Abdur-Rahman v. Dekalb County
United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division
September 25, 2019, Decided
CIVIL ACTION NO. 1:18-cv-00252-AT

Reporter
2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 238771 *; 2019 WL 12494878
DAISY ABDUR-RAHMAN, Plaintiff, v. DEKALB COUNTY, GEORGIA, Defendant.
Prior History: Abdur-Rahman v. Dekalb County, 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 238752 (N.D. Ga., July 17, 2019)
Counsel:  [*1] For Daisy Abdur-Rahman, Plaintiff: Jean Simonoff Marx, LEAD ATTORNEY, Marx & Marx LLC, Atlanta, GA; Robert Nathan Marx, LEAD ATTORNEY, Marx & Marx LLC, Atlanta, GA.
Judges: AMY TOTENBERG, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: AMY TOTENBERG
Opinion



ORDER
This matter is before the Court on the Magistrate Judge's Report and Recommendation ("R&R") [Doc. 76]. The R&R recommends that Defendant's motion for summary judgment [Doc. 57] be denied as to all of Plaintiff's claims except her retaliation claim.
If no objections to the R&R are filed, then the Court reviews the Magistrate Judge's R&R for clear error. 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1). But if a party objects to the R&R, the district court must review de novo any part of the R&R that is the subject of a proper objection. Fed. R. Civ. P. 72(b); 28 U.S.C. § 636(b). Defendant timely filed objections to the R&R. [Doc. 78]. Plaintiff did not file any objections. The Court reviewed de novo all portions of the R&R to which Defendant objected. The Court further reviewed all other portions of the R&R for clear error.
Defendant filed three objections to the R&R, arguing that the Magistrate Judge erred: (1) in finding that a genuine issue of material fact exists as to Plaintiff's capacity to perform some of the physical requirements of her job [*2]  as a Compliance Inspector with or without accommodations — in particular, moving and lifting the weights of the interior grease trap covers for inspection purposes; (2) in finding that the evidence, viewed in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, created a triable issue regarding whether Defendant's conduct caused the interactive process to break down and whether Defendant failed to properly participate and complete the interactive reasonable accommodation process; and (3) in finding that a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether Plaintiff could have been accommodated by a transfer to one of one of three posted jobs — Wastewater Laboratory Technician position, a Utility Collections Specialist position, or a Systems Analyst position. The Magistrate Judge's R&R is 62 pages long and covers each of these topics in detail.
As to the first objection, Defendant argues that the weight of the covers for interior grease traps is quantifiable and exceeds the recommended limitation given by Plaintiff's doctor, as manifested by the testimony that Defendant presented in support of its motion for summary judgment.. Defendant insists that the Court should view the testimony presented by [*3]  Bernard Bethea, a Pretreatment Coordinator for DeKalb County's Fats, Oils, and Grease (FOG) Program, as dispositive of the question of the weight of relevant interior trap covers in 2015 and Plaintiff's capacity to move such trap doors. But contrary to Defendant's assertion, this case is not "more like Scott v. Harris, 550 U.S. 380 (2007)" and visually starkly confirmable. (Doc. 78 at. 7) The Magistrate Judge's discussion of the contradictory evidence correctly identifies conflicts in the evidence and infirmities in both parties' proof. For instance, the Magistrate Judge pointed out that the grease trap covers measured by Mr. Bethea were not necessarily the same covers that were in use more than three years earlier in 2015, when Plaintiff sought to return to work. (Doc. 76 at 32-33.) And she noted that Plaintiff's and a co-worker compliance inspector's personal experience moving the covers through various sliding motions lends some credence to Plaintiff's own estimates of their weight and her capacity to slide the covers to gain access to the traps for inspection without any accommodation. (Doc. 76 at 29-31, referencing both Plaintiff's and Ryan Petty's work experience). On the other hand, the Magistrate Judge noted [*4]  Defendant's affirmative evidence of the weight moving challenges presented by inspection of the interior grease covers. (Doc. 76 at 31-32.) Having reviewed the evidence on a de novo basis and viewing it in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, the Court concludes that the Magistrate Judge correctly determined that "reasonable jurors could find that Plaintiff was capable of inspecting grease traps without an accommodation in November 2015." (Doc. 76 at 33.)
The Court similarly finds that the Magistrate Judge properly determined on an alternative basis that Plaintiff could perform with reasonable accommodations the essential functions of her compliance inspector position. Plaintiff's doctor testified that whether Plaintiff could perform her job was highly accommodation-and situation-dependent, and not as simple as assessing the weight of the plate. (See Dr. Weinberg Deposition, Doc. 55-1 at 67-69). It is clear from Dr. Weinberg's testimony that he believed Plaintiff could likely perform her essential job duties with ergonomic training and some accommodations in the form of equipment to assist her in lifting items. (Doc. 55-1 at 69-70.) The Magistrate Judge discounted Dr. Weinberg's opinion [*5]  about the sufficiency of the specific proposed accommodations identified because Dr. Weinberg admitted he had "no knowledge about how a jib crane or magnetic manhole lifter could accommodate Plaintiff's disabilities." (Doc. 76 at 34, citing to Dr. Weinberg's deposition at 63:20-25.) But this weakness in Dr. Weinberg's testimony does not end the story. The Court fully agrees with the Magistrate Judge that the "combined evidence in the record would permit a reasonable jury to find that Plaintiff could access interior grease traps with a reasonable accommodation in November 2015." (Doc. 76 at 35.) The evidence suggests that Defendant did not consider any accommodations proposed by Plaintiff (Doc. 76 at 41-43) in assessing her ability to perform the essential functions of her position or any other possible accommodations.
In sum, a reasonable jury could find in favor of either of the parties. The jury might strongly rely on Mr. Bethea's testimony to render a verdict for Defendant.1 On the other hand, Bethea's testimony as to interior trap lids and weights is contradicted by competent testimony provided by Plaintiff and her co-worker, Mr. Petty. Additionally, Plaintiff's evidentiary citations [*6]  in response to Defendant's Statement of Material Facts in Dispute properly identifies other evidentiary grounds that a reasonable jury could rely upon in rejecting Defendant's evidence that Plaintiff could not perform the compliance inspector position with or without reasonable accommodations. (See, e.g., Doc. 66, Response to SMF 9, 10; Dep. of Plaintiff's supervisor, Dora DeTeboada Dep. at 126-292 , agreeing that a magnetic manhole lifter to assist in lifting and moving weights was an accommodation that she had not considered for Ms. Abdur-Rahman though she knew that Plaintiff was considering this type of accommodation at the point of her attempted return to work in 2015.3 ) In sum, the Court finds that there are disputed genuine issues of material fact as to whether certain accommodations would have allowed Plaintiff to perform her job, and these issues are not foreclosed by the testimony regarding the weights of the covers provided by Defendant's witnesses.
Defendant's second objection concerns the "interactive process" that must occur between an employer and an employee when the employee requests accommodations. (Doc. 76 at 37-38 (citing Spears v. Creel, 607 F. App'x 943, 948 (11th Cir. 2015)). Defendant is correct that it is the Plaintiff's [*7]  responsibility to request an accommodation. (Doc. 78 at 11-12 (quoting Lucas v. W.W. Grainger Inc., 257 F.3d 1249, 1255-56 (11th Cir. 2001) ("The plaintiff bears the burden of identifying an accommodation, and of demonstrating that the accommodation allows him to perform the job's essential functions.")). But it is not disputed that Plaintiff presented several suggested concrete accommodations and possible job transfers as an alternative to Defendant for consideration.
The Magistrate Judge explained in detail why a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether Defendant's actions after Plaintiff requested accommodations or transfer to specific jobs satisfied the legal requirement that Defendant engage in an interactive process with Plaintiff to assess feasible accommodations. Notably, the Magistrate Judge points out that it is not even clear who was supposed to follow up with Dr. Weinberg and the Job Accommodation Network after the November 5, 2015 meeting at which Plaintiff suggested the specific accommodations or job transfers. (Doc. 76 at 43.) Defendant avers that the County's conduct pre-dating this meeting satisfied the interactive process requirement. However, this assertion falls flat, at least for purposes of assessing summary judgment, [*8]  because Plaintiff was not physically ready to return to work during that time. She therefore understandably made no requests for accommodation or transfer prior to being sufficiently recovered to return to work.4 In other words, no interactive process was engaged in — by either party — prior to Plaintiff's initiating efforts to return to work based on her improved medical status when she did propose specific accommodations.5 Based on the Court's review of the record, the Court also agrees with the Magistrate Judge that there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Defendant engaged in the interactive process on a good faith basis. A jury might reasonably conclude that Defendant's issuance of a letter of proposed termination the day after Plaintiff's meeting with Defendant's representatives regarding her return to work and accommodation options demonstrates that the Defendant proceeded in bad faith and prematurely terminated the interactive process, precluding the fashioning of a reasonable accommodation to support Plaintiff's return to employment. But the jury might also determine otherwise.
Defendant's final objection is that the Magistrate Judge erred in finding there was [*9]  a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Plaintiff could have been accommodated by a transfer to another job. Plaintiff, as an alternative to her requested accommodations, also presented numerous job openings that she believed she was qualified for and that would not require physical exertion in ways contrary to her doctor's advice. The Magistrate Judge agreed with Defendant that Plaintiff was not qualified for several of these jobs but found there were at least three jobs that she was facially qualified for, that were still listed as open, and that Defendant did not provide any specific reason for denying a transfer to. (Doc. 76 at 50-51). Except for two jobs not at issue here, Defendant's summary judgment submission only provided a general list of reasons why Plaintiff was not selected for any of the three jobs in dispute. Defendant failed to identify the particular reasons why it did not select Plaintiff for each of the three positions identified — Wastewater Laboratory Technician, Utility Collections Specialist, and Systems Analyst. In the absence of such specific evidence, the Court must find that a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether Defendant could have [*10]  accommodated Plaintiff's request to transfer to one of the three jobs for which she was facially qualified and that were still posted as open positions at that time. (Doc. 76 at 50-52.).
After a careful de novo review of the portions of the R&R to which Defendant objects, this Court agrees with the R&R in all respects. Furthermore, the Court reviewed the remainder of the R&R for clear error and found none.
Accordingly, the Court hereby OVERRULES Defendant's Objections and ADOPTS the Magistrate Judge's Report and Recommendation as the opinion of this Court. Defendant's motion for summary judgment [Doc. 57] is DENIED in part and GRANTED in part. Specifically, the Defendant's motion is denied as to all of Plaintiff's claims with the exception of her retaliation claim.
The Court ORDERS the parties to attend mediation to be conducted by a magistrate judge of this Court. The Clerk is DIRECTED to refer this action to the next available magistrate judge for the purpose of conducting the mediation. The mediation is to be concluded within 45 days of this Order unless otherwise extended by the assigned magistrate judge. The parties are DIRECTED to file a status report regarding the results of the [*11]  mediation with the Court within five days of the mediation's conclusion. In the event the mediation is unsuccessful, the parties are DIRECTED to file a proposed consolidated pretrial order within 20 days of the conclusion of the mediation.
IT IS SO ORDERED this 25th day of September, 2019.
/s/ Amy Totenberg
AMY TOTENBERG
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

