Alabi v. Atlanta Pub. Schs
United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division
September 26, 2013, Decided; September 26, 2013, Filed
CIVIL ACTION NO. 1:12-CV-0191-AT

Reporter
2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 188129 *; 2011 WL 11785485
KAMALDEEN ALABI, Plaintiff, v. ATLANTA PUBLIC SCHOOLS, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Kamaldeen Alabi, Plaintiff: James E. Radford, James Radford, LLC, Decatur, GA.
For Atlanta Public Schools, Defendant: Erick Christopher Burroughs, Atlanta Public Schools, Law Department, Atlanta, GA.
Judges: AMY TOTENBERG, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: AMY TOTENBERG
Opinion



ORDER
This is an employment discrimination action arising under the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") of 1990, 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq., as amended. It is before the Court on the Defendant Atlanta Public Schools' ("APS") Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. 21]. Plaintiff Kamaldeen Alabi, a former APS teacher, alleges that the school district discriminated against him based on his hearing disability (deafness) and associated speech communication disability by failing to provide reasonable accommodations, thereby precluding him from effectively performing the duties of his position. Plaintiff further claims that APS moved him to a less desirable teaching position at a different school in retaliation for his having engaged in the protected activity of seeking accommodations.

I. Background
Keeping in mind that when deciding a motion for summary judgment, the Court must view the evidence and all factual inferences in the light most  [*2] favorable to the party opposing the motion, the Court provides the following statement of facts. This statement does not represent actual findings of fact. Davis v. Williams, 451 F.3d 759, 763 (11th Cir. 2006). Instead, the Court has provided the statement simply to place the Court's legal analysis in the context of this particular case or controversy.1
Plaintiff Kamaldeen Alabi ("Alabi") is deaf and unable to communicate orally. (Pl.'s Resp. to Def.'s Statement of Material Facts to Which There is no Genuine Issue to be Tried ("Resp. SMF") ¶ 3, Doc. 24.) His primary language and means of communication is American Sign Language ("ASL"). (Id. ¶ 4.) Alabi is certified to teach special education for the deaf and hearing impaired in grades kindergarten through twelve. (Id. ¶ 2.) He obtained a degree in deaf education at Gallaudet University in 1998 as well as a bachelor's degree in education and economics  [*4] from the University of Ibidan in Nigeria in 1995. (Alabi Dep. at 24:14-16; 25:4-14.)2 Alabi had worked as a teacher of the deaf and hearing impaired in the Houston County public school district in Georgia for eight years prior to his employment with APS. (Alabi Dep. at 29-34, 38:2-11, 60:16-17.) Alabi also had worked one semester for the Model Secondary School for the Deaf operated by Gallaudet University. (Id.)
Alabi was employed by APS as a teacher for the deaf and hearing impaired from October 1, 2007 to May 28, 2008. (Resp. SMF ¶ 1.) APS initially offered Alabi employment as a teacher for the deaf and hard of hearing on August 17, 2007. (Id. ¶ 5.) Alabi accepted the offer on August 20, 2007. (Id. ¶ 6.) Two days later, Alabi requested an interpreter for a school system teacher orientation program. (Id. ¶ 17.) On August 27, 2007, Alabi rescinded his acceptance of APS's employment offer, stating in an email to Felicia Collins, a human resources representative with APS, that he and his wife would be relocating  [*5] outside of Atlanta. (Collins Decl. ¶ 7.)
On September 17, 2007, Alabi emailed Collins again, this time requesting that APS reinstate the employment offer. (Id. ¶ 8; Resp. SMF ¶ 10.) APS obliged Alabi's request and reinstated the offer. (Resp. SMF ¶ 10.) Alabi's understanding was that he had applied for and been offered a teaching position at Martin Luther King, Jr., Middle School ("King Middle School") where he would be principally teaching math to deaf and hearing impaired students. (Alabi Dep. at 72, 78.) On September 26, 2007, Alabi submitted an APS document entitled "Confidential Post-Officer Medical Questionnaire" indicating he was deaf and needed to discuss the provision of reasonable accommodations. (Pl. SMF ¶ 6.) Ms. Collins on that same date emailed a representative from Georgia Interpretative Services Network ("GISN"), a service provider to APS contracted to provide interpretive services for students with hearing impairments, to arrange for an interpreter to assist Alabi during his new employee processing and orientation program. (Collins Decl. ¶ 11.)
On October 1, 2007, Alabi was assigned to teach at King Middle School in Atlanta, Georgia. (Resp. SMF ¶ 12.) Alabi was responsible  [*6] for a classroom of approximately ten hearing impaired students at King Middle School. (Id. ¶ 14.) All but one or two of Alabi's students at King Middle School communicated primarily orally and understood, at most, only basic sign language. (Id. ¶ 15; Alabi Dep. at 43:10-11, 53:3-13) These students were not fluent ASL users, making it difficult for them to understand Alabi's instruction. (Resp. SMF ¶¶ 15-16.)
In light of the communication barriers between Alabi and his students, Alabi informed his supervisor Evelyn Ware, his principal Teresa Andrews, and Dr. Debra Dwight ("Dwight"), APS's Coordinator for the Program for Exceptional Children, that he would need an interpreter. (Pl. SMF. ¶ 17.) Ms. Ware responded that the interpreter for the student was not permitted to interpret for him. (Id.; Alabi Dep. at 44, 46.) Alabi also submitted a request for a classroom interpreter to APS's special education coordinator, Dianne Holmes ("Holmes").3 (Pl. Resp. SMF ¶ 17.) Holmes was responsible for managing middle school personnel involved in special education and behavioral disorder programs. (Id. ¶ 18.) During the first week of October 2007, Holmes contacted Dwight, stating that Alabi had requested  [*7] a full time interpreter for his classroom to translate his lessons from ASL to oral communication. (Id. ¶ 19.) In early October 2007, Icey Johnson ("Johnson"), Director of the Program for Exceptional Children, contacted Marilyn Teague ("Teague"), Senior Assignment Coordinator with GISN, to arrange for interpretive services for Alabi. (Id. ¶ 20.)
After receiving Alabi's request, Teague informed Dwight that it would be difficult to find a single qualified interpreter to work with Alabi on a full-time basis. (Id. ¶¶ 28-29.) On October 15, 2007, Teague contacted Dwight by email, stating that while she had been unable to find a qualified full-time interpreter for Alabi, she had found several qualified interpreters who would alternate in Alabi's classroom during the school week. (Id. ¶ 30.)
The accommodation arrangements made for the first two weeks of Alabi's  [*8] teaching in October 2007 were a patchwork and as a whole failed to provide interpreting services for Alabi. (Pl. SMF ¶ 18; Alabi Dep. at 50.) Alabi had one student in his classroom who was personally assigned a full-time interpreter through GISN. (Resp. SMF ¶ 31.) This interpreter informed Alabi that he could not interpret for him, because the interpreter's contract was solely to assist the student. (Alabi Dep. at 43-44, 51-52.) The student's interpreter, though, occasionally would interpret for Alabi when she was in the classroom. (Resp. SMF ¶ 32.) In addition, Debra Quartermaine ("Quartermaine"), a paraprofessional for the school's hearing impaired program, intermittently assisted Alabi in communicating with his students.4 (Id. ¶¶ 33-34; Alabi Dep. at 56:1-8.) However, Quartermaine knew "minimal sign language" and was unable to interpret instruction effectively for students because Alabi signed too quickly for her. (Alabi Dep. at 56:2-8.)
Beginning on October 15, 2007, APS provided Alabi with rotating full  [*9] time interpreters to assist him in his classroom. (Id. at 50:10-16; Resp. SMF ¶ 36.) Dwight, the Coordinator of the Program for Exceptional Children, thereafter met with the school principal and other central office special education staff to confirm that Mr. Alabi "would require an interpreter on a daily basis in order to fully participate in regular activities of employment in the educational setting" as well as in specific school meetings held after the school day. (Doc. 23-6 at 3.) Between October 15 and November 30, full-time interpreters were assigned to translate Alabi's lessons from ASL to oral communication, and to translate Alabi's students' questions and responses from oral communication to ASL. (Resp. SMF ¶¶ 36-38.) At some juncture in October, one main interpreter was assigned in place of this rotating group of translators. (Alabi Dep. at 50:10-16.) However, Alabi testified that on two to three occasions over this time frame, no interpreter was present in the classroom due to scheduling conflicts. (Alabi Dep. at 50:20-24.)
On November 29, 2007, Dwight received a letter from Tripp Cook, Director of GISN, regarding the cost of interpreter services for Alabi. (Doc. 21-8.)  [*10] The letter noted that Alabi required an interpreter with a higher level of proficiency in ASL than the interpreters GISN regularly provided for APS students, given "the need for the interpreter to be at least as fluent in English as the teacher" and to "adequately voice on his behalf" and to be at least as fluent in sign language as the student. (Id.; Dwight Decl. ¶ 11.) The letter stated that the cost of providing such a skilled interpreter was higher than normal and outside the scope of GISN's contract for student interpreters. (Doc. 21-8.) Finally, the letter indicated that GISN would be unable to provide a full-time interpreter for Alabi on an ongoing basis without greater financial compensation from APS, although it "causes us distress to consider removing services from Mr. Alabi's classroom, and hope to avoid this circumstance." (Id.) According to Dwight, the cost of a full-time interpreter for Alabi from GISN would have been $62 per hour, or approximately $85,000 per year.5 (Dwight Decl. ¶ 21; see generally Resp. SMF ¶¶ 23-26.)
Cook's letter further states that GISN had been seeking to resolve the above contractual and finance issues with APS without obtaining any reply since Alabi first began receiving GISN services in mid October. (Doc. 21-8.) "We have tried to reach the Office of Procurement Services and the Office of Contract Compliance at least four times since Mr. Alabi began receiving services from our agency." (Id.) GISN, according to Cook's letter, had also reached out to its established APS contact representative to obtain resolution of these issues. (Id.) Although GISN received one reply call, Cook's letter appears to suggest that no APS employee with authority to resolve the contract issue had contacted GISN. (Id.)
After November 30, 2007, APS immediately discontinued its provision of a full-time interpreter for Alabi. (Pl. SMF ¶ 20; Alabi Dep. at 119:21-120:3.) Alabi testified that, up until the commencement of winter break at the end of the December 20, 2007 school day, "[n]o interpreter showed up [in his classroom]." (Alabi Dep. at 56:20-21.) He testified that, in the absence  [*12] of an interpreter he "did [his] very best" to perform his duties as a teacher. (Id. at 56:23.) However, he testified that, when he tried to communicate orally in the classroom, his students would laugh at him. (Id. at 56:23-24.) Alabi testified that he was forced to resort to writing his lessons on the board and on pieces of paper, and to communicate with his students through the use of gestures and slow signing, and that any assistance he received from the paraprofessional in the room was totally inadequate. (Id. at 54-57.) He testified that he was unable to perform the functions of his job without an interpreter. (Id. at 58:22-59:5.) He also testified that he notified his supervisors at APS of the problems he was having without the help of an interpreter, and that his supervisors told him they were "working on finding a resolution to [his] problem." (Id. at 57:4-10.)
On December 7, 2007, Dwight attended a meeting to discuss options to accommodate Alabi's disability. (Dwight Decl. ¶ 22; Resp. SMF ¶ 44.) Alabi was not invited to participate in this meeting. At this meeting, Dwight and the other APS staff discussed the possibility of reassigning Alabi to Slater Elementary School ("Slater  [*13] Elementary") where there were some classes of students who were able to communicate with ASL and would not require interpretive services if Alabi was their teacher. (Resp. SMF ¶ 45; Dwight Decl. ¶¶ 22-23.) On December 10, 2007, Ms. Collins from Human Resources emailed Colinda Howard 6 to obtain clarification regarding what information was needed to address the question of the hearing impaired position at King Middle School. (Doc. 23-6, at 1.) That evening, Ms. Howard emailed Ms. Collins regarding the interpreter rates that had been cited by Mr. Moore of the Office of Procurement Services or Contract Compliance.7 (Id.) Howard recommended that Alabi be assigned to another position as soon as possible, and in any event, by the end of winter break, and directed Collins to work with Dr. Johnson to identify other positions for which Alabi could perform the teaching duties. (Id.) Ms. Collins in turn conferred by phone regarding Mr. Alabi's situation with Dr. Dwight, the principal of King Middle School, and an employee relations coordinator in a conference call on December 17, 2013. (Collins Decl. ¶¶ 16-17.) The group decided Mr. Alabi should be reassigned to Slater Elementary School where  [*14] he could teach students who communicated through ASL. (Id.)
On December 20, 2007, Alabi was called to a meeting with APS representatives, including Ms. Collins, Ms. Howard, Dr. Dwight, his principal, and Mr. Harold Cooper of APS Employee Relations. (Resp. SMF ¶¶ 50, 51.) They notified him that he would be transferred to Slater Elementary. (Id.) At the meeting, APS provided Alabi with a letter informing him that he would be reassigned in order to accommodate his disability. (Id. ¶ 52.) APS also informed Alabi that the cost of providing him with a full-time interpreter at King Middle School would be an undue financial burden on APS, since the cost of such an interpreter would have been double Alabi's salary. (Id. ¶ 53.) Finally, APS representatives informed Alabi that his services were needed at Slater Elementary since Slater Elementary had a greater number of deaf students who were able to communicate directly with Alabi through  [*15] ASL. (Id. ¶ 54.)
Alabi asked at the December 20th meeting what his other options were if he didn't want to be reassigned and was advised that he could either accept the reassignment or resign. (Alabi Dep. at 113:16-23.) Alabi in turn accepted his reassignment and did not make an alternative request for reasonable accommodation. (Id. ¶ 61.) He began teaching at Slater Elementary on January 7, 2008. (Id. ¶ 56.) His job title, general responsibilities as a teacher, certification, and pay rate remained the same upon his transfer as they had been during his tenure at King Middle School. (Id. ¶ 57.) However, Mr. Alabi states that the scope of his teaching duties was reduced because there already were four special education hearing impaired teachers with small classes at Slater. (Alabi Dep. at 91.) In order to create a position for him, Slater arranged for its hearing impaired teachers to re-assign some of their students to Alabi's new class. Alabi in turn was required to share a classroom with another teacher and was left with two regular periods when he had no teaching duties. (Id. at 110-112.) Alabi was frustrated by this teaching situation — concerned that he was not genuinely needed at  [*16] Slater and that there was not a required second hearing impaired teacher at King Middle School. (Alabi Dep. at 86:5-9.) However, since all of Alabi's students at Slater Elementary communicated through ASL, APS did not have to provide Alabi with a full-time interpreter upon his transfer. (Id. ¶¶ 59-60.) Alabi was provided an interpreter for all faculty meetings during his time at Slater Elementary. (Id. ¶ 62.)
Although Alabi was certified to teach special education to hearing impaired elementary school students, he was anxious that the new teaching assignment would jeopardize his certification status and job stability in the long run. Due to the certification requirements of The No Child Left Behind Act ("NCLB")8, Alabi foresaw that his employment options would be limited in the future if he did not obtain content certification in a particular subject or become specially certified for elementary grades. (Alabi Dep. at 71-79.) Alabi testified that he was currently on track to become certified in teaching mathematics at the secondary school level as a result of having already taken several math content courses and through his work at King Middle School. (Alabi Dep. at 82:16-25, 85:19-25.)  [*17] However, following his transfer, his plan to become certified was "derailed" because his assigned classes at Slater Elementary did not provide him with the requisite experience to achieve secondary certification in math and he had not taken elementary school level content courses to become certified at the elementary level. (Id.) However, Alabi provided no other evidence that addressed the availability of teacher secondary math certification based solely on completed coursework.
In February 2008, APS offered to renew Alabi's employment contract. (SMF ¶ 64.) On February 29, 2008, Alabi rejected APS's offer. (Id. ¶ 65.) Alabi then submitted an online resignation form to APS requesting to end his employment effective May 28, 2008. (Id. ¶ 66.) Alabi testified that while it was true his family had moved back to Washington, D.C. by that point, he decided to resign based on his frustration with APS's actions and that he had become "more or less not a full teacher." (Alabi Dep. at 109-10.) On May 28, 2008, Alabi completed his final day as an APS employee at Slater Elementary. (SMF ¶ 73.)
Alabi's request for an accommodation was formally resolved and closed by APS on  [*18] March 4, 2013. On that date, Harold Cooper, an employee relations officer with APS, issued a resolution letter to Alabi in response to Alabi's request for a reasonable accommodation on the basis of his disability. (Doc. 21-10.) Cooper wrote that Alabi's request for a full-time classroom interpreter was denied based on Alabi's transfer to a position at Slater Elementary for which he did not require such an interpreter. (Id. at 3.) The full disposition statement issued by Cooper's office cited the cost of interpreter services as $83,000, or $62.00 an hour for 7.5 hours a day for 190 days, and concluded that this cost would cause an undue financial hardship on the school district.9 (Doc. 23-7 at 6.)
On April 2, 2008, Alabi submitted an intake questionnaire to the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC") alleging that APS discriminated against him on the basis of his disability. (SMF ¶ 74; Mot. Summ. J. Ex. 7, Doc. 21-12.) Alabi alleged that he requested an interpreter from APS but was not provided one. (Doc. 21-12.) On October 27, 2011, Alabi received a notice of right  [*19] to sue from the EEOC's Atlanta office. (Alabi Dep., Ex. 11.)

II. Standard on Motion for Summary Judgment
Summary judgment must be granted if the record shows "that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). A factual issue is genuine if there is sufficient evidence for a reasonable jury to return a verdict in favor of the non-moving party. See Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). A factual issue is material if resolving the factual issue might change the suit's outcome under the governing law. Id. The motion should be granted only if no rational fact finder could return a verdict in favor of the non-moving party. Id. at 249.
When ruling on the motion, the Court must view all the evidence in the record in the light most favorable to the non-moving party and resolve all factual disputes in the non-moving party's favor. See Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 150, 120 S. Ct. 2097, 147 L. Ed. 2d 105 (2000). The moving party need not positively disprove the opponent's case; rather, the moving party must establish the lack of evidentiary support for the non-moving party's position. See Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 325, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986).  [*20] If the moving party meets this initial burden, in order to survive summary judgment, the non-moving party must then present competent evidence beyond the pleadings to show that there is a genuine issue for trial. Id. at 324-26. The essential question is "whether the evidence presents a sufficient disagreement to require submission to a jury or whether it is so one-sided that one party must prevail as a matter of law." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 251-52.

III. Discussion

A. Overview of Issues and Prima Facie Case Elements
To state a claim of disability discrimination, a plaintiff must prove three elements: (1) that he has a disability within the meaning of the ADA; (2) that, with or without reasonable accommodations, he can perform the essential functions of the job he holds; and (3) that he was discriminated against because of his disability. Holly v. Clairson Indus., LLC, 492 F.3d 1247, 1256 (11th Cir. 2007); Terrell v. USAir, 132 F.3d 621, 624 (11th Cir. 1998); Stewart v. Happy Herman's Cheshire Bridge, 117 F.3d 1278, 1285 (11th Cir. 1997) (substituting the term "qualified individual" for the second element above). "The burden of identifying an accommodation that would allow a qualified individual  [*21] to perform the job rests with that individual, as does the ultimate burden of persuasion with respect to demonstrating that such an accommodation is reasonable." Stewart, 117 F.3d at 1286.
Upon a showing by the plaintiff that a reasonable accommodation exists, the burden shifts to the employer to prove that that the plaintiff's requested accommodation imposes an undue hardship. Terrell, 132 F.3d at 624. "[E]stablishing that a reasonable accommodation exists is part of an ADA plaintiff's case, whereas undue hardship is an affirmative defense to be pled and proven by an ADA defendant." Willis v. Conopco, Inc., 108 F.3d 282, 286 (11th Cir. 1997). As the Court explained in Willis, the Plaintiff's establishment of a reasonable accommodation generally entails the identification of a method of accommodation "whereas the undue hardship inquiry focuses on the hardships imposed by plaintiff's preferred accommodation in the context of the particular agency's operations." Id. at 286, n.2 (citations omitted). Once the plaintiff has made a general showing regarding the availability of an accommodation, "the defendant/employer then must show special (typically case-specific) circumstances that demonstrate  [*22] undue hardship in the particular circumstances." U.S. Airways, Inc. v. Barnett, 535 U.S. 391, 402, 122 S. Ct. 1516, 152 L. Ed. 2d 589 (2002).
Defendant APS does not contest that Plaintiff has a disability covered under the ADA. Similarly, Plaintiff identified what he considered a reasonable accommodation — the provision of interpreter services — that had proved fully viable to enable his teaching in a range of contexts in the Houston County School District. While APS contends that the full time interpreter service was not a reasonable accommodation because it entailed an undue financial cost or hardship, the school district clearly viewed Plaintiff as qualified to perform the essential functions required of a teacher for hearing impaired or deaf students. The central question posed by this case, then, is whether under these facts, the school district's refusal to provide full time interpreter services as an accommodation could be lawfully justified based on the "undue hardship" provision of the ADA and acceptable initial administrative delay, or alternatively, whether its actions instead constituted unlawful discrimination. Holly, 492 F.3d at 1262 (holding that "an employer's failure to reasonably accommodate a disabled  [*23] individual itself constitutes discrimination under the ADA, so long as that individual is "otherwise qualified," and unless the employer can show undue hardship.)

B. Reasonable Accommodation
Plaintiff claims that APS failed to provide him with a reasonable accommodation during his tenure at King Middle School in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12112. Specifically, Alabi contends that APS failed to provide him with fulltime interpreter services over two time periods during his tenure at King Middle School, first from October 1, 2007 to October 15, 2007 and again from December 3, 2007 to December 20, 2007. (Resp. Mot. Summ. J. at 10-11.) He also contends that if he had been provided his preferred accommodation of translation services, he would have been able to continue to teach at King Middle School, an assignment that both advanced his professional goals and allowed him to be most productive as a teacher.
The ADA prohibits discrimination in employment against "qualified individual[s] on the basis of disability." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). The ADA defines "discrimination" in part as "not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental  [*24] limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who is an applicant or employee, unless [the employer] can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business of [the employer]." Id. § 12112(b)(5)(A). Under the ADA, a reasonable accommodation may include "job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, reassignment to a vacant position, acquisition or modification of equipment or devices, appropriate adjustment or modifications of examinations, training materials or policies, the provision of qualified readers or interpreters, and other similar accommodations for individuals with disabilities." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(9)(B). However, an employer is not required to provide an employee with "the maximum accommodation or every conceivable accommodation possible." Stewart, 117 F.3d at 1285 (quoting Lewis v. Zilog, Inc., 908 F. Supp. 931, 947 (N.D. Ga. 1997) (Hull, J.)). Moreover, the fact that the statute lists a possible accommodation does not mean that such accommodation is per se reasonable. Terrell, 132 F.3d at 626. The accommodation must also be reasonable based on the specific circumstances of the employer-employee  [*25] relationship at issue. Id.; Stewart, 117 F.3d at 1285.

i. Reasonableness of Alabi's request
APS first argues that Alabi's request for a full-time interpreter imposed an undue hardship and was therefore unreasonable. (Mot. Summ. J. at 11.) APS points out that, according to GISN's November 30, 2007 letter, a full-time interpreter would have cost APS $62 per hour, or approximately $85,000 per year, in addition to Alabi's $53,000 annual salary. (Id. at 12.) This cost was significantly higher than the price GISN normally charged APS for interpreter services. (Mot. Summ. J., Ex. 3.) Alabi's request was therefore unreasonable, according to APS, both because the interpretive services required by Plaintiff were not included in APS's original contract with GISN and because "the costs of full-time interpreters for Plaintiff would be disproportionate to the benefits that they would produce." (Mot. Summ. J. at 12-13.)
The determination of whether a requested accommodation imposes an "undue hardship" entails a fact-specific inquiry. APS must show the specific circumstances that demonstrate undue hardship in the particular context of this case. U.S. Airways, 535 U.S. at 402. The fact that full-time  [*26] interpreter services for teachers were not included in APS's original contract with GISN does not mean that such services were not "reasonably available," as APS seeks to argue. APS cites School Board of Nassau County, Florida v. Arline, 480 U.S. 273, 107 S. Ct. 1123, 94 L. Ed. 2d 307 (1987), for the proposition that an accommodation is unreasonable where an employer did not have existing policies in place to accommodate the employee in the manner requested. (Mot. Summ. J. at 12.) This is a mischaracterization of the Supreme Court's holding. In fact, the Court wrote in Arline that while an employer is not required to find another position for a disabled employee who is not qualified for the job he was doing, it "cannot deny an employee alternative employment opportunities reasonably available under the employer's existing policies." Arline, 480 U.S. at 289 n.19 (emphasis added). No evidence has been produced that remotely suggests that Plaintiff's requested accommodation was not potentially available under APS's existing policies, whether or not teacher translation services were covered under the existing GISN contract.
Instead, the Court must look to the evidence that APS has produced with respect to undue hardship.  [*27] The statute defines undue hardship as "an action requiring significant difficulty or expense, when considered in light of the factors" set forth in the statute's provision describing various modes of accommodation,10 including the provision of interpreters and job reassignments. 42 U.S.C. § 12111(10) (emphasis added). The ADA implementing regulations provide further guidance in assessing the evidence and factors to be considered in assessing the establishment of the undue hardship affirmative defense. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(p). The regulations direct the consideration of the following relevant factors, among others:
(i) The nature and net cost of the accommodation needed under this part, taking into consideration the availability of tax credits and deductions, and/or outside funding;
(ii) The overall financial resources of the facility or facilities involved in the provision of the reasonable accommodation, the number of persons employed at such facility, and the effect on expenses and resources;
(iii) The overall financial resources of the covered entity, the overall size of the business of the covered entity with respect to the number of its employees, and the number, type and location  [*28] of its facilities;
(iv) The type of operation or operations of the covered entity, including the composition, structure and functions of the workforce of such entity. . . .; and
(v) The impact of the accommodation upon the operation of the facility, including the impact on the ability of other employees to perform their duties and the impact on the facility's ability to conduct business.
APS's argument that the cost of a fulltime interpreter would far exceed the teacher's salary at first blush appears to be persuasive evidence of undue hardship in the context of a public education setting, where funding resources are typically constrained and the salary of the teacher, rather than interpreter, normally would constitute the primary instructional expense. However, APS introduced no evidence that it attempted to negotiate this estimated hourly price with its regular interpreter vendor (GISN), sought to obtain alternative bids from any other vendors for this same service, or determined if it could meet this need through the re-assignment of other interpreter staff who might already be employed within the district. Indeed, Ms. Cook's November 29, 2007 letter on  [*29] behalf of GISN indicates that GISN had hit a brick wall in its efforts to negotiate the terms of Alabi's interpreting service that GISN considered outside its normal contract for student interpreter services. In sum, there is an absence of evidence regarding the scope of options that could have been available to the school district for arranging full time interpreter services for Alabi either through negotiations with a contractual provider or through its own ASL trained staff or the financial implications of such options. The Houston County School District's capacity in Georgia to provide needed interpreter accommodations to Plaintiff suggests that alternative arrangements may have been feasible here as well.11 Additionally, APS introduced no evidence as to the impact of the potential translation fees on its own fiscal operation and resources. Moreover, APS's costs and "undue hardship" argument must be viewed not merely from the perspective of the fees that might be charged for a full school year of translation services. A more pointed analysis would look at this cost based on the far more limited expense entailed in subsidizing the translator costs during Alabi's teaching assignment  [*30] at King Middle School in December 2007 when no translation services where provided whatsoever. Based on the cost data provided in the final March 4, 2008 APS disposition letter, the total fee for full time translator services for the three school weeks of services in December 2007 would have been $6,552.63. (Doc. 23-7 at 6.)
The Court cannot rule as a matter of fact or law based on the current record that Defendant has produced sufficient evidence to establish that GISN's initially quoted fee for interpreter services constituted an undue hardship affirmative defense. D'Angelo v. ConAgra Foods, Inc. 422 F.3d 1220, 1229-34 (11th Cir. 2005) (reversing district court's grant of summary judgment and holding in light of ADA regulations that the determination of whether particular work duties were essential functions of the job or alternatively, could be accommodated, constituted unresolved genuine issues of material fact); Borkowski v. Valley Cent. School Dist., 63 F.3d 131, 143 (2nd Cir. 1995)  [*31] (holding that in the absence of evidence of school district budgets or cost information for the provision of an aide to a librarian, insufficient evidence had been introduced at summary judgment upon which the Court could conclude as a matter of law that undue hardship defense had been established as a matter of law); Pinkerton v. City of Tampa, Florida, 981 F. Supp. 1455, 1458 (M.D. Fla. 1997) (denying summary judgment where material facts remained outstanding regarding whether the defendant police department could accommodate Plaintiff without undue hardship).
The incompleteness of the record on the undue hardship defense alone, though, does not necessarily mean that Plaintiff should be able to proceed to trial on his accommodation claims for the period post January 1, 2008 under the specific factual circumstances of this case. While APS balked at providing full time interpreter services as a permanent accommodation in the 2007/08 school year for Alabi, it ultimately implemented a school site transfer as an alternate accommodation for the second semester starting January 2008 to ensure that he could continue to work as a teacher for the hearing impaired within the district. A job  [*32] reassignment is an established mode of accommodation under the ADA. 42 U.S.C. § 12111(9)(B). Although Plaintiff viewed translation services as providing a far preferable mode of accommodation — one that would allow him to stay in his desired position at King Middle School — he decided to proceed with the transfer rather than resign when he was advised on December 20, 2007 that this was the way the district could accommodate his hearing and speech communication limitations. The Eleventh Circuit recognized in Stewart that an "employer is not required to accommodate an employee in any manner in which that employee desires," explaining that the adjective "reasonable" (in the context of "reasonable accommodation") "would be rendered superfluous in the ADA if employers were required in every instance to provide employees the maximum accommodation or every conceivable accommodation possible . . . Under the ADA a qualified individual with a disability is not entitled to the accommodation of her choice, but only to a reasonable accommodation." 117 F.3d 1278, 1285-86 (11th Cir. 1997) (internal citations omitted); see also Santacrose v. CSX Transp., Inc., 288 F. App'x 655, 657 (11th Cir. 2008)  [*33] (holding that employer that refused to agree to requested accommodation of adopting an overtime restriction nevertheless reasonably accommodated employee by allowing him to use sick and FMLA leave to avoid working overtime shifts); McKane v USB Fin. Servs., Inc., 363 Fed. Appx. 679, 681 (11th Cir. 2010). Therefore, unless Plaintiff can demonstrate that the transfer was retaliatory or objectively caused him to suffer an adverse employment action based on his disability, he cannot prevail as a matter of law with respect to his disability discrimination claim for the period subsequent to his transfer to Slater Elementary School. Doe v. DeKalb Cnty. Sch. Dist., 145 F.3d 1441, 1447-48 (11th Cir. 1998).12

ii. Excusable delay in the provision of accommodation
In the alternative, APS argues that even if Alabi's requested accommodation was reasonable, Alabi has failed to establish that he was denied a reasonable accommodation due to his transfer to Slater Elementary. (Mot. Summ. J. at 13.) APS argues that the two time periods in 2007 during which Alabi was left without a full-time interpreter should not be treated as a  [*34] failure to accommodate because APS was engaged in an interactive process with Alabi during those time periods to determine a reasonable accommodation. (Id. at 21.)
Because the determination of an appropriate reasonable accommodation is job-specific, it may be necessary for the employer to initiate an informal interactive process with the qualified individual in need of accommodation to identify the person's limitations and possible accommodations. Jones v. Ga. Dep't of Corrections, No. 1:07-CV-1228-RLV, 2008 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 22142, 2008 WL 779326, at *6 (N.D. Ga. March 18, 2008) (Vining, J.) (quoting 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3)) (internal quotation marks omitted). As part of its duty in this regard, the employer is obligated "to engage in an informal process with the employee to identify the precise limitations posed by the employee's disability and the reasonable accommodations that could overcome those limitations." Id. (citing Stewart, 117 F.3d at 1286).
Even if APS arguably engaged Alabi in some form of interactive process during the first two weeks of October 2007,13 there is no evidence in the record to suggest that APS was engaged in any such an interactive process with Alabi in November or December 2007.14  [*35] Indeed, Alabi testified that in December 2007, he "would go to APS [during his breaks] and ask for an interpreter," but that APS "kept providing new excuses . . . not to provide one." (Alabi Dep. at 57:4-6.) No reasonable fact-finder could conclude that APS and Alabi were "interacting" in November and December 2007 in order "to identify the precise limitations posed by the employee's disability and the reasonable accommodations that could overcome those limitations." Jones, 2008 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 22142, 2008 WL 779326, at *6. At best, APS was working unilaterally in December to "find[] a resolution to [Alabi's] problem." (Alabi Dep. at 57:9-10.) When APS cutoff all translation services as of November 30, 2007, it was neither engaged in an "interactive process" with Alabi nor steering though the initial start-up challenges posed in the first two weeks of his employment. Alabi was not invited to participate in any of the last moment December phone conferences or meetings convened to address his situation until December 20, 2013, when APS administration had already decided by itself on the transfer course of action it would implement.
The question is therefore whether the delay in the provision  [*37] of a reasonable accommodation to Alabi in the first two weeks of October or later, in December is sufficiently long or serious enough to trigger ADA liability. Courts in this Circuit have held that a delay in the provision of a reasonable accommodation does not constitute an ADA violation where the delay does not preclude the employee from performing the tasks of his employment. Terrell, 132 F.3d at 628 (holding that an employer did not violate the ADA by delaying in providing an employee with a drop keyboard where the employee had some access to a drop keyboard position during the delay and, when she had no access, was not required to type); Hartsfield v. Miami-Dade Cnty., 90 F. Supp. 2d 1363, 1373 (S.D. Fla. 2000) (holding that a delay in providing an employee with a CCTV was not an ADA violation where the employee was able to work during the delay with some difficulty). In Hartsfield, the plaintiff suffered from a disease causing macular degeneration known as Stargardt's disease. Hartsfield, 90 F. Supp. 2d at 1364. The plaintiff was an office systems specialist and submitted a request to her employer, Miami-Dade County, for a CCTV as a reasonable accommodation of her disability.  [*38] Id. at 1366. Her employer delayed providing her with a CCTV for 10 months. Id. The district court found that, in spite of the delay, the employer was not liable under the ADA because "she could work [during the delay], although it was difficult." Id. at 1373.
APS's failure to provide interpreter services as an accommodation in both early October and December centrally impeded Alabi's ability to teach and communicate with his students. Dwight, APS's Coordinator for the Program for Exceptional Children, recognized this. She states in her sworn declaration that the paraprofessional in Alabi's classroom only "occasionally assisted" Alabi in oral communication translation but that he needed a full-time interpreter because he could not effectively communicate with his students using ASL because the majority of the students relied on hearing aids. (Dwight Decl. ¶¶ 4-7, Doc. 21-3.) While the two-week delay in instituting interpreter services was unfortunate and must have severely impacted Alabi's teaching and the student's receipt of instruction, this abbreviated initial delay period may fairly be viewed as falling within the initial excusable delay period allowed under Eleventh Circuit authority.  [*39] Dr. Dwight clearly was moving forward in her efforts to find suitable translation accommodations for Alabi and indeed, arranged suitable translation accommodations by mid-October.
APS's actions in the three weeks in December is a different story. A reasonable jury could find that its refusal to continue to pay for any professional interpreter services after receipt of GISN's November 29 letter cannot be chalked up to "delay problems" in arranging suitable services but instead, reflected a determination simply not to provide any accommodation for the interim. Between December 3, 2007 and December 20, 2007, Alabi testified that he was not assigned any interpreter. During this time period, Alabi was forced to communicate through gestures, writing, and slow signing. (Alabi Dep. at 56:23-57:3.) He testified that his students laughed at him when he attempted to communicate orally and that he was unable to perform the functions of his job without an interpreter. (Id. at 58:22-59:5.) Alabi likened his situation during this time period to one in which an English speaker is tasked with teaching a Spanish-speaking student or signing in front of blind children. (Id. at 59:5-11.)
Based on the evidence  [*40] in this case, a reasonable jury could conclude that APS's decision to terminate the provision of translation services in December 2007 constituted a failure to provide Alabi a reasonable accommodation critical to his performance of his teaching duties and thus, discrimination on the basis of his disability. In cases such as Hartsfield and Terrell, the plaintiff was able to perform the traditional functions of her job notwithstanding the employer's delay in providing her with a reasonable accommodation. Hartsfield, 90 F. Supp. 2d at 1373; see also Terrell, 132 F.3d at 627. Here, the denial of accommodations left Alabi in the position that he could not perform the central communication functions of his teaching position and according to him, was subjected in turn to student ridicule. He was forced to communicate with his students through gesturing and blackboard writing because almost all of his students did not understand his language — ASL. The school district had an easy interim remedy immediately available that was fully congruent with its mission and legal duty to deliver educational services to students, including students with disabilities: arrange for the continuation of GISN  [*41] interpreter services at least until the end of the first semester in December. Viewing the facts in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, the Court therefore concludes that a reasonable jury could determine that in December 2007, APS denied Alabi reasonable translation accommodation services, failed to demonstrate a good faith effort in consultation with Alabi to make a reasonable accommodation, and that as a result, he experienced emotional humiliation and damages.15

C. Retaliation
Alabi brought a retaliation claim against APS based on his transfer to Slater Elementary.16 To establish a prima facie case of retaliation under the ADA, a plaintiff must show the same elements required under Title VII: (1) that he engaged in statutorily protected expression, (2) that he suffered an adverse employment action, and (3) that there is some causal connection between the expression and the adverse employment action. Stewart, 117 F.3d at 1287. "Once a prima facie case is established, the burden then shifts to the defendant employer to come forward with legitimate non-discriminatory reasons for its actions that negate the inference of retaliation." Id. "An employment action is considered 'adverse' only if it results in some tangible, negative effect  [*43] on the plaintiff's employment." Lucas v. W.W. Grainger, Inc., 257 F.3d 1249, 1261 (11th Cir. 2001); see also Doe v. DeKalb Cnty. Sch. Dist., 145 F.3d at 1453 (holding that the determination of whether a transfer is "adverse" must be based on an objective basis, that is whether a "reasonable person" in the plaintiff's position would view the action taken as materially adverse and that "it is not enough that a transfer imposes some de minimis inconvenience or alteration of responsibilities"); Burlington N. and Santa Fe Ry. Co. v. White, 548 U.S. 53, 57, 126 S. Ct. 2405, 165 L. Ed. 2d 345 (2006) (holding that Title VII's anti-retaliation provision, under whose framework the ADA's provision is analyzed, extends to those "employer actions that would have been materially adverse to a reasonable employee or job applicant").
Alabi claims that his transfer constituted a materially adverse employment action for a number of reasons: (1) he was unable to continue his progress on obtaining certification for secondary school level mathematics through his work at Slater Elementary; 2) he was placed in a specially created teaching position in a classroom in which he was not expected to teach for two periods in the day. On the other hand, APS has introduced evidence that within APS, it is customary for teachers to be involuntarily transferred, without consultation, in the best interest of students or to meet staffing needs. (Dwight Decl. ¶ 24, Doc. 21-3,; Thomas Dep. at 40.)
There is no dispute in this case that Alabi's title, pay, and overall teaching responsibilities remained the same upon his transfer. The real issues here relate to Plaintiff's concerns  [*45] regarding the transfer's potential impact on his math certification goal and the structuring of his teaching duties at Slater Elementary. In other words, Alabi must show that a "reasonable person" would view the transfer as materially adverse under the facts and circumstances. Doe, 145 F.3d at 1453. Alabi's desire to build upon his training and experience to obtain certification in secondary math is reasonable. However, he introduced no evidence that would suggest that under state certification rules he could not continue to move toward this goal while at Slater Elementary through completing additional course work. Alabi's feeling of frustration — that he was just "not needed" at Slater Elementary because his students were assigned from other teachers' classes of hearing impaired students and his time was not fully scheduled, while King Middle School's hearing impaired students continued to have met unmet needs — is also understandable. However, more than anything else, Alabi's feeling reflects his frustration with and critical assessment of the school district's delivery of special education instructional services and management of staffing. Indeed, a "reasonable person" might well  [*46] view the transfer to Slater Elementary as a poor use of a highly qualified hearing impaired teacher — but at the same time, would recognize that the transfer did not entail materially adverse job changes. Plaintiff continued to teach hearing impaired students, consistent with his certification, although his duties were now less demanding because of the way in which his job had been created mid-year. He was offered contract renewal for the 2008/09 school year and was therefore assured of employment for the coming year and, in turn, could apply for other hearing impaired positions within the district in the future. While the elementary school placement may have been a setback in his efforts to acquire math certification, there is no indication he could not substitute further course work for experience. Under the totality of circumstances, the Court cannot find that there is sufficient evidence in the record upon which a reasonable jury could conclude that APS retaliated against Plaintiff when it transferred him to Slater Elementary School to a class of students with ASL communication skills in which translation accommodation services would not be needed.

IV. Conclusion
For the foregoing  [*47] reasons, the Court GRANTS IN PART and DENIES IN PART APS's Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. 21]. Specifically, the Court DENIES the Motion in connection with Alabi's claim for failure to provide a reasonable accommodation in December 2007.
The Court DIRECTS the parties to engage in mediation of this matter. The Court REFERS this case to the next available Magistrate Judge for mediation and DIRECTS the parties to complete mediation within forty-five (45) days of the date of this Order. The Court DIRECTS the parties to submit a consolidated pretrial order within twenty (20) days of the conclusion of the mediation.
IT IS SO ORDERED this 26th day of September, 2013.
/s/ Amy Totenberg
AMY TOTENBERG
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

