Alonzo-Miranda v. Schlumberger Tech. Corp.
United States District Court for the Western District of Texas, San Antonio Division
November 24, 2014, Decided; November 24, 2014, Filed
SA-13-CA-1057-OLG (HJB)

Reporter
2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 191082 *
JUAN ALONZO-MIRANDA, Plaintiff, v. SCHLUMBERGER TECHNOLOGY CORPORATION, Defendant.
Subsequent History: Adopted by, Summary judgment granted, in part, summary judgment denied, in part by, Partial summary judgment denied by, Objection overruled by Alonzo-Miranda v. Schlumberger Tech. Corp., 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 191083 (W.D. Tex., Dec. 15, 2014)
Costs and fees proceeding at, Motion granted by, in part, Motion denied by, in part Alonzo-Miranda v. Schlumberger Tech. Corp., 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 76028 (W.D. Tex., June 11, 2015)
Motion denied by Alonzo-Miranda v. Schlumberger Tech. Corp., 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 193963 (W.D. Tex., June 11, 2015)
Counsel:  [*1] For Juan Alonzo-Miranda, Plaintiff: Oscar Herman Villarreal, LEAD ATTORNEY, Luttrell Villarreal Law Group, San Antonio, TX; John Griffin, Jr., Marek, Griffin & Knaupp, Victoria, TX.
For Schlumberger Technology Corporation, Defendant: Julie C. Tower, LEAD ATTORNEY, Jackson Lewis LLP, Austin, TX; Talley R. Parker, LEAD ATTORNEY, Jackson Lewis, LLP, Dallas, TX; William L. Davis, LEAD ATTORNEY, Jackson Lewis, P.C., Dallas, TX.
For Peter Michael Curry, Jr., Neutral: P. Michael Curry, Jr., LEAD ATTORNEY, Attorney at Law, Austin, TX.
Judges: Henry J. Bemporad, United States Magistrate Judge. Honorable Orlando L. Garcia, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Henry J. Bemporad
Opinion



REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE
To the Honorable United States District Judge Orlando L. Garcia:
This Report and Recommendation concerns Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment (Docket Entry 45) and Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment (Docket Entry 48). Dispositive pretrial matters have been referred to the undersigned for recommendation pursuant to Western District of Texas Local Rule CV-72 and Appendix C. (See Docket Entry 61.) For the reasons set out below, I recommend that Defendant's Motion for Summary [*2]  Judgment (Docket Entry 45) be GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART, and that Plaintiffs Motion for Partial Summary Judgment (Docket Entry 48) be DENIED.

I. Jurisdiction.
The district court has jurisdiction over this case pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12101, et seq. I have authority to issue this recommendation pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(B).

II. Background.
Plaintiff Juan Alonzo-Miranda, a veteran who served several tours of duty in Iraq, contends that he was diagnosed with Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder ("PTSD") in 2007. (Docket Entry 12, at 2-3.) On December 1, 2010, Defendant, Schlumberger Technology Corporation ("Sclumberger"), hired Plaintiff to work as a mechanic at the Schlumberger maintenance facility in Von Ormy, Texas. (Docket Entry 45, at 7; Docket Entry 48, at 3.)
In March 2012, Plaintiff trained his dog Goldie through the "Train a Dog-Save a Warrior" program to help alleviate his symptoms of PTSD. (Docket Entry 12, at 3.) Plaintiff alleges that, in May 2012, he experienced a panic attack which rendered him unable to work for several days. (Docket Entry 12, at 3.) As a result of this panic attack, Plaintiff asserts that he asked Schlumberger to accommodate his PTSD by allowing [*3]  him to bring his dog to work with him. (Docket Entry 60-5.) Schlumberger wrote Plaintiff a letter stating that Plaintiff would need to provide (1) his signature on an enclosed medical release form, which would allow Schlumberger to discuss his medical condition with him and his physician, and (2) a statement from his medical provider on an enclosed form entitled Clarifying Accommodations Form ("CAF"), which should discuss how his "medical condition may affect the essential functions of his job and "the type of accommodation[s] that would assist [him] with being able to perform [his] essential job functions." (Docket Entry 60-5, at 1.)
Plaintiff returned both forms to Schlumberger on June 15, 2012. (Docket Entry 60-9, at 1.) The CAF was completed by Dr. Barbara Roach, M.D. on May 23, 2012, who Plaintiff contends was his primary treating physician and was prescribing medications for his mental illness. (Docket Entry 60-1; Docket Entry 58-1, at 2.) Dr. Roach's answers on the CAF are short, often one-word answers, but she does note in response to whether Plaintiff's medical conditions affected his life activities that "yes[, he] can't function without his dog," and that "if [his] PTSD flares this could [*4]  cause emotional distress." (Docket Entry 60-1.)
According to Schlumberger, on June 22, 2012, it asked Plaintiff whether the CAF had been completed by the physician treating him for PTSD; Plaintiff responded that it was not. (Id.) Schlumberger contends that Plaintiff stated that he was going to contact his counselor, whom he said signed off on the application for his dog, about completing the CAF. (Id.) In July and August 2012, Plaintiff again approached Schlumberger about accommodating his request, but did not provide another CAF from any additional healthcare personnel. (Id. at 4.) Both times, Schlumberger advised Plaintiff that it would not accommodate his request without completion of the CAF by the physician treating his PTSD. (Id. at 4-5.)
On October 1, 2012, Schlumberger contacted Plaintiff to inform him that his request for accommodation had been denied because it did not receive proper documentation from his treating physician. (Id.) On October 10, 2012, Plaintiff provided an additional CAF to Schlumberger, completed by Ronald Yates, Plaintiff's counselor, suggesting that Plaintiff would benefit from taking his service dog to work with him. (Docket Entry 58-11.) However, Schlumberger met with [*5]  Plaintiff a week later to explain to him that they still needed further clarification from his treating physician regarding "how his condition affected his performance on the essential functions of his job and how having a dog at work would assist and enable him to perform the essential functions of his job." (Docket Entry 58-1, at 5.)
Meanwhile, Plaintiff sought assistance from the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC"). (Docket Entry 48, at 5; Docket Entry 12, at 4.) On November 2, 2012, the EEOC issued a determination that Plaintiff "was discriminated against because of his disability in that he was and continues to be denied reasonable accommodation, in violation of the ADA." (Docket Entry 48-4, at 14.) The EEOC determined that Plaintiff's initial CAF, obtained from Dr. Roach and given to Schlumberger on June 15,2012, was "sufficient information to act upon his request for reasonable accommodation." (Id.) The determination also stated that Schlumberger "continues to request unnecessary and superfluous information in order to act upon his request." (Id.) The EEOC determination encouraged the parties to reach "a just resolution of this matter." (Id.)
Subsequent to the EEOC [*6]  determination, Plaintiff sent a letter to Schlumberger's Chief Executive Officer, appealing to him to allow his service dog to be brought to work with him. (Docket Entry 48-4, at 15-16.) On November 30,2012, Schlumberger granted Plaintiffs request to allow his service dog to accompany him at work, provided certain logistical conditions were met.1 (Docket Entry 48-3, at 2-3.)
Plaintiff contends that, subsequent receiving this accommodation from Schlumberger, he began to experience discrimination and retaliation on the basis of his disability and his requests to bring his service dog to work. (Docket Entry 12, at 6-7.) While still employed with Schlumberger, Plaintiff filed the instant suit on November 20,2013, alleging claims against Schlumberger for failure to accommodate his disability under the ADA for the six months subsequent to his request, and for discrimination on the basis of his disability. (Docket Entry 1.) Plaintiff was terminated from employment with Schlumberger on April 25, 2014. (Id at 6.) He then filed an amended complaint, adding a claim for retaliation. (Docket Entry 12.)

III. Motions for Summary Judgment.
Schlumberger moves for summary judgment on Plaintiff's claims for failure [*7]  to accommodate his disability, discriminatory discharge, and retaliation under the ADA. (Docket Entry 45.) Plaintiff moves for partial summary judgment on his failure-to-accommodate claim. (Docket Entry 48.)
A party is entitled to summary judgment under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56 if the record shows that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). A party against whom summary judgment is sought may not rest on the allegations or denials in his pleadings, but must come forward with sufficient evidence to demonstrate a "genuine issue for trial." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). A dispute concerning a material fact is "genuine," and therefore sufficient to overcome a summary judgment motion, "if the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party." Id. The moving party "always bears the initial responsibility of informing the district court of the basis for its motion, and identifying those portions of 'the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, which it believes demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986) (quoting Fed. R. Civ. P. 56). "When the moving party [*8]  has carried its burden under Rule 56(c), its opponent must do more than simply show that there is some metaphysical doubt as to the material facts . . . . Where the record taken as a whole could not lead a rational trier of fact to find for the nonmoving party, there is no 'genuine issue for trial.'" Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. Ltd. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586-87, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986) (citations omitted).

A. Failure to Accommodate.
Both parties move for summary judgment on Plaintiffs claim for failure to accommodate under the ADA. (Docket Entry 45, at 12.) Schlumberger contends that Plaintiff has no evidence that bringing a dog to work was a reasonable accommodation for his PTSD. (Id.) Schlumberger also asserts that Plaintiff contributed to the delay in failing to accommodate his request to bring the dog to work. (Id. at 15.) Plaintiff alleges that Schlumberger improperly delayed granting his request for more than six months because it refused to accept documentation provided by Plaintiffs treating physician, and also that it improperly failed to suggest an alternative accommodation or otherwise participate in Plaintiffs request. (Docket Entry 48.) For the reasons set out below, I conclude that both parties' motions should be denied on this issue.
An employer's failure to accommodate is [*9]  simply a form of disability discrimination under the ADA. See 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). The employee bears the burden of demonstrating that the employer failed to implement a reasonable accommodation. Riel v. Elec. Data Sys. Corp., 99 F.3d 678, 682 (5th Cir. 1996). To establish a prima facie case of discrimination based on failure to accommodate a disability, Plaintiff must show: "(1) the employer is covered by the statute; (2) [he] is an individual with a disability; (3) [he] can perform the essential functions of the job with or without reasonable accommodation; and (4) the employer had notice of the disability and failed to provide accommodation." Mzyk v. N.E. Indep. Sch. Dist., 397 Fed. App'x 13, 15 (5th Cir. 2010).
In this case, only the last element appears to be in dispute. (See Docket Entry 45, at 12; Docket Entry 57.) Schlumberger's motion for summary judgment on this issue rests on whether Plaintiff's requested accommodation was reasonable and whether Plaintiff engaged in a good faith interactive process. (Docket Entry 45.) Plaintiff's motion focuses on whether Schlumberger failed to accommodate Plaintiff's request for reasonable accommodation for the time period between May 2012, when Plaintiff first made his request, and November 30, 2012, when Schlumberger granted his request. (Docket Entry 48.)
Failing to make reasonable accommodation [*10]  is disability discrimination unless such accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the employer. 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). Reasonable accommodations include "making existing facilities used by employees readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities[,] job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, reassignment to a vacant position . . . and other similar accommodations." Id. § 12111(9)(A)—(B). To decide what reasonable accommodations will be implemented, the entity should engage in an informal, interactive process with the individual to assess the limitations caused by the individual's disability and the possible accommodations that would overcome those limitations. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3) (2014).
When an employee's limitations caused by a disability are not "open and obvious" to an employer, it is the employee's responsibility to notify the employer of the limitations and suggest a reasonable accommodation. EEOC v. Chevron Phillips Chem. Co., LP, 570 F.3d 606, 621 (5th Cir. 2009) (citing Taylor v. Principal Fin. Grp., Inc., 93 F.3d 155, 165 (5th Cir. 1996)). The employer must then engage in a good faith interactive process, which is "a meaningful dialogue with the employee to find the best means of accommodating that disability." Chevron Phillips Chem. Co., LP, 570 F.3d at 621 (quoting Tobin v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 433 F.3d 100, 108 (1st Cir. 2005)). "Courts interpreting the interactive process requirement have held that when an employer's unwillingness to [*11]  engage in a good faith interactive process leads to a failure to reasonably accommodate an employee, the employer violates the ADA." Loulseged v. Akzo Nobel, Inc., 178 F.3d 731, 736 (5th Cir. 1999).
As Loulseged indicates, the ultimate determination of liability has two parts: even if an employer fails to participate in the interactive process, the Court must still determine whether this failure led to a failure to reasonably accommodate the employee. Additionally, while the employee is entitled to reasonable accommodations, the employer is not obligated to adhere to the employee's preference, and it has final discretion as to the most effective accommodations that satisfy both the employee's and employer's needs. EEOC v. Agro Distrib., LLC, 555 F.3d 462, 471 (5th Cir. 2009) (citing 29 C.F.R. pt. 1630, App., § 1630.9).
Because PTSD would not generally be "open and obvious" to an employer, it was Plaintiff's responsibility to notify Schlumberger of the limitations caused by his disability and suggest reasonable accommodations to overcome those limitations. See Chevron Phillips Chem. Co., 570 F.3d at 621. Plaintiff argues that his requested accommodation, bringing his service dog to work with him, was a reasonable accommodation because it would help prevent or mitigate his potentially debilitating flashbacks and panic attacks. (Docket Entry 60, at 3; Docket Entry 48, at 9.) Schlumberger [*12]  argues in its motion that Plaintiffs requested accommodation was not reasonable because he has no competent proof that it was necessary. (Docket Entry 45, at 12.) Schlumberger also argues that the delay in accommodating Plaintiff's request was caused by his own failure to cooperate and provide the requested medical documentation. (Docket Entry 45, at 15.)
In support of his claims, Plaintiff relies on the evaluation of Dr. Roach, and the determination of the EEOC. (Docket Entry 60, at 4.) Schlumberger maintains that, despite the determination from the EEOC, Dr. Roach's evaluation of Plaintiff was insufficient proof of the need to bring his service dog to work with him. (Docket Entry 45, at 15.) Schlumberger further argues that Plaintiff hid from both it and the EEOC that Plaintiff had seen at least two other medical doctors and both had refused to support his request. (Docket Entry 45, at 15.)
In support of its argument, Schlumberger presents evidence that, on May 18, 2012, Plaintiff was seen by Dr. Richard Wyrick, a psychologist who had been treating him for PTSD for the prior seven months. (Docket Entry 45-2, at 45; Docket Ent.), 45-1, at 33.) Plaintiff admitted in deposition testimony [*13]  that he presented the CAF to Dr. Wyrick at this appointment. (Docket Entry 45-1, at 16-19.) Dr. Wyrick's notes indicate that he "declined to fill out the forms and talked to [Plaintiff] about the wisdom of having his dog with him at work" because "the area does not sound safe for a dog and more importantly [he felt] that [Plaintiff] is too dependent on his dog for security needs." (Docket Entry 45-2, at 45.) Schlumberger also presents evidence that another psychiatrist, Dr. Rochelle Dennis, Plaintiff on September 10, 2012, and declined to fill out the CAF. (Docket Entry 45-2, at 18.) Dr. Dennis commented in her notes that she discussed the CAF with Plaintiff and that she was "unable to say if his dog is necessary at work or not and no current guidelines [exist] on this at the VA. [There is] no research published so far [regarding service] dogs." (Docket Entry 45-2, at 18.) Dr. Dennis's notes also, however, mention that Plaintiff's suicide "risk could rise if frustrations in relationships/work" and that he still experienced stressful thoughts and feelings regarding his military experiences. (Id.)
Plaintiff disputes Schlumberger's arguments, and he contends that Schlumberger's eventual [*14]  granting of his request to bring the service dog to work with him is proof that the request was a reasonable accommodation for his PTSD. Citing 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(1), Plaintiff argues that the only relevant inquiry into the accommodation is whether it enables the individual employee to perform his work or otherwise enjoy the benefits of employment. (Docket Entry 48, at 12.) With regard to this inquiry, Plaintiff presents deposition testimony from Schlumberger's corporate representative that he agreed that Schlumberger was "aware that service dogs for patients with PTSD . . . are trained to observe the patient [and] keep on eye on them" and that he did not disagree with Plaintiff's statement that his service dog helped "him to be a successful worker, free of panic attacks on the job." (Docket Entry 48-1, at 28, 38.) The representative also agreed that he did not consider Plaintiff's accommodation request "as not reasonable." (Docket Entry 48-1, at 37.) Plaintiff further contends that his requested accommodation was not an undue hardship, a point the corporate representative admitted when he agreed in deposition that having the service dog was not "a hardship in any way for Schlumberger." (Id. at 38.)
Plaintiff asserts [*15]  that, in addition to admitting that Schlumberger ultimately found the requested accommodation to be reasonable, Schlumberger's corporate representative also admitted that this determination was made on Dr. Roach's CAF form alone. (Docket Entry 48, at 4; Docket Entry 48-1, at 35.) Plaintiff argues that, if Schlumberger truly disputed Dr. Roach's findings, it had an independent duty to seek clarification from Plaintiff's physicians. (Docket Entry 60, at 7.) Yet at no time during the six months he was denied accommodation did Schlumberger ever reach out to Plaintiff's physician or counselors, nor did it make a single suggestion to Plaintiff. (Id.) Such omission, according to Plaintiff, demonstrates that Schlumberger did not engage in an ongoing, interactive process with Plaintiff. (Id.) Plaintiff also argues that any delay in granting the accommodation was not attributable to him because he has no control over the differing opinions of medical professionals. (Id. at 8.) According to Plaintiff, unanimity among the medical professionals who evaluated him was not required for Schlumberger to accommodate his disability. (Id.)2
Based on the evidence presented, there are genuine factual disputes on this [*16]  issue, both as to whether Plaintiff sought a reasonable accommodation and whether Plaintiff and Schlumberger engaged in a good faith, interactive process after Plaintiff presented Dr. Roach's CAF form to Schlumberger. Both sides have presented summary judgment evidence creating a factual dispute as to whether Plaintiff's requested accommodation was reasonable and whether Dr. Roach's answers on the initial CAF were sufficient to supply Schlumberger with the necessary information to grant or deny Plaintiffs request to bring his service dog to work with him in June 2012.3 If, as Plaintiff claims, Dr. Roach's answers were sufficient, then Schlumberger arguably failed to engage in good-faith interaction by refusing to credit them without contacting Dr. Roach or any other physician, and without reaching out to Plaintiff to discuss any alternative accommodations. On the other hand, if Dr. Roach's CAF was insufficient, then Plaintiff arguably contributed to his own delay by his inability to obtain the CAF from the healthcare personnel treating his PTSD, and his failure to disclose to Schlumberger that at least two medical doctors had refused to sign the CAF. Accordingly, both Schlumberger's [*17]  and Plaintiff's motions for summary judgment on the failure to accommodate claim should be denied.

B. Discriminatory Discharge.
Plaintiff also complains that he was discriminated against on the basis of his disability. (Docket Entry 12, at 6.) He contends that Schlumberger stereotyped him and discriminated against him because it considered him dangerous on account of his PTSD. (Id.) Plaintiff argues that as a result of this discrimination, he was ultimately terminated, and that the discharge was pretext for discrimination. (Docket Entry 69.) Schlumberger disputes this contention, responding that, after a series of problems, Plaintiff was ultimately discharged for sending a racially offensive message to an African-American employee. (Docket Entry 45, at 19.) Schlumberger contends that Plaintiff cannot show that he was treated differently than any non-disabled employees, and thus that he cannot demonstrate a prima facie case discriminatory discharge. (Docket Entry 45, at 18.)
Under the ADA, it is unlawful for an employer "to discriminate against a qualified individual on the basis of disability in regard to job application procedures . . . discharge of employees . . . and other terms, [*18]  conditions, and privileges of employment." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). To sustain a claim for disability discrimination, a plaintiff must establish that he: (1) has a disability; (2) is qualified for the position in which he was employed; and (3) was discriminated against because of his disability. Griffin v. UPS, 661 F.3d 216, 222 (5th Cir. 2011); Jenkins v. Cleco Power, LLC, 487 F.3d 309, 315 (5th Cir. 2007). Such a claim may be proven by direct or circumstantial evidence. Plaintiff claims he has presented both sorts of evidence here.
1. Direct Evidence.
"Direct evidence is evidence that, if believed, proves the fact of discriminatory animus without inference or presumption." West v. Nabors Drilling USA, Inc., 330 F.3d 379, 384 n.3 (5th Cir. 2003). "In the context of [employment discrimination], direct evidence includes any statement or written document showing a discriminatory motive on its face." Portis v. First Nat'l Bank of New Albany, Miss., 34 F.3d 325, 328 (5th Cir. 1994). "A plaintiff who can offer sufficient direct evidence of intentional discrimination should prevail, just as in any other case where a plaintiff meets his burden." Nichols v. Loral Vought Sys. Corp., 81 F.3d 38, 40 (5th Cir. 1996). Furthermore, "[w]hen a plaintiff presents credible direct evidence that discriminatory animus in part motivated or was a substantial factor in the contested employment action, the burden of proof shifts to the employer to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that the same decision would have been made regardless of the forbidden [*19]  factor." Brown v. E. Miss. Elec. Power Ass'n., 989 F.2d 858, 861 (5th Cir. 1993). However, if an inference or presumption is required for the evidence to be probative as to an employer's discriminatory animus, the evidence is circumstantial, not direct. West, 330 F.3d at 384 n.3.
Plaintiff contends that Schlumberger's corporate representative admitted in his deposition that the true reason for Plaintiffs termination was because he posed a threat to the workplace because he had PTSD. (Docket Entry 69, at 11.) The deposition testimony involved concerns Schlumberger's interaction with Plaintiff regarding the racially-tinged text message he sent an African-American coworker. The corporate representative states that Schlumberger was worried about confronting Plaintiff regarding the message, because of a statement Plaintiff had made in 2012 that he had "ideas of coming to work and shooting other co-workers and taking his own life." (Id.; Docket Entry 69-8, at 40.) The representative said that Schlumberger considered "the potential threat [Plaintiff] could represent towards other co-workers, including management, by having him come at the facility to confront him" about the text message. (Id.; Docket Entry 69-8, at 40.) The representative goes on to state that Plaintiff "was not confronted [*20]  with . . . his side of the story, because [Schlumberger] had clear evidence" that the message was sent. (Docket Entry 69-8, at 40.)
The corporate representative's testimony does not provide direct evidence that Plaintiff was terminated for his PTSD. The testimony arguably sheds light on how Plaintiff was terminated: he was not confronted concerning the text message was because Schlumberger was concerned about Plaintiff's previous history and statements to co-workers concerning work place violence. But it is not direct evidence of why he was terminated. The deposition testimony does not state that Plaintiff was fired, either in whole or in part, because of a potential threat Plaintiff posed to the workplace based on his PTSD. Cf. Fabela v. Socorro Indep. Sch. Dist., 329 F.3d 409, 415 (5th Cir. 2003) (describing direct evidence as "any statement or document which shows on its face that an improper criterion served as the basis—not necessarily the sole basis, but a basis—for the adverse employment action"), overruled on other grounds by Smith v. Xerox Corp., 602 F.3d 320 (5th Cir. 2010). As such, the deposition testimony of Schlumberger's corporate representative is not direct evidence of discrimination.
2. Circumstantial Evidence.
Plaintiff also alleges circumstantial evidence of disability discrimination. [*21]  When circumstantial evidence is relied on to sustain a plaintiff's case, the Court applies the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework to determine whether he can meet such a standard. Daigle v. Liberty Life Ins. Co., 70 F.3d 394, 396 (5th Cir. 1995). "Under this framework, a plaintiff must first make a prima facie showing of discrimination by establishing that: (1) he is disabled, has a record of disability, or is regarded as disabled; (2) he is qualified for the job; (3) he was subjected to an adverse employment action on account of his disability; and (4) he was replaced by or treated less favorably than non-disabled employees." McInnis v. Alamo Cmty. Coll. Dist., 207 F.3d 276, 279-80 (5th Cir. 2000). If the plaintiff successfully establishes such a prima facie case of discrimination, the burden shifts to the employer to articulate a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the adverse employment action. Id. at 279. If the employer is able to do so, the burden then shifts back to the plaintiff to produce sufficient evidence that either (1) the employer's proffered reason is not true, but is instead a pretext for discrimination (pretext alternative); or (2) the employer's proffered reason, while true, is only one of the reasons for its conduct, and another motivating factor is the plaintiff's protected characteristic (mixed-motive [*22]  alternative). Rachid v. Jack in the Box, Inc., 376 F.3d 305, 312-13 (5th Cir. 2004).
Schlumberger challenges only the fourth prong of Plaintiff's prima facie case. It argues that Plaintiff cannot demonstrate that he was treated less favorably than any similarly-situated employee. (Docket Entry 45, at 18.) It is well established that a plaintiff may support a claim of [discrimination] by showing that his employer gave "preferential treatment to [another] employee under nearly identical circumstances." Okoye v. Univ. of Tex. Hous. Health Sci. Ctr., 245 F.3d 507, 514 (5th Cir. 2001) (quotation omitted). The "nearly identical" standard required to show that a comparator employee is similarly situated is stringent, and excludes employees with "different responsibilities, different supervisors, different capabilities, different work rule violations or different disciplinary records." Beltran v. Univ. of Tex. Health Sci. Ctr. at Hous., 837 F. Supp.2d 635, 642 (S.D. Tex. 2011). Furthermore, "[t]he employment actions being compared will be deemed to have been taken under nearly identical circumstances when the employees being compared held the same job or responsibilities, shared the same supervisor or had their employment status determined by the same person, and have essentially comparable violation histories." Lee v. Kansas City S. Ry. Co., 574 F.3d 253, 259 (5th Cir. 2009). "[C]ritically, the plaintiff's conduct that drew the adverse employment decision must have been 'nearly identical' to that of the proffered [*23]  comparator who allegedly drew dissimilar employment decisions." Id.
Although Schlumberger concedes that Plaintiff was terminated, it asserts that Plaintiff cannot demonstrate that it treated any other employee more favorably than Plaintiff under "nearly identical" circumstances. (Docket Entry 45, at 19.) Schlumberger has provided evidence that Plaintiff discharged for sending a racially offensive message to an African-American employee. (Docket Entry 45, at 19; Docket Entry 46-5, at 1; Docket Entry 46-1, at 4-6.) Additionally, Schlumberger contends that Plaintiffs employment history with Schlumberger demonstrates his "poor judgment" and that Plaintiff had problems getting to work on time, and that he received numerous warnings for his attendance and other performance issues. (Docket Entry 45, at 11, 19; Docket Entry 46-1; at 7; Docket Entry 46-2; Docket Entry 46-3; Docket Entry 46-4.) Schlumberger also asserts that Plaintiff received a warning after a work accident wherein Plaintiff drove a cement truck into an overhead door, and that he was found asleep in his truck during work hours. (Docket Entry 45, at 11, 19; Docket Entry 46-13.) Schlumberger contends that these events led to the [*24]  immediate termination of Plaintiff upon the complaint concerning his racist text message. (Docket Entry 45, at 19.)
Plaintiff responds that the message sent to his co-worker was not intended to be racist, but even if it was interpreted as such, Schlumberger did not inform him of the accusation against him, failed to give him an opportunity to respond, and did not follow its own anti-harassment policy regarding progressive discipline when dealing with such instances. (Docket Entry 69, at 7.) Plaintiff argues that when other employees were accused of similar or worse harassment, Schlumberger gave those employees multiple warnings and opportunities for improvement. (Id.) As evidence, Plaintiff provides copies of warnings given to Schlumberger's employees for various violations, including racial and sexual harassment, as well as other human resource documents regarding such incidents. (Docket Entries 69-9, 69-10, 69-11, 69-12, 69-13, 69-14, 69-15, 69-16.) Even viewed in Plaintiff's favor, however, these examples fail to support Plaintiff's prima facie case.
Plaintiff's first example concerns the termination of a Schlumberger equipment operator who was terminated subsequent to a fellow employee's [*25]  complaint following a racist comment he made. That employee was terminated after two incidents, occurring approximately two months apart, where he made racist comments directed at African-American employees. (Docket Entry 69-9, at 1-2.) The evidence presented by Plaintiff further shows that the employee had previously received a written warning about his "excessive absenteeism or tardiness" and his "poor attitude or lack of cooperation." (Docket Entry 69-9, at 3.) Plaintiff argues that since the employee was not immediately fired after the first incident, then this proves he was treated differently. (Docket Entry 69, at 7.)
Plaintiff has not produced sufficient evidence that this employee was similarly situated to him—that both he and the employee had the same job, responsibilities, or supervisors. But even assuming that Plaintiff could demonstrate similarity in their jobs, he cannot show that the employee was punished differently for making a similar racist comment. Although the evidence indicates that the employee had made two such comments, the first incident was not reported to Schlumberger personnel—indeed, the supervisor who witnessed the first event received a warning letter [*26]  for not reporting it. (Docket Entry 69-9, at 1-2; Docket Entry 69-10, at 1-2.) Because Plaintiff does not have evidence that demonstrates the employee would not have been terminated following the first incident had it been reported, this evidence is insufficient to demonstrate the fourth prong of his prima facie case.
Plaintiff points to other evidence in support of his contention that he was treated differently than other non-disabled, similarly situated employees. For example, Plaintiff has produced an EEOC charge filed by another employee, which complains that his supervisor called him a "wetback." (Docket Entry 69-11.) Plaintiff argues that Schlumberger has not produced any evidence demonstrating that the supervisor was immediately terminated after this comment. (Docket Entry 69, at 7.) But Plaintiff has not produced sufficient evidence that the supervisor was in "nearly identical" circumstances as him. Likewise, Plaintiff's other evidence, that a Hispanic contractor made a racist remark and only received a warning, and that several other Schlumberger employees were involved in sexual harassment of fellow employees and received less discipline than him, does not sufficiently demonstrate [*27]  that these employees were in "nearly identical" circumstances as Plaintiff.
Plaintiff has not presented sufficient evidence to raise a genuine issue of material fact that "he was treated less favorably because of his [disability] than were other similarly situated employees who were not [disabled], under nearly identical circumstances." Lee, 574 F.3d at 259. Because Plaintiff has not presented sufficient evidence to establish a prima facie case of discriminatory discharge, summary judgment should be granted in favor of Schlumberger for this claim.

C. Retaliation.
In addition to his disability discrimination claim, Plaintiff complains that he experienced unlawful retaliation after "filing and pursuing his claim of disability discrimination." (Docket Entry 12, at 7.) He contends that his termination from employment was retaliation for his complaints concerning Plaintiff's treatment of his disability. (Id.) Schlumberger responds that Plaintiff cannot make out a prima facie case of retaliation because he cannot demonstrate a causal connection between a protected activity and his ultimate termination, nor can he show that his termination was pretext for retaliation. (Docket Entry 45, at 21.)
"Retaliation claims [*28]  are treated the same whether brought under the ADA or Title VII." Penny v. United Parcel Serv., 128 F.3d 408, 417 (6th Cir. 1997). Under these statutes, retaliation is prohibited against employees who engage in protected conduct, such as filing a charge of harassment or discrimination. Perez v. Region 20 Educ. Serv. Ctr., 307 F.3d 318, 325 (5th Cir. 2002). To make out a prima facie case of retaliation, a plaintiff must demonstrate: (1) he engaged in an activity protected by the ADA; (2) the employer took a materially adverse employment action against the employee; and (3) there is a causal connection between the protected activity and the adverse employment action. Seaman v. CSPH, Inc., 179 F.3d 297, 301 (5th Cir. 1999). Once the plaintiff makes a prima facie showing, the burden shifts to the employer to articulate a legitimate, nonretaliatory reason for the adverse employment action. McCoy v. City of Shreveport, 492 F.3d 551, 557 (5th Cir. 2007). If the employer meets this burden of production, then the burden shifts back to the plaintiff to show that the employer's proffered explanation is a pretext for retaliation. Id.
1. Prima Facie Case.
Schlumberger appears to dispute only the last element of Plaintiff's prima facie case. Schlumberger argues that there is no causal connection between Plaintiffs protected activity—the EEOC charge—and his termination. (Docket Entry 45, at 21.) To establish the causal link necessary to make out [*29]  a prima facie case of retaliation, a plaintiff must produce evidence that "demonstrates that the employer's decision to termination was [based] in part on knowledge of the employee's protected activity." Ackel v. Nat' Communs, Inc., 339 F.3d 376, 386 (5th Cir. 2003) (quotation omitted). As such, "[t]he standard for establishing the 'causal link' element of the plaintiff's prima facie case [of retaliation] is much less stringent than the tut for' test." Evans v. City of Houston, 246 F.3d 344, 354 (5th Cir. 2001) (quotation omitted). For example, "[c]lose timing between an employee's protected activity and an adverse employment action against him may provide the 'causal connection' required to make out a prima facie case of retaliation." Swanson v. Gen. Servs. Admin., 110 F.3d 1180, 1188 (5th Cir.), cert. denied, 522 U.S. 948, 118 S. Ct. 366, 139 L. Ed. 2d 284 (1997).
Schlumberger argues that Plaintiff's termination occurred nineteen months after he filed his EEOC charge, which is too long of a time gap to support a retaliation claim. (Docket Entry 45, at 21.) Plaintiff counters that the EEOC charge of discrimination was not the only protected activity that he engaged in while employed at Schlumberger. (Docket Entry 69, at 5.) He argues that he engaged in multiple instances of protected activity even after the EEOC issued its cause determination, including complaining to Schlumberger's CEO about the restrictions placed on his accommodation [*30]  and disability-related harassment at work, and filing the instant suit. (Id) Furthermore, Plaintiff contends that he engaged in protected activity just three days before his termination, when he complained to his supervisors that he was experiencing harassment at work related to his PTSD, including accusations that he was dangerous and unstable. (Id.) Such activity, Plaintiff asserts, is sufficient to establish a causal connection between his protected activity and his termination.
Plaintiff has made out a prima facie case of retaliation. The ADA retaliation provision protects any individual who has "opposed any act or practice made unlawful by" the ADA or who has made a charge under the ADA. 42 U.S.C. § 12203(a). Plaintiff has adequately alleged several instances of protected activity sufficient for the first prong of a prima facie retaliation case. See Long v. Eastfield College, 88 F.3d 300 , 305 n.5 (5th Cir. 1996) (determining the plaintiff engaged in a protected activity when she complained to college officials about harassment because "opposing any practice made an unlawful employment practice is broad enough to include . . . using the employer's internal grievance mechanisms" (internal quotation omitted)). In addition to his EEOC charge, Plaintiff filed a complaint [*31]  with his supervisors on October 2, 2013, complaining that he was experiencing harassment at work related to his PTSD, including accusations by his coworkers that he was dangerous and unstable. (Docket Entry 69-5.) Plaintiff's deposition testimony also indicates that he complained to his supervisors in January 2014 about property that had been vandalized that he believed was the result of harassment based on his disability. (Docket Entry 69-4, at 7.) And Plaintiff testified that, in March 2014, he complained once again to his supervisors that he was being discriminated against because someone had written the word "beaner" on his radio. (Id. at 5-7.) Furthermore, Plaintiff produced evidence that his attorney sent a letter on April 22, 2014, to counsel for Schlumberger, complaining about harassment Plaintiff was receiving at work on account of his PTSD. (Docket Entry 69-6.) In the letter, Plaintiff alleges that someone had made false accusations against him of safety violations, and that someone in Schlumberger management had made allegations that he was a threat to the workplace because of his PTSD. (Id.) Plaintiff was terminated on April 25, 2014. (Docket Entry 12, at 6.)
The record reflects that [*32]  Plaintiff engaged in protected activity in close temporal proximity to his complaints about the alleged discrimination he was experiencing based on his PTSD. A plaintiff who relies on close "temporal proximity between the protected activity and the adverse employment action" must produce "evidence of knowledge of the protected activity on the part of the decision maker." Ramirez v. Gonzales, 225 Fed. App'x 203, 210 (5th Cir. 2007). In this case, there is evidence that management, who were the final decision-makers in Plaintiff's termination, were aware of his complaints concerning his alleged discrimination. Plaintiff's letters to his supervisors establish the requisite knowledge. (See Docket Entry 69-5; Docket Entry 69-6.) Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, the temporal proximity of the events occurring in this case, coupled with the other evidence presented, is sufficient to withstand summary judgment regarding his prima facie case of retaliation.
2. Legitimate, Non-retaliatory Reason.
After concluding that Plaintiff has presented a prima facie case of retaliation, the burden shifts to Schlumberger to articulate a legitimate, non-retaliatory reason for the employment action. Schlumberger has met that burden here. [*33]  It has presented evidence that Plaintiff's termination was due to Plaintiffs offensive text message sent to an African-American co-worker who made a complaint of harassment subsequent to the message, and that this was the "last-straw" due to Plaintiffs past performance history, including warnings regarding his attendance, driving a truck into an overhead door, and sleeping on the job. (Docket Entry 45, at 19.)
3. Pretext.
Once Schlumberger satisfies its burden of producing its reasons, Plaintiff must demonstrate that the reasons are actually pretext for retaliation. An employee may establish pretext by showing that the adverse action would not have occurred "but for" the employer's retaliatory reason for the action. University of Tex. SW Med. Ctr. v. Nassar, 570 U.S. 338, 133 S. Ct. 2517, 2533-34, 186 L. Ed. 2d 503 (2013). In order to avoid summary judgment, Plaintiff must show "a substantial conflict in substantial evidence" on the question of whether the employer would not have taken the action "but for" the protected activity. Hague v. Univ. of Tex. Health Science Ctr. at San Antonio, 560 Fed. App'x 328, 336 (5th Cir. Mar. 28, 2014) (quoting Long, 88 F.3d at 308). "[E]vidence establishing the prima facie case and any inferences drawn therefrom may also be considered when determining whether pretext has been shown." Id. (citing Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143, 120 S. Ct. 2097, 147 L. Ed. 2d 105 (2000)).
Plaintiff does not dispute that he: (1) sent the text message to his co-worker and that the coworker [*34]  complained the message was racist; (2) received several written warnings for his attendance and for sleeping while on the job; and (3) that he drove a company vehicle into a door. (See Docket Entry 69.) He nevertheless contends that Schlumberger's treatment of similarly situated individuals, as discussed above in his disability discrimination claim, demonstrates that Schlumberger's ostensible reasons for its actions were pretextual. (Docket Entry 69, at 6.) He alleges that Schiumberger did not follow its own policies which call "for investigation and progressive discipline for harassment complaints." (Id. at 9.) Plaintiff also asserts that he received a positive performance evaluation just three days before his termination, further demonstrating that his termination was pretextual for retaliation. (Id. at 10.)
This evidence is insufficient to raise a material issue of genuine fact concerning whether there is a "conflict in substantial evidence" on the question of whether he would have been terminated "but for" his protected activity. As already noted, Plaintiff has not produced sufficient evidence that other employees were treated more favorably than him under "nearly identical" circumstances. Plaintiff's [*35]  performance evaluation does not create a "conflict in substantial evidence" either. While Plaintiff contends that he received the evaluation three days before his termination, the manager comments within the report show that they were made in January 2014, several months prior to Plaintiff's termination and also prior to the Plaintiff offensive message to his co-worker. (Docket Entry 69-1.) Plaintiff sent the text message on April 24, 2014. (Docket Entry 46-5.) Three days before that, on April 21, 2014, Plaintiff was found "sleeping in a well fracturing truck on the job." (Docket Entry 46-1, at 3.) And the record demonstrates that Plaintiff had received written warnings on at least three occasions prior to these incidents. (Docket Entry 46-1, at 3.)
On this record, Plaintiff has not presented sufficient evidence of pretext to create a genuine issue of material fact that he would not have been terminated "but for" his protected activity. Accordingly, summary judgment should be granted on Plaintiff's retaliation claim.

IV. Conclusion and Recommendation.
Based on the foregoing, I recommend that Schlumberger's Motion for Summary Judgment (Docket Entry 45) be GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN [*36]  PART, and Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment (Docket Entry 48) be DENIED. Schlumberger is entitled to summary judgment as to Plaintiff's claims for discriminatory discharge and retaliation, but genuine disputes of material fact preclude summary judgment on Plaintiff's accommodation claim.

V. Instructions For Service And Notice of Right to Object/Appeal.
The United States District Clerk shall serve a copy of this report and recommendation on all parties by either (1) electronic transmittal to all parties represented by attorneys registered as a "filing user" with the clerk of court, or (2) by mailing a copy to those not registered by certified mail, return receipt requested. Written objections to this report and recommendation must be filed within fourteen days after being served with a copy of same, unless this time period is modified by the district court. 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1); Fed. R. Civ. P. 72(b). The party shall file the objections with the clerk of the court, and serve the objections on all other parties. A party filing objections must specifically identify those findings, conclusions or recommendations to which objections are being made and the basis for such objections; the district court need not consider [*37]  frivolous, conclusive or general objections. A party's failure to file written objections to the proposed findings, conclusions and recommendations contained in this report shall bar the party from a de novo determination by the district court. Thomas v. Arn, 474 U.S. 140,149-52, 106 S. Ct. 466, 88 L. Ed. 2d 435 (1985); Acuña v. Brown & Root, Inc., 200 F.3d 335, 340 (5th Cir. 2000). Additionally, failure to file timely written objections to the proposed findings, conclusions and recommendations contained in this report and recommendation shall bar the aggrieved party, except upon grounds of plain error, from attacking on appeal the unobjected-to proposed factual findings and legal conclusions accepted by the district court. Douglass v. United Servs. Auto. Ass'n, 79 F.3d 1415, 1428-29 (5th Cir. 1996) (en banc).
SIGNED on November 24, 2014.
/s/ Henry J. Bemporad
Henry J. Bemporad
United States Magistrate Judge


End of Document

