A.M.N. v. Walt Disney Parks & Resorts United States
United States District Court for the Middle District of Florida, Orlando Division
September 26, 2016, Decided; September 26, 2016, Filed
Case No: 6:14-cv-1938-Orl-22GJK

Reporter
2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 199811 *
A.M.N. and V.M.N., Plaintiffs, v. WALT DISNEY PARKS AND RESORTS U.S., INC., Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For A.M.N., by and through V.M.N. as next friend, parent and natural guardian, V.M.N., Individually, Plaintiffs: Anthony Anderson Benton Dogali, LEAD ATTORNEY, Dogali Law Group, PA, Tampa, FL; Domenick Giovanni Lazzara, Dom Law PA, Tampa, FL; Eugene Feldman, PRO HAC VICE, Arias, Sanguinetti, Stahle & Torrijos, LLP, Los Angeles, CA; Geoffrey E. Parmer, The Consumer Protection Firm, PLLC, Tampa, FL.
For Walt Disney Parks and Resorts US, Inc., Defendant: Jeremy Marc White, LEAD ATTORNEY, PRO HAC VICE, McDermott, Will & Emery, LLP, Washington, DC; Kerry Alan Scanlon, LEAD ATTORNEY, PRO HAC VICE, McDermott, Will & Emery, LLP*, Washington, DC; Manuel Kushner, LEAD ATTORNEY, Manuel Kushner Law Firm, PLLC, Palm Beach, FL; Oscar Ramallo, Rhonda R Trotter, LEAD ATTORNEYS, PRO HAC VICE, Kaye Scholer, LLP, Los Angeles, CA; Robert Michael Kline, LEAD ATTORNEY, McDermott, Will & Emery, LLP, Miami, FL; Jon Michael Philipson, Thomas & LoCicero, PL, Tampa, FL; Paul I. Margulies, PRO HAC VICE, Kaye Scholer, LLP, Washington, DC.
For H. M., Movant: Anthony Anderson Benton Dogali, LEAD ATTORNEY, Dogali Law Group, PA, Tampa, FL.
Judges: ANNE C. CONWAY, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: ANNE C. CONWAY
Opinion



ORDER
This cause comes [*2]  before the Court on Defendant's, Walt Disney Parks and Resorts U.S., Inc. ("Defendant"), Motion for Summary Judgment filed on June 1, 2016. (Doc. No. 50). Plaintiff, A.M.N. by and through V.M.N. as Next Friend, Parent, and Natural Guardian ("Plaintiff"), filed a Response in Opposition to Defendant's Motion on July 1, 2016. (Doc. No. 65). Defendant filed its Reply on July 18, 2016. (Doc. No. 70). For the following reasons, this Court will grant Defendant's Motion.

I. BACKGROUND
Plaintiff is a resident of Maricopa County, Arizona living with autism. (Doc. No. 1 ¶¶ 75 and 79) (Complaint). Plaintiff also has extreme sensory issues, a behavioral feeding disorder, and low muscular tone. (Id. at ¶ 75). Plaintiff is generally in the care of her mother ("V.M.N."). (Id. at ¶ 78). V.M.N. brought this action on Plaintiff's behalf. (Id.). Plaintiff becomes "overtly anxious when forced to idly wait for more than a few minutes." (Id. at ¶ 75). She wears headphones to avoid over-stimulation and uses a mobility scooter and a service animal to lead her through crowds. (Id.). Plaintiff must also experience Defendant's parks in a specific order and disruptions to this routine will escalate toward her having [*3]  a meltdown. (Id. at ¶ 83). Her meltdowns consist of directing aggressive behavior toward herself, her parents, and elopement (running away). (Id. at ¶ 75).
Defendant is one of the world's most popular amusement parks. (Doc. No. 50 p. 24). Until October 9, 2013, Defendant would issue a Guest Assistance Card ("GAC") to certain disabled guests at its parks. (Id. at p. 4). A GAC allowed these guests and their party nearly unlimited access to rides through alternative "backdoor entrances" or "Fastpass"1 lines. (Id.).
Defendant, however, abandoned the GAC system because of alleged abuse by both guests that needed GACs and those that did not. (Id. at p. 5). The most common way guests purportedly abused the former GAC system was by requesting the accommodation with no need for it altogether. (Id.). Individuals were also creating counterfeit GACs, posting Craigslist advertisements offering unauthorized tours guided by GAC holders, and selling unexpired GACs online. (Id.).
On October 9, 2013, the Disney Disability Access Service ("DAS") was adopted to replace the GAC system. (Id. at 7). Guests needing accommodations for a cognitive disability at Defendant's parks are to obtain a DAS card from its City Hall in Disneyland or its [*4]  Chamber of Commerce at California Adventure upon arrival. (Id.). DAS affords guests with disabilities such as autism the ability to "virtually wait" for attractions without standing in lines. (Id.). A guest using DAS arrives at an attraction, presents the card, and receives a return time. (Id.) This can be done for the duration of their visit. (Id.). The virtual wait using DAS is the posted time for the attraction minus ten minutes. (Id.). DAS cardholders thus have the opportunity to "avail themselves of the many other attractions throughout the park—other rides, shows, attractions, concerts, characters, restaurants, and stores" until their return time. (Id.). In addition to DAS, some guests receive a number of "readmission passes" permitting them to enter the Fastpass line for any attraction without having to stand in line or wait virtually. (Id. at p. 8).
Plaintiff's family visited Defendant's parks on February 28, 2014. (Doc. No. 1 ¶ 90). Upon arrival, they waited thirty minutes at Guest Relations. (Id.). They first visited the Peter Pan ride in which they were asked to wait in a "wheelchair line" and watched a non-DAS family using Fastpasses get on the ride before them. (Id.). Plaintiff then [*5]  went to the Frozen Meet and Greet but there was a 120-minute wait. (Id. at ¶ 91.). They were told that DAS is not used for meeting characters and Plaintiff had her first meltdown. (Id.). The family then went to Star Tours at which they usually used an alternate entrance. (Id. at ¶ 92). When they were told to use the elevator instead, Plaintiff had another meltdown. (Id.). Plaintiff then had another meltdown at Autopia when the employee told them to wait in a line located in a tunnel instead of allowing them to enter the ride through the exit as in the past. (Id. at ¶ 93). Plaintiff and her family left the park feeling unaccommodated by DAS. (Id. at ¶ 94). They returned the next day but Plaintiff had another meltdown at Mickey's Fun Wheel because there was a twenty-five minute wait and no DAS return time available. (Id. at ¶ 96).
They visited Defendant's parks again on October 6, 2014.2 (Id. at ¶ 97). DAS was explained to them and they received ten readmission passes. (Id. at ¶ 99). This encounter took sixty minutes. (Id.). At various rides, Plaintiff was told that she could not enter through the exit of the ride as she did before. (Id. at ¶¶ 102 and 103). However, in some instances, [*6]  she was eventually allowed to use the exit but in others she was not. (Id.). Plaintiff also received a return time for Pirates of the Caribbean but came back two hours late because she needed time to recover from a meltdown. (Id. at ¶ 104). The family was told that they were really late and they needed to try again, returning closer to the scheduled time. (Id.).
Overall, Plaintiff and her family allege that they are discouraged and deterred from the full use and enjoyment of Defendant's parks because of DAS. (Id. at ¶ 107). As a result, Plaintiff requests injunctive relief requiring Defendant to modify DAS. (Id. at ¶¶ 111-19).

II. LEGAL STANDARD
Granting a summary judgment motion is proper if the moving party "shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). A dispute of material fact exists "if the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). "[A] complete failure of proof concerning an essential element of the nonmoving party's case necessarily renders all other facts immaterial." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986); Hairston v. Gainesville Sun Pub. Co., 9 F.3d 913, 918 (11th Cir. 1993).
A grant or denial of summary judgment hinges on whether there is a triable issue. Such issue exists when there is "sufficient evidence favoring [*7]  the nonmoving party for a jury to return a verdict for that party." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249. However, the Court must grant a motion if "the evidence . . . is so one-sided that one party must prevail as a matter of law." Id. at 251-52. In making this determination, "[t]he evidence of the non-movant is to be believed, and all justifiable inferences are to be drawn in his favor." Id. at 255 (quoting Adickes v. S.H. Kress & Co., 398 U.S. 144, 158-59, 90 S. Ct. 1598, 26 L. Ed. 2d 142 (1970)); Allmond v. Akal Sec., Inc., 558 F.3d 1312, 1316 (11th Cir. 2009).

III. DISCUSSION
As an initial matter, Plaintiff claims that the Complaint alleges a failure to accommodate, disparate treatment (intentional discrimination), and a disparate impact. Defendant, however, argues that it asserts only a failure to accommodate.
The parties' discord on what the issues are stems from Count I in the Complaint, the only count pertaining to the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"). Plaintiff broadly alleges a cause of action under 42 U.S.C. § 12131 et seq.3 A close reading of the Complaint nonetheless shows that only one issue is in dispute: the ADA's specific prohibition for the failure to accommodate, §12182(b)(2)(A)(ii), as referenced at ¶ 11. Count I provides facts describing Plaintiff's experience with Defendant's accommodations. (Doc. No. 1 ¶¶ 74-119). Though the Complaint mentions the ADA's general prohibition against discrimination, it lacks discernible [*8]  allegations regarding denial of participation, participation in an unequal benefit, or a separate benefit. 42. U.S.C. §12182(b)(l)(A)(i)-(iii).4 Furthermore, Count I makes no identifiable claims of disparate treatment or disparate impact. Instead, Count I only alleges that Defendant's accommodations are insufficient. Based on these three theories that Plaintiff purports are applicable, Plaintiff has only made allegations for a failure to accommodate.
Thus, Plaintiff's arguments of disparate treatment and disparate impact are now raised for the first time. Such tactic is impermissible. Raytheon Co. v. Hernandez, 540 U.S. 44, 53, 124 S. Ct. 513, 157 L. Ed. 2d 357 (2003); Gilmour v. Gates, McDonald & Co., 382 F.3d 1312, 1315 (11th Cir. 2004) ("A plaintiff may not amend her complaint through argument in a brief opposing summary judgment."). Plaintiff's proper course of action was to move for leave to amend the Complaint. See id. The deadline to do so, however, has passed.
Even if Plaintiff's Complaint is construed to allege disparate treatment and disparate impact, Plaintiff has not carried the initial burden of satisfying a prima facie case for either. Proving disparate treatment requires Plaintiff to show that a motivating factor behind Defendant implementing [*9]  DAS was to impose an adverse effect on individuals with Plaintiff's disability. See Vill. of Arlington Heights v. Metro. Housing Dev. Corp., 429 U.S. 252, 265-66, 97 S. Ct. 555, 50 L. Ed. 2d 450 (1977). However, Plaintiff states that "Disney's entire goal was to eliminate its prior system [GAC], for business reasons." (Doc. No. 65 p. 12).
Furthermore, "[a] disparate impact case is one in which a facially neutral practice impacts more harshly on one group of people than on others." Mayberry v. Von Valtier, 843 F. Supp. 1160, 1164-65 (E.D. Mich. 1994). Defendant's "mantra" for an "equal wait time for all" is just that—a mantra. To the extent it is viewed otherwise, Plaintiff acknowledges, as the Court elaborates infra, that the ADA is intended to ensure that disabled patrons of public accommodations are afforded a like experience of those that are not disabled to the extent feasible. (Doc. No. 65 p. 13). Disabled or not, virtually no one visits Defendant's parks and accesses its attractions without having to wait. Therefore, the real issue is DAS, which is not facially neutral. It applies specifically to those with disabilities, not all of Defendant's guests. This precludes Plaintiff from establishing a disparate impact.

A. Public Accommodations Must Provide Disabled Individuals a Like or Similar Benefit as Nondisabled Individuals
As discussed, the only legal issue at [*10]  hand is Defendant's alleged failure to accommodate Plaintiff by implementing DAS and discontinuing GACs. Congress enacted the ADA specifically to protect individuals with mental and physical impairments from societal discrimination and exclusion. See generally 42 U.S.C. § 12101(a)(2). This was based on its finding, amongst other things, that "historically, society has tended to isolate and segregate individuals with disabilities, and, despite some improvements, such forms of discrimination against individuals with disabilities continue to be a serious and pervasive social problem." Id.; PGA Tour, Inc. v. Martin, 532 U.S. 661, 674-75, 121 S. Ct. 1879, 149 L. Ed. 2d 904 (2001). Such discrimination includes "outright intentional exclusion as well as the failure to make modifications to existing facilities and practices." Id. at 675 (citing 42 U.S.C. § 12101(a)(5)) (internal quotation marks omitted).
The ADA accordingly prohibits discrimination by private entities providing certain amenities to the public. Title III of the ADA provides that "[n]o individual shall be discriminated against on the basis of disability in the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations of any place of public accommodation by any person who owns, leases (or leases to), or operates a place of public [*11]  accommodation." 42 U.S.C. § 12182(a). Myriad entities, including amusement parks, are deemed public accommodations by the ADA. Id. at § 12181(7)(I). The statute also lists specific prohibitions. There is only one prohibition at issue here:
[F]ailure to make reasonable modifications in policies, practices, or procedures, when such modifications are necessary to afford such goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations to individuals with disabilities, unless the entity can demonstrate that making such modifications would fundamentally alter the nature of such goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations.
42 U.S.C. § 12182(b)(2)(A)(ii).
Pursuant to this prohibition, the parties disagree over the extent of the accommodations Defendant is required to provide.5 The Martin Court noted that § 12182(b)(2)(A)(ii) "contemplates three inquiries: whether the requested modification is 'reasonable,' whether it is 'necessary' for the disabled individual, and whether it would 'fundamentally alter the nature'" of the accommodation. 532 U.S. at 683 n.38. Therefore, a plaintiff must show that he requested a modification and that such modification is reasonable "in the run of cases." Johnson v. Gambrinus Co./Spoetzl Brewery, 116 F.3d 1052, 1059 (5th Cir. 1997). A defendant can then offer rebuttal evidence to the reasonableness of the [*12]  request but the burden of proof on this issue remains with the plaintiff. Id. If the plaintiff satisfies the burden of showing that the requested accommodation is reasonable and necessary, the modification must be made unless the defendant proves it would fundamentally alter the nature of the public accommodation. See id. at 1058-60; Larsen v. Carnival Corp., 242 F. Supp. 2d 1333, 1342-43 (S.D. Fla. 2003). Assessing whether a request works a fundamental alteration goes hand-in-hand with determining its reasonableness. See id. Courts have considered "the effectiveness or feasibility of the proposed modification and whether it imposes undue costs or administrative burdens on the defendant" in making this determination. Id. (citing DeBord v. Bd. of Educ. of the Ferguson—Florissant Sch. Dist., 126 F.3d 1102, 1106 (8th Cir. 1997); Staron v. McDonald's Corp., 51 F.3d 353, 356 (2d Cir. 1995)).
Courts have used the "full and equal enjoyment" language in § 12182(a) to guide the "necessary" inquiry in § 12182(b)(2)(A)(ii). Martin states that an accommodation is necessary if it is beyond the individual's capacity to access a public accommodation without it. 532 U.S. at 682. Though this is telling regarding an accommodation's necessity, it was dicta.6 Accordingly, courts have interpreted the "full and equal enjoyment" clause, in the context of the necessary requirement, to mean that Congress intended for all individuals to have an opportunity [*13]  to experience an equal benefit from public accommodations to the extent it is feasible. Argenyi v. Creighton Univ., 703 F.3d 441, 450-51 (8th Cir. 2013) ("Congress require[s] public accommodations . . . to furnish reasonable . . . services so that all individuals have an equal opportunity to gain 'a like' or 'equal' benefit."); Baughman v. Walt Disney World Co., 685 F.3d 1131, 1135 (9th Cir. 2012) ("Public accommodations must start by considering how their facilities are used by nondisabled guests and then take reasonable steps to provide disabled guests with a like experience."); Liese v. Indian River Cty. Hosp. Dist., 701 F.3d 334, 343 (11th Cir. 2012) ("the proper inquiry [in determining if an accommodation was provided where necessary] is whether the auxiliary aid that a hospital provided to its hearing-impaired patient gave that patient an equal opportunity to benefit from the hospital's treatment."). In sum, a key inquiry in determining that a requested accommodation is necessary is whether a disabled individual requires it to receive a benefit like that of a nondisabled person.
Plaintiff also brings a claim under California's Unruh Act ("Unruh Act"), Cal. Civ. Code § 51(b), the state's civil rights statute. The Unruh Act provides that "violation of the right of any individual under the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 . . . shall also constitute a violation of this section § 51." Id. at § 51(f). Like [*14]  the ADA, California law requires a plaintiff suing for a failure to accommodate to prove that their requested accommodation is necessary and reasonable. Baughman v. Walt Disney World Co., 217 Cal. App. 4th 1438, 1446-47, 159 Cal. Rptr. 3d 825 (Cal. Ct. App. 2013). Therefore, the Court's disposition of Plaintiff's ADA claim simultaneously decides her Unruh Act claim.

B. The Parties' Arguments
Defendant primarily argues that Plaintiff has not met her burden because an accommodation beyond DAS is not necessary as DAS affords her access to the rides at its parks. (Doc. No. 50 p. 15). Defendant also contends that if the Court finds that reverting to the GAC system is reasonable and necessary, it would nonetheless fundamentally alter its operations based on the risk of abuse and an overall adverse impact on the wait times experienced by all other guests. (Id. at p. 22). Defendant maintains that these same arguments show that Plaintiff does not have a claim under the Unruh Act. (Id. at p. 25). Defendant further argues that Plaintiff lacks standing because she has access to its parks and that she has no redress because modifying DAS will not curb her meltdowns. (Id. at p. 26).
Plaintiff counters Defendant's Motion with six main arguments. First, Defendant's conduct amounts to disparate treatment or alternatively creates a disparate impact. [*15]  (Doc. No. 65 p. 10). Second, the reasonableness inquiry is fact-intensive and not fit for resolution on summary judgment. (Id. at p. 14). Third, the requested accommodation is necessary because Plaintiff's need for routine is not a preference, it is instead a biologically driven mechanism that cannot be disrupted. (Id. at p. 15). Fourth, Defendant has not shown that the requested accommodation will fundamentally alter its operations because it has provided a similar accommodation for the last twenty years. (Id.). Then, Plaintiff argues that the Unruh Act provides broader relief than the ADA regarding actual, statutory, and punitive damages. (Id. at p. 20). Lastly, Plaintiff argues that she has standing based on her deterrence from visiting Defendant's parks. (Id. at 21). Plaintiff's disparate treatment and disparate impact arguments have already been addressed and are impermissible.
Therefore, based on the remaining arguments identified by each party, there are four issues to be considered by this Court:
1. Whether Plaintiff's requested modification is necessary to afford her access to Defendant's parks;
2. Whether Plaintiff's requested modification is reasonable;
3. Whether Plaintiff's requested modification would fundamentally [*16]  alter the services provided by Defendant; and
4. Whether Plaintiff has standing to pursue her claim.
The subsequent analysis covers issues one and four only. Even if Plaintiff has standing to sue, the Court determines that the requested accommodation is not necessary. Therefore, discussion on the reasonableness of Plaintiff's request and whether it is a fundamental alteration to Defendant's operations is not needed.

C. Plaintiff's Requested Accommodation Is Not Necessary
Revising DAS is not necessary for Plaintiff to have equal access to Defendant's parks. This is because (1) Defendant provided Plaintiff an opportunity to gain a like benefit from its parks that is enjoyed by nondisabled individuals; (2) Plaintiff can wait for a sufficient amount of time to access attractions without following a routine; and (3) DAS is an existing means to equal access. The Court assesses the "necessary" inquiry first because a showing that Plaintiff did not need the accommodation obviates further discussion regardless if it is reasonable. Martin, 532 U.S. at 682.

1. Defendant afforded Plaintiff an experience like that of nondisabled guests
Plaintiff was given an opportunity to experience Defendant's attractions in a similar manner [*17]  as guests that do not need accommodations. In Baughman, Defendant in this case was sued by a guest with limb girdle muscular dystrophy which made it difficult for her to walk or stand. 685 F.3d at 1131. As part of its "necessary" inquiry into the plaintiff's requested accommodation, the Ninth Circuit highlighted the importance of considering the way nondisabled persons experienced Defendant's park and then assessing if the public accommodation took reasonable steps to afford a similar experience. Id. at 1135. In the present case, nondisabled guests visit Defendant's parks for rides and attractions that most of them have to wait in line for more than an hour to experience. (Doc. No. 50 p. 24). Comparing this to Plaintiff's experience, DAS and readmission passes allow Plaintiff to access those same rides in a fraction of the time. (Id. at p. 20). The plaintiff in Baughman had difficulty standing and walking; Plaintiff here alleges that she cannot wait to access attractions. Having trouble walking or standing could create a different experience from nondisabled guests when viewing certain attractions or transitioning on and off of rides. However, nondisabled guests will inevitably have to wait to experience the attractions [*18]  at Defendant's parks regardless of the order they choose to visit them. Not only will nondisabled guests have to wait, most of them will have to stand in line. Plaintiff can wait for attractions from anywhere in Defendant's parks from the time she arrives until whenever she decides to leave. While doing so, Plaintiff can visit other attractions with shorter waits until her return times for attractions with longer waits. Thus, DAS and readmission passes afford Plaintiff a similar, or better, experience as those not needing accommodation.

2. Plaintiff can wait long enough to access Defendant's attractions and does not need to follow a routine
The crux of Plaintiff's action is that she cannot wait idly to experience attractions and her specific routine cannot be disrupted. However, DAS accommodates these needs to the extent for her to have equal access. Plaintiff does not have to stand in line while waiting to access an attraction. Instead, she can experience other attractions in between waiting for attractions with longer waits, preventing her from being idle.
The Complaint states that Plaintiff must experience "the park in a specific order" (Doc. No. 1 ¶ 83) but her Response to this Motion [*19]  argues that this specific order pertains to the five different lands in Disneyland, not specific rides (Doc. No. 50 p. 8). However, even if her routine is "land-based," there appears to be nothing to accommodate because Plaintiff can simply go to the land she prefers at the outset of her visit. In any event, the ADA does not require Defendant to accommodate this preference because "preference—standing alone—is not essential to accessing Disney's Park." Ault v. Walt Disney World Co No. 6:07-cv-1785-Orl-31KRS, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 92911, 2009 WL 3242028, at *7 (M.D. Fla. Oct. 6, 2009), vacated and remanded on other grounds, 405 F. App'x 401, 2010 WL 5078088 (11th Cir. Dec. 14, 2010). V.M.N. also stated that Plaintiff has shown that she can wait in lines for at least twenty-five minutes. (Doc. No. 50 p. 13).
Furthermore, Plaintiff has demonstrated her ability to defer gratification for hours through traveling by car and plane.7 The gratification in traveling is, for the most part, reaching the desired destination. The time spent traveling in these instances is much more than Plaintiff's conceded ability to wait for twenty-five minutes—gratification from those trips was anything but instant. Plaintiff argues that traveling by car is not comparable to visiting an amusement park because the environment is controlled in terms [*20]  of temperature, smell, noise and light levels, number of people, and exposure to textures. (Doc. No. 65 p. 8). However, none of these things can be completely controlled in an amusement park. To the extent these things trigger Plaintiff's meltdowns, modifying DAS will not prevent her from having them.

3. DAS and readmission passes are existing means that afford equal access
Finally, Plaintiff's requested modification is not necessary because of the existing accommodations to access the attractions at the parks. Defendant cites a host of cases where federal courts have deemed an individual's request for accommodation unnecessary because accommodations were already in place that provided access.8 Plaintiff's case is no different. As noted, DAS and readmission passes afford Plaintiff access to the attractions at Defendant's parks. Based on these facts, a reasonable juror could not find that Plaintiff's requested accommodation is necessary. Consequently, even if Plaintiff had standing, which she does not as discussed infra III. D., Plaintiff failed to satisfy an essential element of her case. Celotex, 477 U.S. at 322-23. Discussion of the facts as they pertain to reasonableness and the fundamental alteration defense [*21]  is unnecessary. Id.

D. Plaintiff's Standing
There are two issues regarding standing: (1) Plaintiff's alleged injury from her visits and (2) the risk of future injury pursuant to her claim for injunctive relief. Regarding the risk of future injury, Plaintiff is not being denied access to Defendant's parks. This is because DAS and readmission passes create a like experience for Plaintiff that is enjoyed by nondisabled guests. Injunctive relief is not proper and further analysis of the risk of future injury is not needed.
Plaintiff's previous visits, nonetheless, must be assessed under the three, bedrock elements of standing. These are "(1) 'injury-in-fact'; (2) 'a causal connection between the asserted injury-in-fact and the challenged action of the defendant'; and (3) 'that the injury will be redressed by a favorable decision.'" Shotz v. Cates, 256 F.3d 1077, 1081 (11th Cir. 2001) (citing Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560-61, 112 S. Ct. 2130, 119 L. Ed. 2d 351 (1992)).
In general, a motion for summary judgment is not the appropriate means for deciding jurisdictional issues. Sheely v. MRI Radiology Network, P.A., 505 F.3d 1173, 1182 (11th Cir. 2007) (treating the district court's grant for summary judgment regarding subject matter jurisdiction as a Federal Rules of Civil Procedure Rule 12(b)(1) motion to dismiss). However, a court can review a standing challenge on summary judgment if it is based on [*22]  evidentiary support in the record. Clapper v. Amnesty Int'l. USA, 568 U.S. 398, 133 S. Ct. 1138, 1148-49, 185 L. Ed. 2d 264 (2013) ("[T]he party invoking federal jurisdiction bears the burden of establishing standing—and, at the summary judgment stage, such a party can no longer rest on . . . mere allegations, but must set forth by affidavit or other evidence specific facts.") (internal quotations omitted). As discussed throughout this Order, Defendant has supported its standing argument through record evidence.
Plaintiff has demonstrated that she is seeking to accommodate what appears to be a preference and thus has not established injury under the ADA. As shown by her experience at Defendant's parks, DAS provides what she needs—the ability to wait for attractions virtually. This prevents idle wait times. Moreover, Plaintiff experienced a significant number of attractions during her visits. Specifically, among her five visits in 2014 and 2015, Plaintiff experienced 150 attractions using DAS and readmission passes. (Doc. No. 65 p. 8). Consequently, V.M.N. admitted that Plaintiff has been able to access numerous rides. (Doc. No. 50 p. 10). Therefore, Defendant's Motion will be granted. However, even if Plaintiff had standing, Plaintiff's requested accommodation is not necessary. [*23] 

IV. CONCLUSION
Therefore, based on the foregoing, it is ORDERED as follows:
1. Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment filed on June 1, 2016 (Doc. No. 50) is GRANTED.
2. The Clerk is directed to enter judgment providing that Plaintiff shall recover nothing on her claims and that Defendant shall recover costs from Plaintiff.
3. Additionally, any pending motions filed by the parties are DENIED as moot.
4. The Clerk is directed to CLOSE this file.
DONE and ORDERED in Chambers, in Orlando, Florida on September 26, 2016.
/s/ Anne C. Conway
ANNE C. CONWAY
United States District Judge


End of Document

