Baker v. Dupnik
United States District Court for the District of Arizona
March 31, 2011, Decided; March 31, 2011, Filed
No. CV 09-0015-TUC-HCE; No. CV 09-0273-TUC-HCE (Consolidated)

Reporter
2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 162507 *
Celine A. Baker, Plaintiff, vs. Clarence W. Dupnik; et. al., Defendants.The State of Arizona, ex rel. Terry Goddard, et. al., Plaintiffs, vs. Clarence W. Dupnik, et. al., Defendants.
Prior History: Baker v. Dupnik, 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 145682 (D. Ariz., Jan. 26, 2010)
Counsel:  [*1] For Terry L Goddard, Attorney General, agent of, State of Arizona, Arizona Department of Law, Civil Rights Division, Plaintiffs: Sandra R Kane, Office of the Attorney General, Civil Rights Division, Phoenix, AZ.
For County of Pima a political subdivision of the State of Arizona, Clarence W Dupnik, in his official capacity as Pima County Sheriff, Pima County Sheriff's Department, Defendants: Stacey A Roseberry, Wendy Ann Petersen, Pima County Attorney's Office, Tucson, AZ.
Judges: Héctor C. Estrada, United States Magistrate Judge.
Opinion by: Héctor C. Estrada
Opinion



ORDER
Pending before the Court are: (1) Defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment (hereinafter "Defendants' MSJ") (Doc. 179)1 and (2) Plaintiffs' Joint Motion to Strike Defendants' Supplemental Statement of Facts (Doc. 212). With regard to Defendants' MSJ: Defendants filed a Statement of Facts in support of their Motion (hereinafter "DSOF")(Docs. 180-181) and an Affidavit of Filing Non-Electronic Exhibit, recordings of 911 calls on June 25, 2007 and October 21, 2007 (Doc. 182; see also (Doc. 178 (Order granting Defendants leave to file the recordings)); Plaintiff Arizona Civil Rights Division (hereinafter "ACRD") filed a Response in Opposition to Defendants' [*2]  MSJ (hereinafter "ACRD Response") (Doc. 194) and a Separate Statement of Additional Facts (hereinafter "PSSAF") (Doc. 196); Ms. Baker filed a Response in Opposition to Defendants' MSJ (Doc. 195) (hereinafter "Baker Response"), a Statement of Facts (hereinafter "PSOF") (Doc. 193), and a First Amended Notice of Filing Exhibits consisting of computer discs with photos and a video (Doc.204; see also Doc. 201 (Order granting Plaintiffs leave to file the exhibits)); Plaintiffs ACRD and Baker filed a Joint Controverting Statement of Facts (Doc. 197); Defendants filed a Reply (Doc. 208) together with a Supplemental Statement of Facts (hereinafter "DSSOF") (Docs. 209-210); and Defendants filed objections to ACRD's PSSAF (Doc. 206) and Ms. Baker's PSOF, (Doc. 207). The pending motions came on for oral argument on March 1, 2011.
For the following reasons, the Court: (1) grants in part and denies in part Defendants' MSJ; and (2) denies Plaintiffs' Joint Motion to Strike Defendants' Supplemental Statement of Facts.

I. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND AND MOTION
This consolidated action arises out of Ms. Baker's employment with the Pima County Sheriff's Department at the Department's Communications Center, which [*3]  handles 911 calls among other things. Plaintiffs are the Attorney General of the State of Arizona, the ACRD and Ms. Celine Baker. Defendants are Pima County, Clarence W. Dupnik in his official capacity as Pima County Sheriff, and the Pima County Sheriff's Department (hereinafter "PCSD").
The ACRD filed suit in state court and Ms. Baker, through counsel, intervened. That action was removed to this District Court (See CV 09-273), and Ms. Baker also filed a separate action in this District Court (See CV 09-15) that was consolidated with CV 09-273. (See Doc. 20). Plaintiffs allege that Defendants: (1) discriminated against Ms. Baker in violation of the Arizona Civil Rights Act, A.R.S. §41-1463(F)(4), by "unlawfully den[ying] Baker's request for a reasonable accommodation without demonstrating that the requested accommodation would impose an undue hardship...." (Count One of Second Amended Complaint (hereinafter "SAC") filed in CV 09-273 (see CV 09-273: Doc. 1-5)); (2) discriminated against Ms. Baker in violation of the Arizona Civil Rights Act, A.R.S. §41-1463(B) by issuing a September 10, 2007 Letter of Reprimand to Ms. Baker "in response to her request for an interactive process meeting with Defendants regarding her disability-related [*4]  request to use her service animal at work" (Count Two of SAC, filed in CV 09-273 (see CV 09-273: Doc. 1-5)); (3) retaliated against Ms. Baker in violation of the Arizona Civil Rights Act, A.R.S. §41-1464(A), by issuing a Notice of Intent to Suspend Without Pay, a Notice of Demotion Probation Failure, and a Layoff Notice to Ms. Baker in retaliation for her filing a charge of discrimination against PCSD (Count Three of SAC filed in CV 09-273 (see CV 09-273, Doc. 1-5); see also Count One of Complaint filed in CV 09-15)); (4) retaliated against Ms. Baker in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act (hereinafter "ADA"), 42 U.S.C. §12203 (Count Two of Complaint filed in CV 09-15); and (5) retaliated against Ms. Baker under the Rehabilitation Act, 29 U.S.C. §794 (Count Three of Complaint filed in CV 09-15)).
Defendants assert that they are entitled to summary judgment on all grounds and that PCSD is not a valid defendant and should be dismissed.

A. Plaintiffs' Joint Motion to Strike Defendants' Supplemental Statement of Facts
After filing a 118-page, 560-item Statement of Facts in support of their MSJ,2 Defendants filed a 53-page, 122-item Supplemental Statement of Facts (hereinafter "DSSOF") in support of their Reply. Plaintiffs seek [*5]  to strike the DSSOF as unauthorized by the LRCiv. 56.1, of the Rules of Practice of the U.S. District Court for the District of Arizona. Plaintiffs are correct that the Local Rules do not specifically address the filing of supplemental statement of facts with a reply brief on motion for summary judgment.
Defendants contend that the DSSOF is necessary to provide the full context of the factual assertions made by Plaintiffs in their respective statements of facts. According to Defendants, approximately half of the citations in their DSSOF are to evidence that is already in the record before the Court.3
As to Defendants' citations to items not previously contained in the record,4 that evidence is primarily from depositions taken during the discovery period prior to the filing of Defendants' MSJ and are submitted in response to arguments and factual statements advanced by Plaintiffs. Of the exhibits submitted by Defendants, only the August 5, 2010 affidavit of Kaison Kim is dated after Defendants filed their MSJ. The Kim affidavit provides foundation for a video recording of Ms. Baker's site visit to the Communications Center with her service dog. The affidavit also indicates that the video was [*6]  filed as an exhibit to the affidavit. The record does not reflect that Defendants submitted a nonelectronic filing of the video. The record reflects that Plaintiffs submitted a video of presumably the same site visit. (See Doc. 201; see also DSSOF, ¶62 ("Plaintiffs submitted Defendants' video of the October 26, 2009 site visit....")).
The Ninth Circuit has held that "[w]here new evidence is presented in a reply to a motion for summary judgment, the district court should not consider the new evidence without giving the [non-]movant an opportunity to respond." Provenz v. Miller, 102 F.3d 1478, 1483 (9th Cir. 1996) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted) (movant filed an affidavit with reply brief). The District Court for the District of Arizona has taken the position that exhibits filed in support of a reply on motion for summary judgment do not constitute "new" evidence when such evidence "rebut[s] arguments first raised by Plaintiff in its opposition to Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment." Equal Employment Opportunity Commission v. Creative Networks, LLC and Res-Care, 2008 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 103381, 2008 WL 5225807, *2 (D.Ariz. Dec. 15, 2008). Likewise, the District Court for the Central District of California has observed that "[e]vidence is not 'new,' however, if it is submitted in direct response to proof adduced in opposition to a motion. See Terrell v. Contra Costa County, 232 Fed.Appx. 626, 629 n.2 (9th Cir. Apr. 16, 2007) (Unpub. Disp.) (reply evidence [*7]  is not new where '[t]he Reply Brief addressed the same facts supplied in [the plaintiff's]... opposition to the motion [for summary judgment] but provides the full context to [the plaintiff's]... selected recitation of the facts.')." Edwards v. Toys "R" Us, 527 F.Supp.2d 1197, 1205 n.31 (C.D.Cal. Nov. 5, 2007).
On the instant record, Defendants' Reply addressed the same facts relied upon by Plaintiffs in their opposition. The material submitted by Defendants, except for the Kim affidavit, existed as part of discovery prior to the filing of Defendants' MSJ, much of that material was included in the PSSAF, and the material was submitted to rebut factual assertions and arguments advanced by Plaintiffs in their opposition. "Consequently, the submissions were proper...." Creative Networks, LLC, and Res-Care, 2008 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 103381, 2008 WL 5225807 at *2 (denying motion to strike supplemental statement of facts). Moreover, Plaintiffs' Motion is also moot given that, as set out infra, even consideration of the additional material submitted by Defendants does not alter the Court's conclusion that triable issues of fact preclude granting Defendants' MSJ. See Edwards, 527 F. Supp.2d at 1205 n. 31 ("The court notes that, even if plaintiffs were correct that the declarations constitute new evidence, it would deny the motion as moot, since the declarations...do not alter [*8]  the court's conclusion that triable issues of fact remain....").
Further, the Court will not rely on the Kim affidavit in resolving Defendants' MSJ.
Accordingly, Plaintiffs' Joint Motion to Strike Defendants' Supplemental Statement of Facts is denied.

II. FACTUAL BACKGROUND

A. Factual background pertaining to discrimination claims

1. Ms. Baker's disability
"For purposes of this motion, it is conceded that Ms. Baker is a qualified person with a disability ..." who began employment with Defendants in November 2004. (ACRD Response, p.3;DSOF, Att. 2, ¶3).
Ms. Baker's disability stems from a sports injury she sustained to her left knee in 1995 when she was 15 years of age. (PSSAF, ¶7 (citing PSSAF, Att. 2, ¶2)). Ms. Baker underwent ACL reconstruction with patellar tendon graft, complicated by a patellar tendon rupture and the need for reconstruction of the patellar tendon. (PSOF, Att. 3, p.9). In total, Ms. Baker has had four surgeries on her left knee. (Id.). Ms. Baker is now many years post surgery, and she still experiences chronic left knee pain and hypersensitivity of the soft tissues in the proximal tibia and distal thigh on the left. (Id. at p. 14). According to Majorie Eskay-Auerbach, M.D., J.D., [*9]  Plaintiffs' expert medical witness:
Ms. Baker's condition substantially affects her ability to ambulate normally. She is limited with respect to walking, running, standing and climbing stairs. Based upon the history provided by Ms. Baker, and a review of the medical records, she has a consistent history of unpredictable falls related to her knee pain and knee condition. As a result, it is medically necessary for her to use an assistive device. Her options for assistive devices include crutches or a service dog. Crutches are generally used for temporary conditions, such as a fracture, because use of crutches requires both hands to be occupied, and pressure under the arms can cause brachial plexopathy, involving nerves of the arm and forearm. A service dog permits her to have at least one hand available for other functions, and at the same time she could be braced by the dog to help prevent a fall.
(PSOF, Att. 1, ¶5.B).5 Dr. Eskay-Auerbach also indicates that her research shows that "service dogs are used for bracing" and can "prevent fall[ing] by bracing on command if partner needs help recovering balance and position self and brace to help partner catch balance after partner rises from [*10]  a couch or other seats....Mobility assistance includes brace command to prevent ambulatory partner from stumbling among other tasks..." (Id. at ¶5.C) (internal quotations omitted). According to Dr. Eskay-Auerbach, "[b]ased upon the history provided by Ms. Baker, and a review of the medical records, which consistently documents a history of falls since age 16, use of a service dog seems to be a reasonable safety precaution and medically appropriate." (Id.). According to Dr. Eskay-Auerbach, although a brace dog is not a common prescription, it is not "common to see someone with the same condition that Ms. Baker has." (PSSAF, Att. 56, p. 54). Defendants do not dispute Dr. Eskay-Auerbach's statements. (See Defendants' Objections to PSOF).
Ms. Baker has been treated by Anthony Arnold, M.D., whose speciality is orthopedic surgery. (DSOF, Att. 14, p. 4). In October 2004, Dr. Arnold, treated Ms. Baker for knee pain, which he opined was caused by a ligament strain. (Id. at pp.8-9). Dr. Arnold recommended that Ms. Baker use crutches to "diminish weight-bearing impact on the sore knee in order to give it a chance to improve symptomatically." (Id. at p.9). Dr. Arnold has found that frequently giving the body a chance [*11]  to heal itself by means of partial weight bearing crutches or walker, if the patient is significantly older, and localized ice packs would help the situation improve. (Id. at p.8). According to Dr. Arnold:
crutches should be used long enough to take stress off the irritated joint, that combined with cold packs. Using the crutches long term is not a problem, but if you can get to the point where there is no pain, you would rather not have the patient on the crutches in order to maintain good muscle tone and good mobility.
(Id. at p. 61) (emphasis added). Dr. Arnold also opined that "[u]sing the crutches would not put adequate stress on the quadriceps muscle to maintain their tone if, in fact, such tone has been achieved." (Id. at p. 36). According to Dr. Arnold, "[h]aving greater muscle strength will put a lesser degree of stress on the tissues that can become irritated, therefore, the amount of time they will be irritated will hopefully diminish." (PSSAF, Att. 4, p.64). He opined that it is better if Ms. Baker can use her leg in a way that maintains or increases muscle tone. (Id.). When asked at his deposition:
if [Ms. Baker] can use [her service dog] as a brace and as a way to keep her walking without crutches, that's [*12]  beneficial with respect to muscle tone either keeping...muscle tone or improving muscle tone; is that correct?
(Id.). Dr. Arnold responded: "If she can perform any activities that do not hurt, that would be to her benefit." (Id.).
On December 5, 2006, Ms. Baker presented to Dr. Arnold complaining of knee pain. (DSOF, Att. 4, p. 19). Dr. Arnold's assessment was "Complication Of Device, Implant, Or Graft Knee/Left, New." (DSOF, Att. 4, Exh. 20). He indicated in his treatment record (hereinafter "December 5, 2006 Work Note") under the heading "PLAN" that he discussed the following treatment options with Ms. Baker: "Activity Restrictions-25% W[eight]B[earing] use crutches"6 and "Modalities-ice three times daily." (Id.). Under the heading "WORK STATUS", he indicated: "Return to modified duty on 12/05/06 with the following restrictions: Must use Brace Dog at work." (Id.).
At his January 2010 deposition, Dr. Arnold testified that his intention was that the brace dog would be used "[i]n addition to" crutches. (DSOF, Att. 14, pp. 27-28). With regard to his order that Ms. Baker must use a brace dog, Mr. Arnold testified:
The dog. I'm sure that is not a brace dog, but I didn't have a better term [*13]  for it at the time, would help protect the individual from anybody accidently butting against her or might assist her if there was some trouble with the knee.
(Id. at p.26).7 He believed that Ms. Baker "thought she would be much safer with the dog to protect her in a work setting from being jostled or otherwise getting into an impact) situation on the knee."8 (Id. at p.27). At his deposition, Dr. Arnold did not recall what Ms. Baker had told him about her service dog's training. (Id. at p.28). When asked whether it was his feeling that the dog would somehow prevent Ms. Baker from falling, he testified:
I suspect it was more of an assist, if something untoward happened rather than a preventive measure as such. The only preventive measure would be anybody suddenly coming upon the patient, the dog would act as kind of barrier to any inadvertent physical contact in that knee.
(Id.).
A treatment note from July 26, 2007, when Dr. Arnold saw Ms. Baker for complaints of left knee pain, reflected that Ms. Baker's activity was restricted as dictated by the symptoms.9 (DSOF, Att. 14, Exh. 23). There was no mention of use of a brace dog. (See DSOF, Att. 14, Exh. 23; see also DSOF, Att. 14, p. 33). Dr. Arnold also completed a work [*14]  note on July 26, 2007 wherein he indicated that Plaintiff could return to work at full duty with no restrictions. (DSOF, Att. 14, Exh. 23). By indicating "no restrictions", Dr. Arnold meant that Ms. Baker "was doing well enough that she did not need restrictions within the purview of her job." (DSOF, Att. 14, p.33). Dr. Arnold did not mention a brace dog in the work note. (See DSOF, Att. 14, Exh. 23). At his January 2010 deposition Dr. Arnold could not say why he did not mention a brace dog in either note. (DSOF, Att. 14, pp. 32-34). On July 27, 2007, Dr. Arnold wrote a letter "To Whom It May Concern:" wherein he briefly described Ms. Baker's history and stated: "The patellar tendon is reconstructed and still giving her difficulty at this time. The desire to be without crutches is based on the fact that mobility and quadriceps muscle strength would be better maintained when the dependency on the crutches is eliminated. The patient may still need these at some time in the future intermittently.10 It is desirable to not do this anymore than is absolutely necessary." (DSOF, Att. 14, Exh. 25) (emphasis added). Also on July 27, 2007, Dr. Arnold authored another letter "To Whom It May Concern" [*15]  written "in response to your request for information concerning the patient's left knee." (PSSAF, Att. 53). Therein Dr. Arnold stated:
The patient's diagnosis is postoperative tendonitis and reconstructed patellar tendon. The prognosis for the left knee is for continued problems due to the fact that she has already had four procedures done on this knee. The impairment rating is based on impairment and the severity of this is based on her findings of tenderness which exists essentially 10 years after these four procedures have been done on the knee. This will limit the patient's ability to stand and walk for significant distances. The patient would be prone to falling activities due to the weakness and irritation which is present. The patient should be able to work most commonly in a sitting position. The service dog would be helpful to her because she has developed a relationship with the dog that can provide assistance and aid to her when something is demanded or after she might possibility [sic] fall in the future.
(Id.).
Upon his October 2007 evaluation of Ms. Baker, Dr. Arnold prescribed: "partial weight bearing with walker or crutches as needed." (DSOF, Att. 14, Exh. 30).
At his deposition, [*16]  Dr. Arnold testified that knee replacement was not an option for Ms. Baker. (DSOF, Att. 14 at p. 87). Dr. Arnold's deposition reflects the following exchange regarding Ms. Baker's range of options:
Q. [Mr. Martinez]: So in terms of where she is at and has been for some time now, for years, ice packs, muscle tone, muscle strengthening, crutches as needed and using [her service dog], right?
A. [Dr. Arnold]: Crutches, ice packs, maintaining quad strength, doing exercises, the dog is helpful to her.
(Id. at p. 88). Dr. Arnold was of the opinion that a knee brace was not indicated for Ms. Baker's condition. (Id. at p.46). Dr. Arnold testified that "we could improve on the pain status..." of Ms. Baker's knee "by diminished weight bearing and cold packs..." although Ms. Baker's "underlying anatomical status would not change, possibly would worsen with time." (Id. at p. 56).
It is undisputed that Dr. Arnold could not recall seeing Ms. Baker's service dog retrieve or pick up items for her, he never saw her dog assist her in getting up from a fall, he never saw Ms. Baker stumble or fall while using crutches, nor had he seen her fall down or her knee give way, but he had been told by Ms. Baker that she was still suffering from the [*17]  knee giving way. (Plaintiffs' Joint Statement of Controverting Facts, ¶¶457, 471-73). The following testimony from Dr. Arnold is undisputed as to the fact that he made such statements, but Plaintiffs do dispute the accuracy of the comments with regard to Ms. Baker: (1) Dr. Arnold testified that if Ms. Baker were on crutches and handling them properly, she probably would not fall (Id. at ¶480); and (2) Dr. Arnold believed that crutches could be used to assist Ms. Baker in getting up from a fall (Id. at ¶481(quoting DSOF, Att. 14, p. 83)("you would get on your right knee, both hands on a crutch, use that as a fulcrum to bring yourself up to a standing position.")).
In November 2009, after Plaintiffs filed this action, Ms. Baker was examined at Defendants' request by Dr. Debra Walter, who is Board Certified in internal medicine, physical medicine, and rehabilitation. (DSOF, ¶¶ 521, 522, 526, 530; see also DSOF ¶543 (Dr. Walter's consideration of Ms. Baker's case also included review of medical records)). Dr. Walter's report reflects, in part:
At the start of our exam I asked her to rise and pull the table close to her for a handhold for balance. I specifically warned Ms. Baker to be careful [*18]  and not fall. Despite this warning, Ms. Baker fell right in front of me.
(DSOF, Att. 16, ¶11). According to Dr. Walter,
History of old ACL injury with repair complicated by patellar tendon rupture and repeated reconstruction with mild laxity but otherwise inexplicable reasons for falling right in front of me. It was a little bizarre, and her knee diagnosis and examination does not explain it. Her complete failure to prevent herself from falling when warned specifically by me and given a table with which to support herself, seemed at least to imply an underlying neurologic problem or at least poor judgment[.]
(Id. at ¶22). Dr. Walter noted that Ms. Baker's service dog, who was with Ms. Baker during the examination, "was curled under the bed,...he did not stop her at all from falling, nor assist her with rising, she told me she had instructed him not to." (DSOF, Att. 16, Exh. 3, p.2).
In Dr. Walter's opinion:
Use of a trained "brace" dog is not typical or common in this situation, it would not be considered a standard medical recommendation, and in fact, from a rehabilitation point of view she should be on a walker with a knee brace.
(Id. at p. 4).
Plaintiffs disagree with Dr. Walter's opinion and cite [*19]  Ms. Baker's testimony that in February 1996, she used a walker after her second surgery until her doctor ordered her not to because it was not appropriate at that time (PSSAF, Att. 5, pp. 54-55). Further, in July 2007 Dr. Arnold instructed Ms. Baker not to use a cane, crutches or a walker (Id. at p. 123). Dr. Arnold testified that he would "not recommend a walker11 for a lady that's very young or a cane which would not achieve what I was after in this situation [referring to a February 2005 appointment]. The cane is basically a balancer, not a weight reliever. And it wasn't a problem of dizziness, it was trying to achieve diminished weight on a sore limb." (DSOF, Att. 14, pp. 12-13). Dr. Arnold does not believe a knee brace is indicated for Ms. Baker because it used for ligament instability which Ms. Baker does not have (Id. at p. 46). Moreover, Dr. Eskay-Auerbach does not believe Ms. Baker would tolerate a knee brace because Ms. Baker has stated that even soft fabrics irritate her knee (PSSAF, Att. 56, pp. 55-56). Dr. Eskay-Auerbach testified that Ms. Baker could tolerate a walker. (Id. at p. 56).
According to Dr. Walter, use of a service dog will not prevent Ms. Baker from falling and will not alleviate her knee pain, [*20]  thus Dr. Walter would not consider a service dog to be medically necessary in Ms. Baker's situation. (DSOF, Att. 16, ¶25). Dr. Walter did not believe crutches would further disuse atrophy of the leg if the crutches are used only for balance with otherwise normal weight bearing. (Id. at ¶29; see also Id. at ¶33 ("While I agreed that full-time use of crutches, particularly for non-weight bearing can cause upper extremity nerve injury, in this case, it would be primarily for balance and she probably only needs one....")).
Dr. Walter believes that from a rehabilitation point of view, Ms. Baker should be using a walker with a leg brace; however, given the fall she took in front of Dr. Walter, nothing, including the service dog, would adequately stop her from falling and perhaps a scooter should be considered instead. (DSOF, Att. 16, ¶23). However, Plaintiffs point out that Dr. Eskay-Auerbach eschewed use of a wheelchair or scooter because these devices "don't allow you to walk." (PSSAF, Att. 56, pp. 44-45).

2. Ms. Baker's employment at PCSD Communications Center
The chain of command at the PCSD Communications Center is as follows in descending order: Sheriff Clarence Dupnik; Bureau Chief Bradley [*21]  Gagnepain; Captain Paul Wilson; Communications Commander Lt. Michael Sacco12; 911 Dispatch Manager Patsy Joy13;the 911 Dispatch Supervisor, which includes Charles Balser14; the 911Dispatcher (hereinafter "Dispatcher"); and the 911 Call Taker (hereinafter "Call Taker"). (DSOF, Att 2, ¶2; PSSAF, Att. 15, p.5).

a. The time period before Ms. Baker's service dog was certified
When Ms. Baker began employment with PCSD, she
was on [two] crutches....I was using a cane when I went to the oral board. I was placed on crutches between the oral, time of the oral board and the time I started working for the Sheriff's Department by my orthopedic specialist, because I had a nerve flare up in my knee and it was causing...more severe pain and more frequently falling.
(DSOF, Att. 8, Exh. 2, pp.14-15). In November or December 2004, after Ms. Baker began her employment, she told Ms. Joy, 911 Dispatch Manager, that she wanted a service dog to assist her, but the dog15 was not yet certified.16 (Id.; see also DSOF, Att. 2, ¶15). Ms. Joy expressed concerns about fear and allergies that other employees may have if Ms. Baker brought her service dog to work. (PSSAF, Att. 5, p. 107).
In December 2004, Ms. Baker met with [*22]  Ms. Christine Molina, Pima County's ADA Coordinator concerning Ms. Baker's desire to use her service dog at work once he achieved certification. (DSOF, Att. 8, Exh. 2, pp. 14, 22-23; PSSAF, Att. 5, pp. 107-109). Ms. Baker also explained to Ms. Molina that she was using crutches at the time because of a "flare due, of my nerves." (Id. at p.33). According to Ms. Baker, she was using crutches when she met with Ms. Molina in December 2004
[n]ot because of my the, the disability. Well, I mean they're a result of the disability, but the flare up was just to temporarily relieve my knee and then I was to continue using it as normal as possible once that flare was relieved.
(Id.).
"Ms. Molina told Ms. Baker that Pima County was exercising its right to refuse [the service dog]...access to the Sheriff's Department building and to refuse to allow him to be used on the property until he reached pre-certification status. Ms. Molina also instructed Ms. Baker to get two notes from her orthopedic doctor. The first note was to be provided soon to document Ms. Baker's disability. The second note was to be provided when Baker's service dog achieved pre-certification which might take 1-3 more years and would confirm [*23]  that Ms. Baker still had a disability and needed her service dog at work." (PSSAF, ¶26, (citing PSSAF, Att. 5, pp. 107-109)).
After meeting with Ms. Baker, Ms. Molina spoke to Ms. Joy about Ms. Baker's request. (PSSAF, Att. 8, pp. 22-23). Although Ms. Joy did not recall having "a major concern at the time", she was concerned about "if we had anyone who worked in the Communications Unit who had an allergy to dogs." (Id. at p. 23). Thereafter, Ms. Joy advised Lt. Sacco about Ms. Baker's plan to bring her service dog to the Communications Center after the dog was certified. (PSSAF, Att. 9, pp. 27-29). Lt. Sacco was "concern[ed]" about having a service dog at the Communications Center and he believed that Ms. Joy "had similar concerns." (Id. at p. 27).
According to Captain Wilson, when Ms. Joy told him about Ms. Baker's plan, Ms. Joy may have expressed concern to him and he may have had concerns, as well. (PSSAF, Att 10, p.244). He stated that there was no decision to be made at this time, and "we'll wait until there's actually a request to do it, then we'll go through the process and figure out what we do." (Id.).
At some point between December 2004 and March 2005, Ms. Joy saw Ms. Baker working without crutches [*24]  and called Ms. Baker into her office to inquire why. (PSSAF, Att. 5, pp. 82-84; PSSAF, Att. 11, ¶34). Ms. Joy told Ms. Baker that "'a couple of higher-ups'" at PCSD had seen Ms. Baker fall with crutches and felt that it was not safe for Ms. Baker not to be using crutches. (PSSAF, Att. 11, ¶34). Ms. Baker told Ms. Joy that her doctor did not want her using crutches and that she was only supposed to be on crutches for a short time when she began her employment with PCSD.17 (Id.). Nonetheless, according to Ms. Baker, Ms. Joy told her "that... [she] was not to come to work without crutches and that... [she] wouldn't ever be allowed back onto the floor." (Id.). Thereafter, Ms. Molina told Ms. Baker that she had been informed by Ms. Baker's "department" that Ms. Baker was to remain on crutches and Ms. Molina was "enforcing that I was to stay on crutches." (PSSAF, Att. 5, p. 84). Ms. Baker felt "forced" to agree given that she was told by her supervisor to use crutches and she was on probation, (Id. at p. 83). Ms. Joy and Ms. Molina testified at their depositions that Ms. Baker had made a verbal agreement to remain on crutches at work until her service dog was certified. (PSSAF, Att. 8, pp. 29-30; PSSAF, [*25]  Att. 12, p. 127).
It is undisputed that co-workers observed Ms. Baker fall at PCSD while using crutches. (PSSAF, ¶19). At supervisor meetings, it was discussed how Ms. Baker would stumble and occasionally fall to one knee. (PSOF, Att. 32, p.24).
In November 2006, Ms. Baker's service dog completed "pre-certification" training through Handi-Dogs, Inc." (PSSAF, Att. 13). Thereafter, Ms. Baker obtained the December 5, 2006 Work Note from Dr. Arnold indicating that she must use a brace dog. (DSOF, Att. 14, Exh. 20).

b. Ms. Baker's request to bring her service dog to work and Defendants' denial of same
Plaintiffs assert that:
In addition to stumbling and falling while walking with or without crutches, Ms. Baker had difficulty getting back up after falling and retrieving items she dropped.
***
When the computer aided dispatch ("CAD") system went down, it was an essential part of the job for call takers to walk call cards over to the time clock and the appropriate dispatchers.
(PSSAF, ¶133 (citing PSSAF, Att. 11, ¶¶ 24, 31; PSSAF, Att. 58, pp. 8-14)). When asked how often she had to get up during a shift, Ms. Baker stated:
My experience has been at least one-third of the shift. . . . I'm constantly [*26]  moving back and forth between the calls that you're taking or getting information, getting a form to track a cell phone call. You're constantly popping up, or to be able to interact with the other people and having general conversations. If all the Dispatcher, if you're the only Call Taker and all the Dispatchers are on a shift, they all move to the ends of their desks here to talk, the supervisor moves out from their desk to talk and you move over there then to have, just general conversation with 'em.'
(DSOF, Att. 8, Exh. 2, p.12). Additionally, according to Ms. Baker, other reasons she recalled for Call Takers having to stand and move about included: retrieving faxes and paper from the printer, submitting payroll receipts, getting forms from the filing cabinet, going to the copier, getting vacation request forms, taking notes to different locations or to the Dispatcher, using the time stamp clock, and going to the Rolodex. (DSOF, Att. 9, pp. 63-66).
On April 14, 2007, Ms. Baker and her service dog achieved certification as a service dog team from Handi-Dogs, Inc. (PSSAF, Att. 20). In May of 2007, Ms. Baker advised Ms. Joy that her service dog had been certified and that she wanted [*27]  to proceed with her request to bring the dog to work. (PSSAF, Att. 8, pp.44-45). Ms. Baker has found her service dog "to be far superior to the other devices I have used to assist with mobility." (PSSAF, Att. 2, ¶3).
On June 22, 2007, Ms. Baker submitted to Ms. Molina a formal request for accommodation pursuant to Pima County's Administrative Procedure No. 23-29.18 (PSSAF, Att. 5, pp. 57-58 & Att. 21). In response to inquiries from Administrative Procedure No. 23-29, Ms. Baker explained the accommodation she was requesting and the reasons why she needed such accommodation as follows:
1. Even though my job mainly consists of sitting down at a desk, there are multiple times during my shift when I must stand up and walk around. For example, I will need to get items from filing cabinets, manuals from the shelves, mail from my mailbox, get faxes, etc... In order to go to these different locations around the room I need to walk there. There are also times when I need to move closer to the other employees in order to interact with them when trying to relay or receive important information pertaining to a call that is [sic] working. I have to walk in order to leave the room to go to my supervisor's [*28]  offices, to be able to leave the room while taking my breaks and going home at the end of my shift.
2. My disability is that my left knee is unpredictable, and randomly doesn't function properly. The result is that it gives way and goes out from underneath me while I'm walking, standing, attempting to sit or stand, and generally trying to use it to perform normal activities. I never know when it will go out from under me or how frequently it will go out. I wind up collapsing all the way to the ground, which could lead to further injury. The majority of the time that my knee gives way I have no warning (like shooting pain, stiffness, etc...) prior to or during the incident. The majority of the time that my knee is collapsing I am not able to physically stop from falling without some sort of outside assistance.
3. The reasonable accommodation that I am writing this for is; for the ability to have my service dog at work with me. For the last three years he has been training as a brace and retrieving dog. This means that he has been trained to walk beside me on my left side, at my pace, so that I can support myself with his body when I collapse. He takes a stationary stance once I start [*29]  falling so that I don't collapse all the way to the floor. His retrieving skills include getting items I have dropped so that I don't put myself in precarious positions trying to get items that are otherwise out of my reach.
(PSSAF, Att. 21). Ms. Baker further stated:
I have been in contact with both my doctor and my Orthopedic Specialist about alternative methods. The medical field has not progressed yet to correct my disability. Continuing to walk on crutches only furthers the atrophy in my leg because my leg is not being used properly. There is always the option of asking another person for assistance once I have fallen or to try and grab onto them as I am falling. But I don't want to injure them or myself.
I have remained on crutches from the time I started as a trainee out of a verbal agreement to do so until my service dog was able to assist me because it made my department feel better about liability issues. Furthermore, once he was certified and this department advised I would stop using them and rely solely on him. Since my dog reached his Pre-Certification Status, I have been using him in every other aspect of my daily life except at work due to the verbal agreement. Now that [*30]  my service dog is certified he is a major part of my daily life, and it is hard for me not to continue using him when at work.
(Id.). With her request, Ms. Baker also submitted Dr. Arnold's December 5, 2006 Work Note stating: "Must use brace dog at work." (See DSOF, Att. 14, Exh. 20). It is undisputed that Ms. Baker offered to provide her own service dog. (PSSAF, ¶134 (citing PSSAF, Att. 5, pp. 33-34; PSSAF, Att. 2, ¶4)). It is also undisputed that Ms. Baker's requested accommodation did not include any request that Pima County or PCSD pay any expense for the use of her service dog. (PSOF, Att. 33, pp. 8-9).
In the summer of 2007, Ms. Molina informed Ms. Joy about Ms. Baker's request and Ms. Joy gave Ms. Molina a functional job description of a Call Taker. (DSOF, Att. 2, ¶¶15, 16 & Exh. 1).19 Sometime in June 2007, Ms. Joy contacted Lt. Sacco to advise about Ms. Baker's request. (DSOF, Att. 4, ¶30).
It is undisputed that Ms. Baker requested accommodation as required by applicable Pima County policy. (PSOF, Att. 33, pp. 10-13). Thereafter, the Pima County ADA Panel met with Ms. Baker who also brought her service dog to the meeting. (DSOF, ¶376). On August 22, 2007, the [*31]  Pima County ADA Panel found that Ms. Baker was eligible for accommodation and that an interactive process meeting would be arranged. (PSSAF, Att. 51). The Panel stated that Ms. Baker had permanent limitations in "walking [and] standing (mobility)" and that Ms. Baker wanted to use her service dog for assistance with walking and that Ms. Baker had "trouble retrieving fallen items off [the] floor." (Id.).
Because Ms. Baker was eligible for accommodation, an interactive process meeting was scheduled as part of the accommodation process. A pre-interactive process meeting was held on September 11, 2007, and attended by at least Ms. Joy, Ms. Molina, Capt. Wilson, Lt. Sacco, and PCSD's legal Advisor. (DSOF, Att. 2, ¶¶16, 41). At that time, Ms. Joy informed Ms. Molina that she had been told by Ms. Callan, a PCSD employee whose son-in law worked in the Communications Center, that the son-in-law, Mr. Sirmon, was allergic to dogs and that having a dog in the Communications Center would aggravate his allergies. (DSOF, Att. 2, ¶16; Plaintiffs' Joint Controverting Statement of Facts, ¶314).20
It is undisputed that "[p]rior to the scheduled interactive process meeting, PCSD's entire chain of command had [*32]  agreed to deny Ms. Baker's requested accommodation. Specifically, Lt. Sacco had decided not to allow Ms. Baker to bring her dog to work, Capt. Wilson supported that decision, Bureau Chief Gagnepain received a briefing and was satisfied with the decision, and Sheriff Dupnik was briefed and agreed." (PSSAF, ¶122 (citing PSSAF, Att. 42, pp. 12, 66-67); see also Defendants' Objections to PSSAF).
When asked about his concurrence in the decision to deny Ms. Baker's request, Chief Gagnepain testified that he was told before the interactive process meeting that Ms. Baker could be accommodated through other means. (PSSAF, Att. 42, p.14). Chief Gagnepain also testified that Ms. Baker's suggested use of the service animal "didn't seem to compute very well." (DSSOF, Att. 14, p. 30). At the time of the interactive process meeting and the subsequent decision, Chief Gagnepain had no information regarding the use of assistive dogs by persons with disabilities. (DSSOF, Att. 14, p.31). He did "Google" the topic prior to his 2010 deposition "[b]ecause I was curious more today than I was then [in 2007] because I wasn't worried about it then. I'm still not worried about it." (Id.). Chief Gagnepain further [*33]  testified:
Q. [Plaintiffs' counsel]: Why aren't you worried about it?
A. [Chief Gagnepain]: I think the whole issue is absurd.
Q. Why do you think it's absurd.
A. Because in my mind, the idea of having a dog that, once again, you use to fall on makes no sense to me. Almost falls under the level of cruelty to animals in my point of view. So that's it.
Q. Do you have any other reasons why you think it's absurd?
A. No.
Q. So you think that a person, such as Ms. Baker, bringing this claim is absurd?
A. Yes, absolutely. Particularly since we could have accommodated her issues through other means.
(Id. at p. 33).
The interactive process meeting occurred on September 18, 2007 and was attended by: Ms. Baker, Ms. Molina, Ms. Joy, and Lt. Sacco. (DSOF, Att. 2, ¶17). Ms. Baker was accompanied to the meeting by Joanne Mauger, who is the Executive Director of Handi-Dogs.21 (PSOF, Att. 34, pp. 173-174, 288). Lt. Sacco refused to permit Ms. Mauger to attend the interactive process meeting because "[s]he wasn't invited to the meeting. She was an outside individual." (Id. at p. 174). Lt. Sacco did permit Ms. Mauger to speak with Ms. Molina prior to the interactive process meeting. (Id.). Lt. Sacco also refused to permit Ms. Baker to bring [*34]  her service dog to the meeting because it was not "necessary" and was not "prudent" given that the dog had not been approved as a reasonable accommodation. (PSOF, Att. 35, pp. 283-285). Nor did Lt. Sacco believe the service dog's presence was important to evaluate Ms. Baker's request or for Ms. Baker to demonstrate how she uses the dog for assistance. (Id. at pp. 288-289). Lt. Sacco was aware that Ms. Baker had been falling at work during the two and one-half years that she had been working at the Communications Center. (PSSAF, Att. 9, p. 211). Lt. Sacco was the PCSD decision-maker concerning Ms. Baker's request for reasonable accommodation. (PSOF, Att. 34, p. 169).
At the interactive process meeting, Ms. Baker made clear that crutches did not work as well for her as her service dog and that the alternative accommodations discussed were not as effective. (PSOF, Att. 33, p.46 (Ms. Molina's notes reflect that Ms. Baker's position during the meeting was that her "only option is using the service dog, using cane or crutches does not provide the same assistance.")).
On October 1, 2007, Lt. Sacco issued a memorandum notifying Ms. Baker that her requested accommodation had been denied. (DSOF, Att. 4, Exh. 8). [*35]  Lt. Sacco stated, inter alia, that Ms. Baker was able to perform the essential functions of the Call Taker position without accommodation. (Id. at p. 1). He identified the following "actions to help alleviate some of... [Ms. Baker's] issues of concern":
1. Of the existing Call Taker work stations, identify the one which allowed you the best access to the Dispatchers, Call Takers, and the shift Supervisor. Once identified, we can make available to you that particular work station when you are at work. Incidentally, future building design will prevent loud verbal communications across the room as well as walking away from the work station in order to speak with a particular person. In the near future we will experience software upgrades to our existing Computer Aided Dispatch software which will allow instant messaging between work stations throughout the Communications Center.
2. Although a time clock is seldom needed, we would ensure a time clock is strategically located at the preferred work station.
3. Most reference data is computer based. For written materials, we can make available to you reference materials and other documents, either through copying the materials or by locating those materials [*36]  in a space on or adjacent to the identified work station.
4. It may be possible to locate your individual mail receptacle to a preferred location, perhaps the aforementioned work station, within the room.
5. Ample supplies of pens and scratch paper are already available to allow a surplus of such items at the work station and thereby minimize the impact of dropping such an item. If helpful, we would purchase an extended pick-up tool to more effectively allow you to retrieve dropped items.
6. Continued use of mechanical support devices to assist you with personal mobility—although relatively infrequent during each shift, certainly important.
(Id. at p. 3). Lt. Sacco directed Ms. Baker to evaluate multiple work station locations and notify Ms. Joy by November 5, 2007 as to which station she preferred. (Id.).
Lt. Sacco's Memorandum also identified the following concerns he had "with allowing a dog in the workplace", which had been discussed at the interactive process meeting:
The Communications Center is a medium size, enclosed work space that is occupied 24 hours a day, every day of the year. The service animal is a large dog and presents a trip hazard in the room while lying down as you sit at your [*37]  work station. The trip hazard potential is increased by the fact that many Call Takers and Dispatchers prefer to function with the room lighting low to avoid glare on their computer screens. The dog will also create a pronounced and long-term distraction for other employees. The dog, despite your efforts to have it regularly groomed, will add to our on-going issue with dirt and dust accumulation in the Center. The air circulation in the room is adequate, but not designed to remove odors or allergens. These are major concerns which impact consideration of introducing a dog into the workplace on a regular, 40 hour-a-week basis. Additional concerns of related issues, such as allergies or phobias affecting your co-workers and future co-workers, as introduced into the workplace by the dog were also discussed. You mentioned there have been times when K-9 Unit Deputies have brought their K-9 partners into the Communications Center (on-duty but not requiring the presence of the K-9 partner). Both Ms. Joy and I were unaware of such events, but nonetheless, I have asked the K-9 Unit to refrain from bringing their K-9 partners into the Center, absent a specific need.22
***
The negative consequences [*38]  associated with the presence of a dog, coupled with a determination the specific accommodation is not needed for you to perform the essential functions of your job, clearly and convincingly override your accommodation request.
(Id.).
Lt. Sacco also noted in his Memorandum that, at the interactive process meeting, Ms. Baker inquired about whether "there were other positions within Pima County at which...[Ms. Baker] would be allowed to use...[her] service animal. Ms. Molina clarified that Pima County is not obligated to make such an accommodation because your requested accommodation is unnecessary for you to perform the essential functions of your position." (Id.).23
Although, at his deposition, Lt. Sacco could not identify how it would cost PCSD any specific dollar amount to allow Ms. Baker to use her service dog at work, he did "think that cost is the burden and the impact on the Comm. Center, and the operation in the Comm. Center, the disruption to the work force." (PSSAF, Att, 9, pp. 227-228). Lt. Sacco opined that having a dog at the Communications Center would likely increase the frequency of cleaning and, therefore, increase cost. (Id. at p. 227). He did nothing to determine whether [*39]  the dog's presence would require a change in the cleaning schedule. (Id.). Lt. Sacco assumed that the service dog would distract employees. (Id. at pp. 210-211). Lt. Sacco did not look into whether the service dog would be a trip hazard and believed there was no reason to do so because he had decided not to allow the dog into the Communications Center. (Id. at pp. 217-218).
Ms. Molina did not do any comparison to determine whether an alterative accommodation was as effective for Ms. Baker as her service dog. (PSOF, Att. 33, pp. 40-41). Nor did Ms. Molina take any steps to determine what it was that Ms. Baker's service dog did for her. (Id. at p. 41). Additionally, no undue burden analysis was done at any time. (Id. at p.42).
On October 10, 2007, Ms. Baker filed a Charge of Discrimination with the ACRD and EEOC (PSOF, Att. 4, ¶ 7).

B. Factual background pertaining to retaliation claims

1. Ms. Baker's work history at the Communications Center
The Communication Center is comprised of Call Takers and Dispatchers. (DSOF, Att. 4, ¶9). The Call Taker position is subordinate to the Dispatcher position in terms of job responsibilities and compensation. (Id.). A Dispatcher can perform a Call Taker's duties, but a Call Taker is not trained to perform Dispatcher [*40]  duties with the exception being that a Call Taker who has been demoted from Dispatcher may perform Dispatcher duties. (Id.) Call Takers are tasked with answering all incoming telephone calls: 911 is given the highest priority. (DSOF, Att. 4, ¶16). Call Takers must triage the call, classify the call into the correct nature, or type of event, verify or change the default priority level for the circumstances, ascertain proper location and jurisdiction of the call, and ensure the call is forwarded to the appropriate PCSD Dispatcher and/or secondary public safety answering point. (Id.).
According to Mr. Balser, some people have difficulty succeeding as Dispatchers, but do well as Call Takers because the skill sets for each position "are a little bit different." (PSSAF, Att. 15, p.28). Mr. Balser described the differences between the skills needed by Dispatchers and Call Takers as follows:
On the radio [Dispatchers]...have to be faster, and you have to hear things right the first time, you can ask to have things repeated, but it's a lot better for you to get it right the first time.
***
[Dispatching is]...a lot more multitasking. An example of that is you're talking on the radio, listening to [*41]  the deputies while you're making a phone call that they requested of you. So you've got a phone in one ear, radio in the other, having to juggle the two. Or sometimes hearing both, hearing parts of both conversations at the same time.
***
On the dispatch side, when something big happens, requires immediate response. There's a lot to keep up with.
On phones [as a Call Taker], you're usually talking to just one person. Sometimes it—sometimes you get a call where the husband and wife are both on the phone at their end. But usually talking with — on the phone you're talking with one person, dealing with one situation.
On the radio [as a Dispatcher] you're working with a dozen or more deputies. Some of them may be working the big thing, and other times they're all—they all have their own assignments that you're keeping track of.
(PSSAF, Att. 15, pp. 28-29).
According to Captain Wilson, who oversees the Communications Center, initially there was only one job classification "that defined the [D]ispatcher and [C]all [T]aker position" so that the employee in that job classification performed both the dispatch and call taking functions. (PSSAF, Att. 10, p. 60). PCSD found that people were successful [*42]  at the training to perform the Call Taker functions, but they were not successfully making it through the Dispatcher part of the training. (Id.). If an employee failed only the Dispatcher part of the training, the only alternative to PCSD would be "to fail [the employee's]...probationary period or fail their training, and then hire new staff and start over." (Id. at pp. 60-61). PCSD had spent a lot of time and effort training these employees, "and we were losing a lot of staff. We wanted to try to find avenues not to do that, so..." the Call Taker classification was created. (Id. at pp. 61-62). Thus, "the impetus behind the creation of [the Call Taker]...classification was that [PCSD was]...having a high rate of employees being unsuccessful in the [D]ispatcher portion of the job." (Id. at p. 63).
In November, 2004, Ms. Baker began her employment with PCSD as a full-time 911 Dispatcher Trainee in the Communications Unit. (DSOF, Att. 2, ¶3). Kathryn Callan,24 911 Dispatch Supervisor and Training Coordinator, "helped train Ms. Baker". (DSOF, Att. 6, ¶¶2-3). The training program for Dispatcher lasts no fewer than 32 weeks. (Id. at ¶6).
Plaintiffs do not dispute the general statement that Ms. Baker had performance problems as a Dispatcher, [*43]  and in September 2006, she was placed on a "Special Observation Period" (hereinafter "SOP") for six months, during which time her job performance was closely monitored. (DSOF, Att. 2, ¶3; PSSAF, ¶ 48).
On February 15, 2007, Ms. Baker requested a voluntary demotion from Dispatcher to Call Taker by Memorandum to Ms. Joy.25 (PSSAF, Att. 17; DSOF, Att. 1, ¶15). Ms. Joy felt comfortable with Ms. Baker being a Call Taker because Ms. Joy had not seen any performance issues with Ms. Baker performing the call taking tasks. (PSSAF, Att. 8, pp. 32 33; DSOF, ¶100). Nor did Ms. Joy remember Ms. Callan having any objection to a voluntary demotion to Call Taker. (PSSAF, Att. 8, p.33). Ms. Joy recommended to Captain Wilson and Lt. Sacco that Ms. Baker would be a good Call Taker. (PSSAF, Att. 8, pp. 32-33).
Lt. Sacco believed that Ms. Baker's two-year track record of call taking while a Dispatcher indicated that she was capable of performing the 911 call taking function and he felt she would "be okay"...as a Call Taker. (PSSAF, Att. 8, pp. 111-112). Lt. Sacco testified that based on "the information we had at the time, it was a logical request to honor. We had open positions. The information that we had [*44]  at the time was [Ms. Baker]...was capable of doing the 911 call taking function." (Id. at p. 111).
With knowledge of Ms. Baker's performance problems dispatching, Ms. Joy. Lt. Sacco, and Capt. Wilson26 all recommended approval of Ms. Baker's voluntary demotion from Dispatcher to Call Taker. (PSSAF, ¶55 (citing PSSAF, Att. 6, p. 58; PSSAF, Att. 8, pp. 32-34; PSSAF, Att. 17); see also PSSAF, Att. 9, pp. 111-112).
In February 2007, Ms. Baker received a Performance Appraisal for the end of her SOP as Dispatcher. (PSSAF, Att. 18). At the bottom of that Performance Appraisal, Lt. Sacco wrote the following on February 26, 2007:
...This will conclude the Special Observation Period. Ms. Baker failed to make reasonable progress as a Sheriff's 911 Dispatcher and has failed this SOP. Ms. Baker has requested a voluntary demotion to Sheriff's 911 Call Taker and that demotion was granted effective 2/18/07.
(Id.). On February 25, 2007, Captain Wilson also noted [*45]  on the bottom of the Performance Appraisal:
Concur. These performance problems do not relate to her effectiveness as a Call Taker.
(PSSAF, Att. 18).
Effective February 27, 2007, Ms. Baker began a one-year demotion probation period as a Call Taker under the Merit System Rules (hereinafter "MSR"). (DSOF, Att. 2, ¶3; PSSAF, ¶59).

2. May 2007 evaluation
Due to the 24-hour nature of the work at the Communications Center, all employees work with more than one supervisor. (PSSAF, Att. 15, p. 8). Typically, the supervisor who is working with the employee at the time a performance evaluation is due completes the evaluation. (Id. at p.9). Ms. Joy informs the supervisor when it is time to provide an evaluation. (Id. at p. 10).
On May 20, 2007, Mr. Balser signed an End of Probation Performance Appraisal for Ms. Baker's Initial Probationary Period, covering the period from May 2006 to May 2007, indicating her job title as Sheriff's 911 Call Taker.27 (PSSAF, Att. 19). The End of Probation Performance Appraisal was served in May 2007, three months after Ms. Baker's voluntary demotion to Call Taker. (Id.; DSOF, Att. 1, ¶17). The evaluation period also covered Ms. Baker's performance for the previous 12 months, including time spent [*46]  as a Dispatcher. (DSOF, Att. 1, ¶17). Thus, the May 2007 End of Probation Performance Appraisal includes evaluation of Ms. Baker's performance as a Call Taker from February 25, 2007 to May 2007. (See PSSAF, Att. 19). In seven areas of performance, Plaintiff was rated as meeting job requirements and in one area, "work habits", she was rated as exceeding job requirements. (PSSAF, Att. 19). Her overall performance appraisal rating was "Meets job requirements". (Id.). Mr. Balser's comments on Ms. Baker's performance include the following under "Quality of Work":
On phones, you are adept with dealing with callers. Your narratives are very well put together and concise. You handle difficult callers professionally and calmly. You are able to get a great deal of information from callers in a short amount of time. Dispatchers rarely have to ask for clarification on your narratives. Phones have been your strong area from the beginning. You captured the ability to handle callers, input information and multitask early in your training.
After several months of being on Special Observation for performance issues as a Sheriff's 911 Dispatcher, you were granted a voluntary demotion to 911 Call-Taker. [*47]  One of the issues was transposing numbers which is now infrequent. The number of incomplete records returned to you is well below average.
Your overall abilities continue to improve. To succeed, you have to take the initiative here and work on your weakest areas, while maintaining proficiency in the areas you have mastered.
(Id.). Additional comments from Mr. Balser include:
I realize it was a difficult decision to request a demotion to Call-Taker after having put in so much effort at succeeding as a Dispatcher. You have maintained a good attitude and working relationship with both Dispatchers and Call-Takers. It is important to remember that what you do here is a vital community service. You must stay confident in your abilities. I enjoy having you on shift.
(Id.).
Mr. Balser also noted that Ms. Baker was "very good" at using her map tools and that she discovered errors in the tools regarding the proper jurisdiction for certain addresses and brought the errors to her supervisor's attention. (Id.). Mr. Balser also pointed out that Ms. Baker needed to speak louder because it was often difficult for people to hear her over the level of noise at the Communications Center. ( [*48] Id.) He also noted under "Work Habits" that although Ms. Baker had "outstanding work habits", there was "an isolated exception on March 7, shortly after [Ms. Baker]...had been assigned to midnight shift when [she] slept through a ringing phone." (Id.)

3. Discipline for the June 25, 2007 911 call
This phone call occurred three days after Ms. Baker submitted her request for reasonable accommodation to the Pima County Human Resources Coordinator. (PSSAF, ¶83). In June 2007, Ms. Joy knew that Ms. Baker had requested reasonable accommodation and Ms. Joy had advised Lt. Sacco of same. (PSSAF, ¶84; DSOF, ¶310, 312).
On June 25, 2007, Ms. Baker took a 911 call from a female who stated: "We just had someone blow his finger off." (DSOF, Att. 2). Ms. Baker asked "Where at" and was given an address on West Manville. (Doc. 182 (recording)). Ms. Baker next asked: "Did he do this with a gun..." and the caller responded "He doesn't know....His finger...is like hanging off...." (DSOF, Att. 2, ¶27; Doc. 182). Ms. Baker asked: "Okay, did he like cut himself with a knife?" and the caller responded "I...have no clue." (Doc. 182). Ms. Baker transferred the call to medical dispatch (hereinafter "Meds" ). (DSOF, [*49]  Att. 2, ¶27). Ms. Baker did not make arrangements for a law enforcement response regarding the call.28 (Id.). The recording reflects that although the call taker at Meds pressed the female caller as to what happened, the caller denied knowing. (Doc. 182). At some point a male voice in the female caller's background stated that he "cut" his finger off and the call taker at Meds confirmed that the speaker had been the injured party, repeated that "he just said he cut it off" and asked how it happened, and the female caller again denied knowing. (Id.).
On June 25, 2007, the hospital ER reported to the Communications Center that a gunshot wound victim had been brought in from the Manville address. (DSOF, Att, 5, ¶27;Doc. 182). Additionally, Ms. Johanna Rankin, 911 Dispatch Supervisor, received a request from PCSD Sgt. Joe Murphy for research to determine whether the Communications Center had received a call from the Manville address. (DSOF, Att. 5, ¶¶1, 27). Ms. Rankin listened to the recording of the call and determined that law enforcement should have responded29 but Ms. Baker had only referred the call to Meds. (Id.). Ms. Rankin spoke to Ms. Baker about her handling of the call and instructed [*50]  her to prepare a memorandum regarding the call.30 (DSOF, Att. 5, ¶¶29-31).
Ms. Baker stated in her memorandum, in pertinent part, that after she transferred the call to Meds, she heard the male state that he had "'sliced his finger'"; "the female sounded like she was in shock because she kept answering every question with the same answer and her tone of voice"; "I disconnected the call to try and answer another call"; "I did notice that Meds didn't call back to have deputies respond or check on deputy responce [sic]; so I took that to mean that the male was telling the truth and it was not a law enforcement incident. Thus I thought I had made the right choice"; and "[i]t is not unusual for someone to call in and make a statement and then to find out the situation was not as they stated." (DSOF, Att. 5, Exh. 6).
It is undisputed that:
After investigating the incident, Ms. Rankin sent a memo dated June 26, 2007 to her supervisor, Pat Joy in which she made no recommendation for any discipline against Ms. Baker. Ms. Rankin testified that she no longer has the original version of the June 26, 2007 memo and that the original version of the June 26, 2007 memo did not have a recommendation for [*51]  discipline against Ms. Baker.
(PSSAF, ¶96 (citing PSSAF, Att. 32, pp. 45:-47, 58-59; PSSAF, Att. 8, pp. 55-58; PSSAF, Att. 38; PSSAF, Att. 5, ¶ 38); see also Defendants' Objections to PSSAF).
Based upon information Ms. Rankin received at some point between June 25, 2007 and June 30, 2007, Ms. Rankin learned from Sgt. Murphy that the Manville address, among other things, was associated with the discovery of drugs and guns. (DSOF, Att. 5, Exh. 7). Ms. Rankin's Memorandum to Ms. Joy included the information she received from Sgt. Murphy. (DSOF, Att. 5, Exh. 5).
At her deposition, Ms. Rankin agreed that Ms. Baker did not have the benefit of the information received from Sgt. Murphy on or around June 30, 2007 and that Ms. Baker had to make a decision based on the information she had received from the caller. (PSSAF, Att. 32, pp.50-51).
On July 26, 2007, Ms. Joy sent Ms. Rankin a routing slip instructing Ms. Rankin to rewrite her memorandum to include a recommendation for a Letter of Reprimand.31 (PSSAF, Att. 38).
On or about August 17, 2007, Ms. Rankin received a routing slip from Ms. Joy directing Ms. Rankin to "'Proceed w/ your L[etter] O[f] R[erprimand]'".32 (DSOF, Att, 5, ¶41). On or about August 20, 2007, Ms. Rankin prepared a rough draft of the the Letter Of Reprimand (hereinafter "LOR") for Ms. Joy's review and Ms. Joy edited the hard copy of the rough draft. (Id. at ¶42). Ms. Rankin made the changes directed by Ms. Joy and generated another draft of the LOR dated August 27, 2007. (Id. at ¶43). Ms. Rankin did not "finalize or sign..." the LOR that was given to Ms. Baker. (Id. at ¶44). The LOR was signed by Sheriff Dupnik and Capt. Wilson. (PSSAF, Exh. 43).
Ms. Callan, who helped to train Ms. Baker, listened to the recording of the June 25, 2007 call and is of the opinion that
With [Ms. Baker's] training and her three (3) years of call-taking experience and given the immediately acknowledged suspicious nature of the call, she should have categorized the call as an unknown problem [*53]  with a Priority 1, the highest priority. The way she handled this call was contrary to her training.
(DSOF, Att. 6, ¶39).
Ms. Joy concurs that the call should have been given priority 1 status. (DSOF, Att, 2, ¶29). According to Ms. Joy "[a]ll call takers are trained to err on the side of caution when deciding whether or not to send a law enforcement response." (Id. at ¶31). In her affidavit, Ms. Joy outlines the reasons why "Ms. Baker made a grave error in not calling for a law enforcement response." (Id. at ¶¶28-30).
According to Ms. Joy, there was a delay in finalizing the LOR because of the wait for Ms. Baker's disciplinary history, a recommendation regarding the level of discipline, and summer vacation schedules. (DSOF, Att. 2, ¶39). The LOR was finalized on September 10, 200733 and Ms. Baker received it on September 16, 2007—two days before the scheduled interactive process meeting. (Id. at ¶40; DSOF, Att. 9, pp. 180-181).
An LOR may be issued to admonish an employee for serious or repetitive improper performance or conduct. (PSSAF, ¶111 (citing DSOF, Att. 1, ¶11, Exh. 1 (Merit System Rule 12.2(B))). Ms. Joy testified that it is a rare measure for someone in the Communications Center to receive [*54]  an LOR. (PSSAF, Att. 8, pp. 59-60 (when asked whether someone else has received an LOR in the three years prior to Ms. Baker's, Ms. Joy did not know)).
Captain Wilson testified that the LOR was "justified based on progressive discipline, given the prior performance history and discipline history with Ms. Baker. I think without those, without the prior history, I can't say that that would have risen to the level of a Letter of Reprimand on its own." (PSSAF, Att. 10, p. 225).

4. Mid-Demotion Probation Evaluations in July and August 2007
The record contains a form captioned "Performance Appraisal" for Ms. Baker, Call Taker, and indicating Mid-Probation Demotion,34 for February 2007 to August 2007, with Mr. Balser listed as the Rating Official/Supervisor. (PSSAF, Att. 35, at p.1). The form is not signed by the Rating Official, but it is signed by Ms. Baker and dated July 27, 2007. (Id. at p. 7). The evaluation indicates that Ms. Baker's performance was rated as "successful" in all areas requiring a rating. (Id. at pp. 1-5). Mr. Balser entered a notation in Super Notes that he had given Ms. Baker her Mid-Demotion Probation Evaluation on July 27, 2007. (PSSAF, Att. 15, p. 46). Mr. Balser testified that upon giving Ms. [*55]  Baker the evaluation on July 27, 2007, he followed the usual procedure, which included checking Super Notes, speaking to other supervisors, and submitting a draft to Ms. Joy for approval. (Id. at pp. 46 47). Mr. Balser also testified that the evaluation they were discussing at the deposition did not have the last page attached, which is for employee comments and other signatures of reviewing officials. (Id.; see also PSSAF, Att. 36).
On August 17, 2007, Ms. Baker received another successful mid-demotion probation performance appraisal from Mr. Balser for February 2007 to August 2007; however, this included a comment about the June 25, 2007 call.35 (PSSAF, Att. 36). The August 17, 2007 appraisal was signed by Mr. Balser on that date, and the final page to the appraisal reflects Ms. Joy's August 17, 2007 signature as the reviewing official. (Id.). The final page also reflects Lt. Sacco's signature dated August 17, 2007 and Capt. Wilson's signature dated August 20, 2007. (Id.).
On August 20, 2007, Ms. Rankin first made an entry in Super Notes about the June 25, 2007 call because, according to Ms. Rankin, they had been waiting to make a decision regarding the appropriate discipline for Ms. Baker. (PSSAF, Att. [*56]  32, p.65).
On August 22, 2007, the Pima County ADA Panel determined that Ms. Baker was ADA-eligible and that an interactive process meeting would be scheduled. (PSSAF, ¶109).

5. Discipline for the October 21, 2007 911 Call
According to Ms. Baker, on the morning of October 21, 2007, Ms. Rankin told Ms. Baker that due to the interactive process meeting, Ms. Baker "was not to get up from her seat, and not to walk call cards to the dispatchers or do other walking in the Comm. Center, and that Ms. Rankin would deliver my call cards to dispatchers. Ms. Rankin also told me that she would discipline me if I got out of my chair again."36 (PSSAF, Att. 2, ¶7).
On the morning of October 21, 2007, Ms. Baker took a 911 call from a woman who reported that her husband had broken into her patio door, the woman had shot at him but did not hit him, he had taken off in a white Suburban, and there were no injuries requiring an ambulance. (PSSAF, ¶156 (citing PSSAF, Att. 5, pp. 193-194; PSSAF, Att. 46, Exh. 94); Doc. 182 (recording)).
Ms. Rankin was on duty when Ms. Baker was handling the call. (DSOF, Att. 5, ¶46). Ms. Rankin became aware of the call while it was in progress. (DSOF, ¶243; DSOF Att. 5, ¶¶45, 50; [*57]  PSSAF, Att. 46). It is Ms. Rankin's opinion that the call should have been categorized "as Priority 1 as soon as Ms. Baker heard the caller state, 'I've shot at him twice...' By the time [Miss Rankin] learned about the call the time element [had] changed....[and Miss Rankin] raised the priority from '3' to '2' the call had been running for 8-9 minutes." (DSOF, Att. 5, ¶49).37 On October 23, 2007, Ms. Rankin directed Ms. Baker to write a memorandum regarding the handling of the call. (DSOF, Att. 5, ¶¶51, 52).
On October 23, 2007, Ms. Baker submitted a memorandum about the call. (Id. at ¶¶ 55, 56; see also DSOF, Att. 5, Exh. 13). Upon consideration of Ms. Baker's memorandum and call records, Ms. Rankin took issue with the way Ms. Baker handled the call for the following reasons: (1) the call priority of 3 assigned by Ms. Baker38; (2) Ms. Baker indicated the nature of the call was "domestic violence separated" which automatically defaults to a priority level 3; (3) there was a 2-minute delay before hearing Ms. Baker typing into the computer coming, in part, from Ms. Baker having placed the caller on hold for almost a full minute; (4) Ms. Baker was gong to disconnect given her statement [*58]  to the caller: "to call us if he comes back"; and (5) deputies were not dispatched until 10 minutes into the call when Ms. Rankin directed the on-duty dispatcher to send deputies. (DSOF, Att. 5, ¶¶ 56, 57, 58, 61).
The record supports the conclusion that at some time during the call, the Computer Aided Dispatch (hereinafter "CAD") system39 was down, which meant that Call Takers had to use a manual card system. (DSOF, Att. 5, ¶53; DSOF, Att. 5, Exh. 13; DSOF, Att. 2, ¶46). According to Ms. Baker, the CAD system was down when she was handling the October 21st call and she was using the manual card system. (DSOF, Att. 5, Exh. 13). While Ms. Baker was taking initial information to write on the calling card, the CAD system came back up. (Id.). Ms. Baker chose Domestic Violence -Separated because they were separated by more than a door or a wall and the husband was no longer on the property.40 (Id.). "Because the husband had left in a vehicle and the wife was still in the apartment, the threat of the two people hurting each other was not eminent, so I did not make the call a priority 1." (Id.). Further according to Ms. Baker:
I had initially placed a priority of 2 on the call because of the shots [*59]  fired. But when I went back and corrected the apartment number, the system reset the priority to 3. I didn't correct the reset priority because I didn't catch it due to being preoccupied with getting further information from the reportee about how she shot at her husband after he had already broken through the glass door, but not while he was fleeing. Also that no one was injured.....Johanna [Rankin] raised the priority of the call back to the 2.
(Id.).
On the manual call card, Ms. Baker wrote "3" as the call priority. (DSOF, Att. 10, pp.251-52 & Exh. 38). Plaintiffs point out that the priority level Ms. Baker wrote on the card is irrelevant because Ms. Baker did not have the card "time stamped" but instead the CAD system came back up and Ms. Baker stopped using the call card and entered the information into the CAD system. According to Plaintiffs, using the CAD system avoids having to manually determine the appropriate district and walking the card over to the dispatchers, which Ms. Baker was not supposed to do, given Ms. Rankin's instructions that morning that she should not leave her seat. (Plaintiffs' Joint Controverting Statement of Facts, ¶252). The CAD system would get the information [*60]  to the dispatchers and the deputies quicker than the manual system. (PSSAF, Att. 32, pp.77-78). Ms. Rankin is of the opinion that "[i]n this particular situation, the call should have been given to the dispatcher prior to the CAD going back up." (PSSAF, Att. 32, p. 78). Ms. Rankin also testified that "[a]s soon as the [CAD] system goes back up, again, then we start working off of the system." (Id. at pp. 78-79).
PCSD received notice of the Ms. Baker's Charge of Discrimination on October 22, 2007. (PSSAF, ¶167). Ms. Rankin did not ask Ms. Baker to prepare the memorandum about the October 21st call until October 23, 2007. (DSOF, Att. 5, ¶51). Ms. Rankin stated that she waited to request the memorandum because Ms. Baker "ended her shift...I decided to tell her about writing the memo on the following shift." (Id.). Lt. Sacco testified that he did not recall the date that he learned that Ms. Baker filed a charge with the ACRD. (PSOF, Att. 35, pp. 314-316).
Ms. Rankin made no entry in Super Notes about the October 21, 2007 call. (PSSAF, Att. 40). Instead, Ms. Rankin prepared a memo, dated October 23, 2007, for Ms. Joy regarding the incident. (DSOF, Att. 2, Exh. 10). Therein, Ms. Rankin determined that discipline [*61]  was warranted and she recommended the next level in formal discipline: a suspension. (Id.).
Ms. Joy, in turn, prepared a memorandum dated October 26, 2007, addressed to Lt. Sacco. (DSOF, Att. 2, Exh. 12). Therein Ms. Joy stated:
The delay in dispatch of this call is due totally to poor decision making on the part of Ms. Baker. She chose the wrong nature, decided to disregard the call card she had started, failed to raise the priority on the call when entering it into CAD, and failed to comprehend the dangerous nature of the incident not only to the caller but to other occupants in the apartment complex [where the caller was calling from].
(DSOF, Att, 2, Exh. 12). Ms. Joy concurred in Mr. Rankin's suggested discipline of a one-day suspension. (Id.).
On October 24, 2007, Lt. Sacco received a memorandum forwarded to him by Lt. Theel, Rincon District Commander. (DSOF, Att. 4, Exh. 11). The memo was from Sgt. Phillips, who sought to inform Lt. Theel about the October 21st call which Sgt. Phillips felt was "inappropriately dispatched; although there appears to be extenuating circumstances."41 (Id.).
Lt. Sacco forwarded Ms. Joy's memorandum about the October 21st incident to Capt. Wilson. (DSOF, [*62]  Att. 3, ¶28). Lt. Sacco concurred in the recommendation that Ms. Baker receive a one-day suspension. (Id.). Capt. Wilson agreed that Ms. Baker should receive a one-day suspension, but he returned the memo to Lt. Sacco and asked him to prepare a document summarizing Ms. Baker's performance deficiencies and her disciplinary history. (Id.).
On November 8, 2007, Capt. Wilson received a Memorandum from Lt. Sacco wherein he recommended that Ms. Baker "fail her demotion probation for failure to meet performance standards for the position. I believe this will result in a layoff for Ms. Baker." (DSOF, Att. 4, Exh. 13). In addition to referencing the June 25th and October 21st calls, Lt. Sacco also discussed Ms. Baker's performance issues as a Dispatcher Trainee and cited specific instances of alleged poor performance during that time period. (Id.). Lt. Sacco concluded:
It is clear to me that Ms. Baker has demonstrated poor work performance throughout her time in the Communications Unit. Although we have tried to work with Ms. Baker to improve her performance, there are some issues I do not believe we will be able to adequately improve. Specifically, Ms. Baker has demonstrated an inability to [*63]  appropriately comprehend the seriousness of situations and therefore exercised poor decision making skills in her response. We are now aware of a few situations, two of which are very serious and which have occurred in the recent past, which have exposed the public and our personnel to unnecessary risk and liability. I do not foresee a significant and/or consistent improvement in Ms. Baker's work performance. Our best predictor of future performance is past performance and, given Ms. Baker's poor performance along with her probationary status, I believe it is reasonable and prudent to end Ms. Baker's probation as a failure to meet minimum requirements.
(DSOF, Att. 4, Exh. 13).42 Lt. Sacco has stated that his recommendation was made "irrespective of Ms. Baker's request to bring a service dog to work." (DSOF, Att. 4, ¶67).
On November 9, 2007, Capt. Wilson wrote on Lt. Sacco's memorandum:
I concur - we have a history of documented performance deficiencies that training, coaching, and disciplinary action have been unable to correct. I recommend that Ms. Baker be laid off pursuant to Pima County Merit Systems Rules 10.2.C.3.
(DSOF, Att. 4, Exh. 13). In his affidavit, Capt. Wilson stated that he intended to [*64]  pursue two actions: one disciplinary in the form of a one-day suspension without pay; and one personnel in the form of for probation failure. (DSOF, Att. 3, ¶30).
On November 19, 2007, Ms. Baker was served with a Notice of Intent to Suspend Without Pay due to the October 21, 2007 call. (DSOF, Att.3, Exh. 4). Therein, Ms. Baker was also notified that a "pre-action meeting" was scheduled for November 23, 2007. (Id.). On November 23, 2007, Capt. Wilson and Ms. Baker met for the "pre-action meeting". (DSOF, Att. 3, ¶¶32-33). At that meeting, Capt. Wilson did not inform Ms. Baker that she was facing demotion probation failure. (PSSAF, Att. 2, ¶8). According to Capt. Wilson,
I would have recommended the one-day suspension for any call taker who made similar errors and had a similar disciplinary history as Ms. Baker's, whether or not such an employee had made a request for a reasonable accommodation.
(DSOF, Att. 3, ¶35).
At some point, Captain Wilson, after consulting with Capt. Chris Radtke, Administrative Services Division Commander, decided not to "follow through with the...disciplinary action...." (DSOF, Att. 3, ¶36).
On December 7, 2007 Ms. Baker received the Notice of Demotion Probation [*65]  Failure. (PSSAF, ¶176).
On average, the Communications Center receives 20,000 911 calls each month. (DSOF, Att. 2, ¶6). Communications Center personnel also answer an average of 19,500 non-911 calls each month. (Id.). Ms. Rankin testified that one call does not determine whether an employee passes or fails demotion probation. (PSSAF, Att. 32, pp. 79-80). Mr. Balser, who completed Ms. Baker's performance appraisals as Call Taker never sought to discipline Ms. Baker or have her probation terminated. (PSSAF, Att. 15, p. 128). It is undisputed that no Call Takers other than Ms. Baker received a demotion probation failure based on an incident like the October 21, 2007 call and no other Call Takers had filed civil rights complaints against PCSD. (PSSAF, ¶179; see also Defendants' Objections to PSSAF). On December 7, 2007, Ms. Baker was placed on Administrative Leave with Pay. (DSOF, Att. 1, ¶24).
On January 16, 2008, the day before her layoff was to take effect, Ms Baker submitted a letter of resignation. (PSSAF, Att. 34). Ms. Baker said she resigned because she was informed by Personnel that it had no jobs for her and her options were to resign or be terminated. (PSSAF, Att. 5, p. 151).43
Ms. [*66]  Deborah Roe, of Pima County Human Resources, testified that during the 30 days she worked with Ms. Baker, she was unable to find a position in the County for her. (PSSAF, Att. 33, p. 13). Ms. Roe also testified that she was "shocked" to receive Ms. Baker's resignation letter:
[b]ecause I can't understand why she would resign. If she's laid off,...she's considered a Pima County employee for two years. So any position, if it's for County only, she can apply for, you know. And that's a nice—that's a very nice thing to try to help her get reemployed, so that's why I was shocked that she resigned. Because once you resign, all that's gone.
(DSOF, Att. 7, pp. 13, 15).
On April 4, 2008, Ms. Baker filed a second Charge of Discrimination with the EEOC and ACRD concerning her loss of employment with Defendants. (PSOF, Exh. 4, ¶16). On August 18, 2008 the ACRD completed its first investigation of Ms. Baker's first charge of discrimination and issued its reasonable cause determination. (PSSAF, ¶184). On March 23, 2009, the ACRD issued its reasonable cause determination with regard to Ms. Baker's second charge of discrimination. (PSOF, Exh. 4, ¶16). There is no dispute that Ms. Baker satisfied administrative [*67]  remedies prior to bringing suit.

III. DISCUSSION

A. Summary Judgment Standard
A court "shall grant summary judgment if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a); see also Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). Under summary judgment practice, the moving party bears the initial responsibility of presenting the basis for its motion and identifying those portions of the record, together with affidavits, which it believes demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact. Id. at 323. If the moving party meets its initial responsibility, the burden then shifts to the opposing party who must demonstrate the existence of a factual dispute and that the fact in contention is material, i.e., a fact that might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law, Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986), and that the dispute is genuine, i.e., the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the non-moving party. Id. at 250; see Triton Energy Corp. v. Square D. Co., 68 F.3d 1216, 1221 (9th Cir. 1995). Rule 56(c) provides that "[a] party asserting that a fact cannot be or is genuinely disputed must support the assertion by: (A) citing to particular parts of materials in the record . . . or (B) showing that the materials cited do not establish the absence [*68]  or presence of a genuine dispute, or that an adverse party cannot produce admissible evidence to support the fact." An issue of fact must be genuine. Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co., Ltd. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586-87, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986). The opposing party need not establish a material issue of fact conclusively in its favor; it is sufficient that "the claimed factual dispute be shown to require a jury or judge to resolve the parties' differing versions of the truth at trial." First Nat'l Bank of Arizona v. Cities Serv. Co., 391 U.S. 253, 288-89, 88 S. Ct. 1575, 20 L. Ed. 2d 569 (1968). If the factual context makes the non-movant's claim implausible, that party must come forward with more persuasive evidence to support its claim than would otherwise be necessary. Matsushita, 475 U.S. at 587. The mere existence of a scintilla of evidence supporting the non-movant's position will be insufficient; there must be evidence from which a fair-minded jury could reasonably find for the non-movant. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 252.
When considering a summary judgment motion, the court examines the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits or declarations, if any. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). However, the "trial court can only consider admissible evidence...." Orr v. Bank of Am., NT & SA, 285 F.3d 764, 773 (9th Cir. 2002). At the summary judgment stage, the trial court's function is not to weigh the evidence and determine the truth but to determine whether there is [*69]  a genuine issue for trial. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249. Nor is the trial court to make credibility determinations. Musick v. Burke, 913 F.2d 1390, 1394 (9th Cir. 1990). The ultimate question is whether the evidence "presents a sufficient disagreement to require submission to a jury or whether it is so one-sided that one party must prevail as a matter of law." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 251-52. The evidence of the non-movant is "to be believed, and all justifiable inferences are to be drawn in his favor." Id. at 255. But, if the evidence of the non-moving party is merely colorable or is not significantly probative, summary judgment may be granted. Id. at 248-49.
The Ninth Circuit has stated that "[a]s a general matter, the plaintiff in an employment discrimination action need produce very little evidence in order to overcome an employer's motion for summary judgment. This is because 'the ultimate question is one that can only be resolved through a searching inquiry-one that is most appropriately conducted by a factfinder, upon a full record.'" Chuang v. University of Calif. Davis, 225 F.3d 1115, 1124 (9th Cir. 2000) (quoting Schnidrig v. Columbia Mach., Inc., 80 F.3d 1406, 1410 (9th Cir. 1996)).

B. Applicable law
Arizona courts in interpreting the Arizona Civil Rights Act, look to federal law. See St. Luke's Health Sys. v. Dep't. Of Law, Civil Rights Div., 180 Ariz. 373, 377, 884 P.2d 259, 263 (App. 1994). Likewise, the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 is materially identical to the ADA, except that it is limited to programs that receive federal financial assistance. See [*70]  Armstrong v. Davis, 275 F.3d 849, 862 n. 17 (9th Cir. 2001), abrogated on other grounds by Johnson v. California, 543 U.S. 499, 125 S. Ct. 1141, 160 L. Ed. 2d 949 (2005); see also EEOC v. MCI Telecommunications, Corp., 993 F.Supp. 726, 729 n.5 (D.Ariz. 1998) (case law decided under the Rehabilitation Act is helpful in interpreting the ADA (citations omitted)). Thus, the parties cite primarily to federal ADA and Rehabilitation Act cases.
The ADA "was enacted 'to provide a clear and comprehensive national mandate for the elimination of discrimination against individuals with disabilities.'" Harris v. Harris & Hart, Inc., 206 F.3d 838, 841 (9th Cir. 2000) (quoting 42 U.S.C. § 12101(b)). The ADA prohibits discrimination "'against a qualified individual because of the disability of such individual in regard to job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment.'" Id. (quoting 42 U.S. C. § 12112(a)). An individual is a "qualified individual with a disability" if she can perform the essential functions of the position she holds or desires with our without reasonable accommodation. Kennedy v. Applause, Inc., 90 F.3d 1477, 1481 (9th Cir. 1996) (citing 42 U.S.C. 12111(8), 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m)). Under the ADA, "'discrimination' includes an employer's not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified...employee, unless [the employer] can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of [its] [*71]  business." United States EEOC v. UPS Supply Chain Solutions, 620 F. 3d 1103, 1110 (9th Cir. 2010) (quoting U.S. Airways, Inc., v. Barnett, 535 U.S. 391, 396, 122 S. Ct. 1516, 152 L. Ed. 2d 589 (2002) (emphasis and alterations in original); see also 42 U.S.C. ¶12112(b)(5)(A); 29 C.F.R. § 1630.9.
To state a prima facie case of discrimination under the ADA, Plaintiffs must show that Ms. Baker is (1) a qualified individual (2) with a disability (3) who suffered an adverse employment action because of her disability. Kennedy, 90 F.3d at 1481; see also Allen v. Pacific Bell, 348 F.3d 1113, 1114 (9th Cir. 2003). "For purposes of this [M]otion, it is conceded that Ms. Baker is a qualified person with a disability who was employed by Defendants, that she requested a reasonable accommodation for her disability from Defendants within the meaning of the...ADA...and the...A[rizona] C[ivil] R[ights] A[ct]..., and that Defendants denied Ms. Baker's requested accommodation." (ACRD Response, p.3).

C. The interactive process meeting
It is undisputed that Ms. Baker made a request for reasonable accommodation under the ADA on June 22, 2007. (PSSAF, Att. 21). Further, the Pima County ADA Panel determined that Ms. Baker was ADA-eligible and that an interactive process meeting would be scheduled. (PSSAF, Att. 51).
The Ninth Circuit has held that "once an employee requests an accommodation...the employer must engage in an interactive process with the employee to determine the appropriate [*72]  reasonable accommodation." Zivkovic v. Southern Calif. Edison Co., 302 F.3d 1080, 1089 (9th Cir. 2002) (footnote omitted) (citing Barnett v. U.S. Air, Inc., 228 F.3d 1105, 1112 (9th Cir. 2000) (en banc) vacated on other grounds, U.S. Airways, 535 U.S. 391, 122 S. Ct. 1516, 152 L. Ed. 2d 589).44 In a case where the employer completely failed to engage in the interactive process, the Ninth Circuit has held that "an employer cannot prevail at the summary judgment stage if there is a genuine dispute as to whether the employer engaged in good faith in the interactive process." Barnett, 228 F.3d at 1116 (footnote omitted); see also Morton v. United Parcel Serv., 272 F.3d 1249, 1256 n.6(9th Cir. 2001), (employer cannot prevail at summary judgment on issue of good faith on defense that no reasonable accommodation existed if there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether a reasonable accommodation existed), (overruled on other grounds, Bates v. United Parcel Serv., 511 F.3d 974 (9th Cir. 2007). The Fifth Circuit has noted that if reasonable accommodation is made, then flaws in the interactive process do not violate the ADA. See Allen v. Rapides, Parish School Board, 204 F.3d 619, 622 (5th Cir. 2000).
"The interactive process is the key mechanism for facilitating the integration of disabled employees into the workplace." Barnett, 228 F.3d at 1116. "The EEOC...outlines the four steps critical to the interactive process." Id. at 1114 (citing 29 C.F.R. Pt. 1630, App. § 1630.9). Once a request for reasonable accommodation has been made, the employer is required to:
(1) Analyze the particular job involved and determine its purpose and essential functions;
(2) Consult [*73]  with the individual with a disability to ascertain the precise job-related limitations imposed by the individual's disability and how those limitations could be overcome with a reasonable accommodation;
(3) In consultation with the individual to be accommodated, identify potential accommodations and assess the effectiveness each would have in enabling the individual to perform the essential functions of the position and;
(4) Consider the preference of the individual to be accommodated and select and implement the accommodation that is most appropriate for both the employee and the employer.
Id. (quoting 29 C.F.R. Pt. 1630, App. § 1630.9). Thus,
[t]he interactive process requires communication and good-faith exploration of possible accommodations between employers and individual employees. The shared goal is to identify an accommodation that allows the employee to perform the job effectively. Both sides must communicate directly, exchange essential information and neither side can delay or obstruct the process. See Smith [v. Midland Brake, Inc.], 180 F.3d [1154] at 1172 [(9th Cir. 1999)] ("The interactive process includes good-faith communications between the employer and employee."); Beck v. University of Wis. Bd. of Regents, 75 F.3d 1130, 1135 (7th Cir.1996) ("A party that obstructs or delays the interactive process is not acting in good faith. A [*74]  party that fails to communicate, by way of initiation or response, may also be acting in bad faith.").
Id. (footnote omitted).
Once the employer and employee have identified and assessed the range of possible reasonable accommodations, the legislative history directs that "the expressed choice of the applicant shall be given primary consideration unless another effective accommodation exists that would provide a meaningful equal employment opportunity." S.Rep. No. 101-116, at 35 (1989); see also H.R.Rep. No. 101-485, at 67 (1990). An appropriate reasonable accommodation must be effective, in enabling the employee to perform the duties of the position.
Id. (emphasis added).45
Defendants argue that an employer can only be found to act in bad faith with regard to the interactive process where there is a complete failure on the part of the employer to engage in the interactive process or where the employer is responsible for a breakdown in "the interactive process where the end result is that no accommodation was provided." (Defendants' Reply, p. 13). They also argue that because they offered Ms. Baker alternative reasonable accommodation, they acted in good faith as a matter of law. (Id.).
 [*75] Plaintiffs dispute that Defendants engaged in the interactive process meeting in good faith. They also dispute that Defendants' alternatives constituted reasonable accommodation.
The Court disagrees that merely going through the act of an interactive process meeting, alone, negates any finding that a defendant failed to act in good faith. "[T]he statute clearly states that talk alone is not enough. A 'good faith effort...to identify and make a reasonable accommodation' is not satisfied merely through communication with the employee." MCI Telecommunications, Corp., 993 F.Supp. at 731 n.10 (emphasis in original). Instead, to show cooperative behavior, the employer should meet with the employee, request information about the condition and what limitations the employee has, ask the employee what he or she specifically wants, show signs of having considered the employee's request, and offer and discuss available alternatives when the request is too burdensome. Barnett, 228 F.3d at 1116 (citing Taylor v. Phoenixville School Dist., 184 F.3d 296, 317 (3rd Cir. 1999)).
Because, as set forth, infra, III.D., triable issues of fact remain as to whether Defendants offered Ms. Baker alternative reasonable accommodation, Defendants are not excused from the good faith requirement in the instant action simply because they offered some alternative accommodation. [*76]  Therefore, the Court must determine whether there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Defendants engaged in the interactive process in good faith.
Under the Rehabilitation Act, which has been seen as instructive in interpreting the ADA, an employer "may not merely speculate that a suggested accommodation is not feasible. When accommodation is required to enable an employee to perform the essential functions of the job, the employer has a duty to 'gather sufficient information from the applicant and qualified experts as needed to determine what accommodations are necessary to enable the applicant to perform the job....'" Buckingham v. United States, 998 F.2d 735, 740 (9th Cir. 1993) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted) (emphasis in original); see also Taylor, 184 F.3d at 315 (ADA case stating that "[o]nce the employer knows of the disability and the employee's desire for accommodations, it makes sense to place the burden on the employer to request additional information that the employer believes it needs," which can occur during or in anticipation of the interactive process).
It is undisputed that an interactive process meeting occurred in Ms. Baker's case. It is also undisputed that prior to that meeting, Lt. Sacco, the decision maker, and others [*77]  had already determined that Ms. Baker's request to bring her service dog to work would be denied. Chief Gagnepain, Lt. Sacco's superior, found it "absurd" that Ms. Baker would request a dog to fall on. Further, on the instant record, it is undisputed that Defendants did little, if anything to educate themselves about how Ms. Baker's service dog could assist her while at the Communications Center or what impact the dog's presence would have at the Communications Center. For example, Chief Gagnepain had no information regarding the use of service dogs by persons with disabilities. Lt. Sacco refused to permit Ms. Mauger, Executive Director of Handi-Dogs, Inc., to attend the interactive process meeting. Although Ms. Mauger was permitted to speak with Ms. Molina prior to the meeting, there is no evidence that Ms. Molina shared any information at the interactive process meeting that she received from Ms. Mauger. Ms. Molina conceded that she did not take any steps to determine what it was that Ms. Baker's service dog did for her. Nor was Ms. Baker permitted to bring her service dog to the meeting to demonstrate or explain how he could assist her at the Communications Center.
Further, the record [*78]  reveals questions of fact as to whether Defendants merely "speculat[ed] that [the] suggested accommodation is not feasible." Buckingham, 998 F.2d at 740. For example, Lt. Sacco's statements in the record supports the conclusion that he assumed and speculated, without questioning Ms. Baker or others, that the presence of the service dog would require a change in the cleaning schedule, that the dog would distract employees, and that the dog would be a trip hazard. Additionally, as to any reliance on the hearsay statement from Ms. Joy that Mr. Sirmon, another Communications Center employee, was allergic to dogs, no inquiry was made to confirm this contemporaneous to the decision to deny Ms. Baker's request.46 Later, in 2008, Lt. Sacco did discuss the matter with Mr. Sirmon who stated that he had never been medically diagnosed with an allergy to dogs and that the presence of a dog in the Communications Center may not affect him so long as he did not have contact with the dog. (PSSAF, Att.9, pp. 88, 95-96). Nor does there appear to have been any consideration given to scheduling Ms. Baker and any employees with allergies so that their shifts did not overlap.
There are also questions whether Defendants considered, in [*79]  good faith, Ms. Baker's request in light of her disability and limitations. See 29 C.F.R. Pt. 1630, App. § 1630.9(2), (4). Lt. Sacco's October 1, 2007 Memorandum reflects that Defendants viewed Ms. Baker's request as one for accommodation to prevent her from falling. (See also Defendants' Reply, p. 11 ("falling was the limitation..." identified by Ms. Baker in her request for accommodation)). Whereas, Plaintiffs frame it as a request for accommodation for mobility.
The purpose of the interactive process meeting is to allow for the exchange of essential information so that the parties may engage in good faith exploration of possible accommodations. See Barnett, 228 F.3d at 1114-1115. The evidence of record reveals questions of fact as to whether Defendants, in good faith, consulted with Ms. Baker, considered her preference, and gathered sufficient information as required by the regulations and case law. See Barnett, 228 F.3d at 1114 (citing 29 C.F.R. Pt. 1630, App. ¶1630.9).

D. Reasonableness of alternative accommodation
The EEOC's Interpretive Guidance on the Americans With Disabilities act provides that:
Once potential accommodations have been identified, the employer should assess the effectiveness of each potential accommodation in assisting the individual in need of the accommodation [*80]  in the performance of the essential functions of the position. If more than one of these accommodations will enable the individual to perform the essential functions or if the individual would prefer to provide his or her own accommodation, the preference of the individual with a disability should be given primary consideration. However, the employer providing the accommodation has the ultimate discretion to choose between effective accommodations, and may choose the less expensive accommodation or the accommodation that is easier for it to provide. It should also be noted that the individual's willingness to provide his or her own accommodation does not relieve the employer of the duty to provide the accommodation should the individual for any reason be unable or unwilling to continue to provide the accommodation.
29 C.F.R. Pt. 1630, App. § 1630.9.47 Plaintiffs argue that because Ms. Baker offered to provide her own accommodation, the employer is not "providing" the accommodation and therefore does not have "ultimate discretion to choose between effective accommodations," and select the less expensive or easiest accommodation to provide. (ACRD Response, p. 5). According to Plaintiffs, "[t]his makes sense because [*81]  the accommodation will not cost the employer anything. Since Ms. Baker offered to provide her own service dog as an accommodation, Defendants had no discretion to deny Ms. Baker's request, unless Defendants could demonstrate that the accommodation would pose an undue burden on the operation of their business."48 Plaintiffs have cited no authority to support their position. Nor does the legislative history support Plaintiffs' broad interpretation:
The final informal step is to implement the accommodation that is most appropriate for the employee and the employer and that does not impose an undue hardship on the employer's operation or to permit the employee to provide his or her own accommodation if it does impose an undue hardship. In situations where there are two effective accommodations, the employer may choose the accommodation that is less expensive or easier for the employer to implement as long as the selected accommodation provides meaningful equal employment opportunity. The expressed choice of the applicant or employee shall be given primary consideration unless another effective accommodation exists that would provide a meaningful equal employment opportunity or unless the [*82]  accommodation requested would pose an undue hardship.
H.R.Rep. No. 101-485, pt. 2 at 66-67 (1990), 1990 U.S.C.C.A.N. 303, 349 (1990); see also S.Rep. No. 101-116, at 35 (1989). The legislative history does not indicate that the employer lacks discretion to choose the accommodation that is less expensive or easier to implement when the employee offers to provide the accommodation. Id. On the instant record, the Court declines to adopt Plaintiffs' position.
Plaintiffs also assert that "[a]ssuming for purposes of argument only, that Defendants either had the right to choose among effective accommodations...Defendants are still not entitled to summary judgment because there are material fact questions regarding whether the accommodation that Defendants provided to Ms. Baker was effective." (ACRD Response, p. 6). According to Plaintiffs, Ms. Baker requested a reasonable accommodation to use her service dog to assist her with mobility from the time she arrives at work until she leaves at the end of her shift. (Id.). Further according to Ms. Baker, mobility issues involve taking 911 call cards to the appropriate dispatcher when the CAD system is down and having equal benefits and privileges [*83]  of employment as enjoyed by other employees without disabilities at the Communications Center such as getting to and from the Center, going to the restroom, taking breaks, carrying items, going to the fax machine, and going to her supervisor's office. (Id.).
The EEOC Guidance on Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under the Americans with Disabilities Act (hereinafter the "EEOC Guidance") provides that:
In general, an accommodation is any change in the work environment or in the way things are customarily done that enables an individual with a disability to enjoy equal employment opportunities. There are three categories of reasonable accommodation:
(i) modifications...to the job application process...; or
(ii) modifications or adjustments to the work environment, or to the manner or circumstances under which the position held or desired is customarily performed, that enable a qualified individual with a disability to perform the essential functions of that position; or
(iii) modifications or adjustments that enable a covered entity's employee with a disability to enjoy equal benefits and privileges of employment as are enjoyed by its other similarly situated employees without disabilities [*84] .
(EEOC Guidance at p.3, attached to Baker's Response at Exh. 3) (endnotes and internal quotation marks omitted) (emphasis added); see also 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o) (setting forth the same three categories of reasonable accommodation). Thus, the "regulations define the term reasonable accommodation to include '[m]odifications or adjustments that enable a covered entity's employee with a disability to enjoy equal benefits and privileges of employment as are enjoyed by its other similarly situated employees without disabilities.'"49 UPS Supply Chain Solutions, 620 F.3d at 1110 (quoting 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(1)(iii)) (emphasis added); see also Edwards v. U.S.E.P.A., 456 F.Supp.2d 72, 100 (D.D.C. 2006) ("Hence, employers must make changes to their policies or practices so as to place disabled employees on the same footing as nondisabled ones."). The EEOC has identified the benefits and privileges of employment as including, but not limited to:
(1) training; (2) services (e.g., employee assistance programs,...credit unions, cafeterias, lounges, gymnasiums, auditoriums, transportation); and (3) parties or other social functions (e.g., parties to celebrate retirements and birthdays, and company outings).
(EEOC Guidance at p.11, attached to Baker's Response at Exh. 3) (endnote omitted).
The Ninth Circuit has stated that
employers are not relieved of their duty to accommodate when employees [*85]  are already able to perform the essential functions of the job. Qualified...employees who can perform all job functions may require reasonable accommodation to allow them to (a) enjoy the privileges and benefits of employment equal to those enjoyed by non-[disabled] employees or (b) pursue therapy or treatment....In other words, an employer is obligated not to interfere, either through action or inaction, with a [disabled] employee's efforts to pursue a normal life. In some instances, this may require employers to alter existing policies or procedures that they would not change for non-[disabled] employees, but that is the essence of reasonable accommodation.
Buckingham, 998 F.2d at 740-41 (internal quotation marks, citation, and footnote omitted) (Rehabilitation Act). See Taylor, 184 F.3d at 312 n.5 ("according to 42 U.S.C. § 12201(a), the ADA should not be construed to apply a lesser standard than the Rehabilitation Act.").
Lt. Sacco's October 1, 2007 Memorandum concluded that Ms. Baker was able to perform the essential functions of her job without any accommodation. (See DSOF, Att. 4, Exh. 8, p.2 ("The negative consequences associated with the presence of a dog, coupled with a determination the specific accommodation is not needed for you to perform the essential [*86]  functions of your job, clearly and convincingly override your accommodation request.")). Lt. Sacco acknowledged that "[i]n your explanation of your duties, as pertaining to mobility, you explained you [sic] need to...": consult with co-workers across the room; obtain reference materials within the Communications Center; use a card-punch time clock; retrieve dropped items; and walk to the break room, restroom and to and from the parking lot. (Id.). The alternative accommodation identified in Lt. Sacco's memorandum was to alleviate "some of [Ms. Baker's]...issues of concern...." (Id. at p.3).
"'An ineffective 'modification' or 'adjustment' will not accommodate a disabled individual's limitations.'" UPS Supply Chain Solutions, 620 F.3d. at 1110 (quoting Barnett, 535 U.S. at 400) (emphasis in original). Thus, ineffective modifications are not accommodations. Id. (citations omitted). The reasonableness of an accommodation is ordinarily a question of fact. Id.; McAlindin v. County of San Diego, 192 F.3d 1226, 1238 (9th Cir. 1999), amended, 201 F.3d 1211 (9th Cir. 2000), ("whether a particular accommodation is reasonable often turns on the facts of the case.") (citation and internal quotations omitted).
Defendants state that "falling was the limitation that [Ms.] Baker identified on the Request..." for accommodation. (Defendants' Reply, p.11). Defendants argue that [*87]  they exercised their discretion to provide Ms. Baker with an alternative reasonable accommodation that would prevent her from falling: they would permit her to select a permanent work station that allows her best access to other employees; items she would need would be placed at her desk; they would provide her with a tool to assist in retrieving dropped items; and she was to continue to use support devices when she did have to move during her shift. According to Defendants, "[m]ost of the alternatives were intended to limit the amount of walking Baker had to do while at work....As a result the likelihood of her falling would be reduced." (Defendants' MSJ, p. 6). They stress that Ms. Baker's service dog does not prevent her from falling to the ground. (Id. at p.7).
Plaintiffs assert that the alternatives are not reasonable because they do not address Ms. Baker's request for mobility assistance. (ACRD's Response, pp. 7-8). According to Plaintiffs, Defendants instead offered alternatives which, other than crutches, limited Ms. Baker's mobility. Plaintiffs point out that crutches are painful for Ms. Baker to use, risk atrophy to her leg muscles, and do not leave her hands free to carry things, open [*88]  doors or retrieve dropped items; whereas, Ms. Baker's service dog allows her to walk freely, as independently as possible, while having necessary support and bracing assistance either to prevent falls, mitigate falls, or get back up from falls safely and independently without the neck, shoulder, and hand pain or risk of atrophy in her leg muscles that result from using crutches. (Id.). Ms. Baker's dog also retrieves dropped objects and allows her to use her hands to carry things and open doors. (Id.; see also PSSAF, Att. 2, ¶3 (Ms. Baker found her service dog "to be far superior to the other devices...[she has] used to assist with mobility.")).
Defendants counter that Plaintiffs have not cited evidence that creates a genuine dispute about the effectiveness of the alternative accommodation they have offered. (Defendants' Reply, p. 6). Defendants stress that nothing prevents Ms. Baker from falling. (Id.). They also argue that the "benefits and privileges" Ms. Baker claims are denied to her are not of the kind discussed in the EEOC Guidance. (Id. at pp. 7-8).
Defendants cite Dr. Arnold's testimony that Ms. Baker should be able to use the crutches in getting up from a fall and Ms. Baker herself testified [*89]  to using the crutches to get up from a fall. (Defendants' Reply, p. 8). According to Defendants, Ms. Baker's claims of pain from using the crutches and difficulty carrying things appeared in discovery and were not mentioned in her request for accommodation. Defendants also state that there is no evidence on the issue of atrophy other than Ms. Baker's own statements. Defendants argue that "[g]iven the undisputed evidence about Baker's use of crutches during her employment and the content of her Request, no reasonable juror could find that the dog was the only effective accommodation. Even assuming that Baker falls less frequently when she uses her dog, no reasonable juror could find that the alternatives were not effective, as they would result in her having fewer opportunities to fall." (Defendants' Reply, pp. 11-12).
"The EEOC's manual makes clear...the notice [of request for reasonable accommodation]...must make clear that the employee wants assistance for his or her disability. In other words, the employer must know of both the disability and the employee's desire for accommodations for that disability." Taylor, 184 F.3d at 313. Defendants have cited no authority for the premise that Ms. Baker is limited [*90]  to the four corners of her request for accommodation. Moreover, although Ms. Baker did reference falling in her request for accommodation, she also discussed mobility needs such as walking to different locations in the Communications Center for work-related tasks, including speaking with co-workers and going to her supervisor's office. (PSSAF, Att. 21). She discussed her need to leave the room while taking her breaks and at the end of her shift. (Id.). She described how her service dog assists her by walking "beside me on my left side, at my pace, so that I can support myself with his body when I collapse. He takes a stationary stance once I start falling so that I don't collapse all the way to the floor. His retrieving skills include getting items I have dropped so that I don't put myself in precarious positions trying to get items that are otherwise out of my reach." (Id.). Mobility is mentioned in the Pima County ADA Panel's decision. (PSSAF, Att. 51). Even Lt. Sacco, in his October 1, 2007 Memorandum, acknowledged that Ms. Baker raised issues about mobility at the interactive process meeting. (DSOF, Att. 4, Exh. 8, p.2). Further, Ms. Molina agreed at her deposition that Ms. Baker [*91]  requested a reasonable accommodation to use her service dog to assist her with mobility in all the ways it affects her from the time she gets to work until the time she leaves at the end of her shift. (PSSAF, Att. 12, p. 123).
An employer only has discretion to choose the less expensive or easiest accommodation when the employer is choosing between "effective accommodations." See 29 C.F.R. Pt. 1630, App. § 1630.9; see also H.R.Rep. No. 101-485, pt. 2, p.66, 1990 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 349; S.Rep. No. 101-116, at 35. A reasonable trier of fact could find that Defendants' reliance on Ms. Baker's prior use of crutches at the Communications Center does not, alone, support the notion that crutches are a reasonable alternative accommodation on the instant facts given that Defendants required Ms. Baker to use the crutches while at work regardless of whether she felt she needed them and regardless of whether her doctor ordered her to use them. This is especially so given that Ms. Baker's treating physician, Dr. Arnold, was of the opinion that Ms. Baker should not use crutches when she was not experiencing pain because such use would prevent maintaining "good muscle tone and good mobility." (See DSOF, Att. 14, p. 61). A reasonable [*92]  trier of fact could conclude that prolonged use of crutches could cause neck, shoulder, and hand pain. "Changes that fail to address the employee's limitations are not accommodations and thus, do not satisfy the employer's duty under the Act." Branson v. West, 1999 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 7343, 1999 WL 311717, *11 (N.D.Ill. May 11, 1999) (employer, who denied employee's request to use service dog, failed, inter alia, to explain how alternative accommodation addressed the physical symptoms caused by employee's use of a manual wheel chair).
An employee is "entitled to reasonable accommodation if such accommodation could have assisted her in performing her job duties or alleviated barriers to enjoy equal benefits, privileges, and opportunities of employment." McDonald v. Department of Environmental Quality, 2009 MT 209, 351 Mont. 243, 260, 214 P.3d 749, 760 (2009). In the instant case, even Ms. Joy did not know how having a single work station would assist Ms. Baker with mobility. (PSSAF, Att. 8, pp. 87-88). She acknowledged that a single work station would limit Ms. Baker's movement. (Id. at 103). She also acknowledged that other people working at the Communications Center were able to move around as needed, but that pursuant to Lt. Sacco's Memorandum, Ms. Baker was to limit her movement while at work. (Id.).
On the instant record, Plaintiffs have demonstrated genuine issues of material fact [*93]  as to whether Defendants' alternative accommodation was reasonable under the applicable statute.

E. Retaliation claims
Under the ADA, an employee may prove discrimination by showing: she suffered an adverse employment action because of her disability, see Sanders v. Arneson Products, 91 F.3d 1351, 1353 (9th Cir. 1996); Snead v. Metropolitan Property & Cas. Insur. Co., 237 F.3d 1080, 1087 (9th Cir. 2001); or that she suffered an adverse employment action because she engaged in protected conduct under the ADA, see Pardi v. Kaiser Foundation Hosp., Inc., 389 F.3d 840, 849 (citing 42 U.S.C. §12203(a)).
Plaintiffs allege the September 10, 2007 LOR was issued in response to Ms. Baker's request for reasonable accommodation and an interactive process meeting. They allege the October 2007 Notice of Intent to Suspend Without Pay, the Notice of Demotion Probation Failure, and the Layoff Notice were issued to Ms. Baker in retaliation for filing her first Charge of Discrimination against Defendants with ACRD.

1. Analytical framework
To establish a prima facie case with regard to adverse employment actions taken because of disability, the plaintiff must show that she: (1) is disabled; (2) is qualified; and (3) suffered an adverse employment action because of her disability. Snead, 237 F.3d at 1087. With regard to retaliation, an employer may not retaliate against an employee who engages in good faith in an activity that is protected under the [*94]  ADA, such as filing an EEOC discrimination charge or requesting reasonable accommodation. 42 U.S.C. §12203(a). To establish a prima facie case of retaliation, the plaintiff must show that: (1) she engaged in protected activity under the ADA; (2) her employer subjected her to an adverse employment action; and (3) a causal link exists between the protected activity and the adverse action. Pardi, 389 F.3d at 849; Coons v. Secretary of U.S. Dep't. of Treasury, 383 F.3d 879, 887 (9th Cir. 2004). Both types of claims involve the same burden-shifting analysis.
The plaintiff bears the initial burden of proving a prima facie case of intentional discrimination. In satisfying this burden, "[t]he requisite degree of proof necessary to establish a prima facie case for [employment discrimination]...claims on summary judgment is minimal and does not even need to rise to the level of a preponderance of the evidence...The plaintiff need only offer evidence which gives rise to an inference of unlawful discrimination." Wallis v. J.R.Simplot Co., 26 F.3d 885, 889 (9th Cir. 1994) (citations omitted). When the plaintiff establishes a prima facie case, she is then entitled to "'a presumption that the employer unlawfully discriminated against [her]'...However, to rebut this presumption the employer must merely articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the action." Nidds v. Schindler Elevator Corp., 113 F.3d 912, 917 (9th Cir. 1997) (quoting [*95]  St. Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 506, 113 S. Ct. 2742, 125 L. Ed. 2d 407 (1993); citing Wallis, 26 F.3d at 892). Once the defendant employer satisfies "this burden, the presumption of discrimination drops away." Id. Thereafter, "the plaintiff may establish pretext 'either directly by persuading the court that a discriminatory reason more likely motivated the employer or indirectly by showing that the employer's proffered explanation is unworthy of credence.'" Godwin v. Hunt Wesson, Inc., 150 F.3d. 1217, 1220 (9th Cir. 1998) (quoting Texas Dept. of Comty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U. S. 248, 256, 101 S. Ct. 1089, 67 L. Ed. 2d 207 (1981)). Thus, the plaintiff must offer direct evidence of discrimination or circumstantial evidence that the employer's proffered reasons are not reliable.50 Id. 150 F.3d at 1220-1221. See also Cornwell, 439 F.3d at 1029 (a plaintiff may rely successfully on either circumstantial or direct evidence to defeat a motion for summary judgment) (citing Desert Palace, Inc. v. Costa, 539 U.S. 90, 123 S. Ct. 2148, 156 L. Ed. 2d 84 (2003)).
"The ultimate burden of persuading the trier of fact that the defendant intentionally discriminated against the plaintiff remains at all times with the plaintiff." Burdine, 450 U.S. at 253. A plaintiff may not defeat summary judgment merely be denying the credibility of the defendant's proffered reason. Cornwell, 439 F.3d at 1028 n. 6 (citations omitted). Nor may a plaintiff create a genuine issue of material fact by relying solely on the plaintiff's subjective belief that the challenged employment action was unnecessary or unwarranted. Id. (citation omitted).
Defendants concede for [*96]  purposes of their MSJ, that Plaintiff has established a prima facie case with regard to their claims concerning the disciplinary actions. (Defendants' MSJ, p. 9). Defendants assert that they are entitled to summary judgment because they have met their burden of providing legitimate reasons for their actions and Plaintiffs are unable to point to a genuine issue of material fact that Defendants' reasons are pretextual. (Id.; Defendants' Reply, p. 22).

2. Defendants' legitimate reason
Defendants point out that Ms. Rankin investigated the June 2007 and the October 2007 calls which included listening to the call recordings and talking to Ms. Baker about how she handled the calls, and prepared memoranda for Ms. Joy regarding her investigation. Ms. Joy reviewed the memoranda from Ms. Rankin, listened to the call recordings, considered additional information by reviewing the CAD Master table with regard to the October 2007 call. (DSOF, Att. 2, P46). Ms. Joy then prepared memoranda "for review by the chain of command...", Lt. Sacco and Capt. Wilson, who reviewed the information about each call before taking responsive action. (Defendants' MSJ, p.10). Defendants argue that reviews of both calls [*97]  were consistent with how PCSD investigated prior complaints about Ms. Baker while she was a Dispatcher.51
Defendants cite Ms. Joy's and Ms. Rankin's reasons set out supra, at II.B.3. and II.B.5., as to why Ms. Baker "seriously" mishandled the calls. Defendants also submit Ms. Joy's affidavit statement that:
The errors Ms. Baker made on June 25 and October 21, 2007 were too grave to ignore. At this point in her career, she had failed a Special Observation Period, took a Voluntary Demotion in lieu of being terminated, received three episodes of informal discipline, a Letter of Reprimand and was on Demotion Probation, which triggers a heightened scrutiny of her performance. It was evident that Ms. Baker failed her probationary status as a 911 Call Taker. Due to her performance as an employee in the Comm Center and the many errors she made she would not have passed her Demotion Probation. The jobs of the 911 Call Takers and 911 Dispatchers are too important to tolerate the types of grave errors she was making. I would have recommended this level of discipline regardless of her request for reasonable accommodation.
(DSOF, Att. 2, P53).
Although Ms. Baker maintains that she followed her training [*98]  with regard to the June call, Defendants argue that Ms. Baker has not pointed to any training materials, etc., to support her statement. (Defendants' Reply, p. 18). Instead, the Operations Guidelines states that "[i]f the call requires law enforcement action, take the call back from MEDS once they have obtained necessary information for their response. Question the caller for the pertinent information necessary for the law enforcement response." (Id.).
With regard to the October call, Defendants also cite to Ms. Baker's deposition testimony that she would handle the call differently now: "I would have rechecked the priority to make sure it was a priority 2...," and she would have omitted the one statement about "'if he comes back, give us a call back." (DSOF, Att. 10, pp. 257-58). Defendants state that Ms. Baker's position that the computer system reset the call priority from a level 2 to a level 3 is belied by the manual call card completed by Ms. Baker wherein she wrote "3" for the priority level. (Defendants' Reply, p. 21).

3. Plaintiffs' evidence of pretext

a. June 25, 2007 911 call
Plaintiffs point out that the June 25, 2007 call occurred three days after Ms. Baker submitted her request [*99]  for reasonable accommodation.
Plaintiffs stress that Ms. Baker determined a law enforcement response was not needed. They also stress that Ms. Rankin's initial memo to Ms. Joy did not recommend any discipline against Ms. Baker. (ACRD Response, p. 14). However, on July 26, 2007, when Ms. Joy first mentioned an LOR to Ms. Rankin, Ms. Joy was aware of Ms. Baker's request to bring her service dog to work.
Plaintiffs argue that the timing of the LOR is suspect given that it was issued just two days prior to the interactive process meeting. (Id.). They state that Ms. Joy instructed Ms. Rankin to draft the LOR on August 17, 2007 and "[i]t is no coincidence that on August 16, 2007, Ms. Joy learned that Ms. Baker's request for accommodation..." would be going before the Pima County ADA Panel. (Id.)
Plaintiffs also argue that Defendants violated the merit system rules because LORs are only issued for serious or repetitive improper performance or conduct: "[t]o issue an LOR to Ms. Baker for the June 25, 2007 call, Defendants had to manufacture 'repetitive' improper performance, but there was none in [Ms. Baker's performance in the] Call Taker position", in fact, she had received good evaluations [*100]  as a Call Taker in May, July and August 2007. (Id.). They also cite Capt. Wilson's testimony that he did not believe that Ms. Baker's handling of the June 2007 call by itself was serious enough to warrant an LOR. (Id.).
Plaintiffs take issue with Defendants reliance on "unrelated" dispatch performance issues to claim that Ms. Baker had repetitive problems as a Call Taker in light of the fact that Capt. Wilson and the Communications Center management all recommended approval of Ms. Baker's voluntary demotion to Call Taker with full knowledge of her performance problems and difficulties with dispatching. "There is no evidence of which Plaintiffs are aware which would establish that a Call Taker other than Ms. Baker who demoted from the Dispatcher position received discipline as a Call Taker based on a history of dispatching problems." (Id. at p. 15). Moreover, the whole purpose of creating the Call Taker classification was to recognize that people who had problems dispatching but were good at call taking could be retained at PCSD as Call Takers.

b. The October 21, 2007 911 call
Defendants received notice of Ms. Baker's ACRD charge on October 22, 2007.
Plaintiffs cite the "computer glitch" with the CAD [*101]  system as contributing to the confusion during the October 21, 2007 call. They point out that Ms. Rankin stated the priority for the October call should have been a level 2, which is the call priority level Ms. Baker says she originally selected. Plaintiffs state that, in a "top-down discipline directive..." Capt. Wilson overrode Lt. Sacco's discipline recommendation of a one-day suspension with pay and, instead, Capt. Wilson changed the action to a demotion failure and layoff recommendation. (Id. at p.17). Plaintiffs also points out that "[t]he range of 20-55 days to permanently remove Ms. Baker from employment she had held for three years is not the result of coincidence." (Baker Response, p. 20).
According to Plaintiffs, "PCSD used the improper LOR from the June 2007 call to bolster a demotion probation failure under progressive discipline." (ACRD Response, p. 17).

4. Analysis
"[A] plaintiff can prove pretext in two ways: (1) indirectly, by showing that the employer's proffered explanation is 'unworthy of credence' because it is internally inconsistent or otherwise not believable; or (2) directly, by showing that unlawful discrimination more likely motivated the employer." Chuang, 225 F.3d at 1127. In addition, an employee [*102]  can establish pretext by showing that an employer treated similarly situated employees more favorably. Vasquez v. Cnty. of Los Angeles, 349 F.3d 634, 641 (9th Cir. 2003). "[I]ndividuals are similarly situated when they have similar jobs and display similar conduct." Id.
"Although the mere existence of a prima facie case is insufficient to preclude summary judgment, a plaintiff 'need produce very little evidence of discriminatory motive to raise a genuine issue of fact' as to pretext." Strother v. So. Calif. Permanente Med. Group, 79 F.3d. 859, 870 (9th Cir. 1996) (quoting Warren v. City of Carlsbad, 58 F.3d 439, 443 (9th Cir. 1995)). Moreover, "'[t]o survive an employer's summary judgment motion, only a genuine factual issue with regard to discriminatory intent need be shown, a requirement that is almost always satisfied when the plaintiff's evidence direct or circumstantial consists of more than the [presumption established by the three-pronged prima facie case test].'" Id. (quoting Lam v. University of Hawaii, 40 F.3d 1551, 1559 (9th Cir. 1994)) (internal quotation omitted)(bracketed text in original).
"To establish retaliation, [a plaintiff] is required to show only that the filing of the EEOC complaint [i.e. protected activity] was one of the reasons for [the adverse employment action]..., and that but for filing the complaint...." the adverse action would not have occurred. Miller v. Fairchild Indus. Inc., 885 F.2d 498, 505 (9th Cir. 1989). As discussed below, on the instant record, the trier of fact, after [*103]  weighing the evidence and evaluating witness credibility could infer that Ms. Baker's request for accommodation and filing of the EEOC/ACRD charge triggered the adverse employment actions at issue. Capt. Wilson, Lt. Sacco and Ms. Joy were aware of Ms. Baker's request for reasonable accommodation in June 2007. PCSD was served with notice of the charge on October 22, 2007.
Under the merit system rules:
A disciplinary action is an action taken only for cause to correct inappropriate performance or other work-related behavior. The degree of disciplinary action shall relate to the gravity of the improper performance or conduct and the past performance and conduct of the employee. Progressive discipline, including counseling and other supervisory actions to improve conduct and performance, should be used whenever possible before taking formal action.
(DSOF, Att. 1, Exh. 1). Formal discipline includes a Letter of Reprimand; Suspension; Demotion; and Dismissal. (DSOF, Att. 1, P9B). Although the Court is mindful of the safety issues involved with calls concerning guns, the record reflects that Ms. Baker received formal discipline upon one documented mistake after her return to the Call Taker position. [*104]  On the instant record, given the lack of formal discipline despite Ms. Baker's alleged numerous, prior mistakes as a Dispatcher, a jury could infer that more was at play in this instance than the strictures of progressive discipline. Additionally, a jury could infer that Defendants' reasons for the adverse actions were pretextual given that the chain of command permitted Ms. Baker's demotion to Call Taker because she had previously performed well as a Call Taker and, consistent with that demotion decision, Ms. Baker's evaluations as a Call Taker since the February 2007 demotion were favorable until after Ms. Baker filed her formal request for accommodation. According to Mr. Balser, Super Notes reflected that Ms. Baker was doing well as a Call Taker from the time she demoted to the Call Taker position in February 2007 until after she received a mid-probation evaluation on August 17, 2007. (PSSAF, Att. 15, p.63). Further, Capt. Wilson felt that the June 2007 call, by itself, did not warrant an LOR. Although Defendants argue that Ms. Baker was subject to higher scrutiny because she was on demotion probation, Ms. Rankin did not recommend any disciplinary action in the original draft of [*105]  her memorandum to Ms. Joy about the June call. Nor did Ms. Rankin make an entry in Super Notes about the October 2007 call that ultimately led to Ms. Baker's layoff.
Plaintiffs also point to LORs issued to other employees at PCSD to argue that "there is a striking difference in severity of the conduct for which Ms. Baker received an LOR and for what other PCSD employees received..." LORs. (ACRD Response, pp. 15-16 see also PSSAF, PP119-120)). Further, "[u]nlike Ms. Baker's LOR, none of the LOR's [sic] produced by Defendants for those other employees with repetitive conduct issues related to performing job duties unrelated to those in their present position or from a different job classification." (Id.). Defendants counter that the employees at issue were not on demotion probation like Ms. Baker and that LORs can be issued for serious misconduct or repetitive improper performance. (Defendants' Objections to PSSAF, PP119-120). However, Defendants have pointed to no repeated misconduct on Ms. Baker's behalf as a Call Taker and Capt. Wilson did not believe the June call, by itself, was serious enough to merit an LOR. It is for the trier of fact to determine whether, under the instant circumstances, [*106]  the distinctions between Ms. Baker and the other employees have merit.
The record also reflects questions as to why Defendants decided to issue the LOR more than two months after the incident and two days before the interactive process meeting. Capt. Wilson testified that the LOR was issued in September because the matter "had fallen through the cracks." Ms. Joy stated that they had to wait for Ms. Baker's disciplinary history, a recommendation regarding the level of discipline, and there were delays because of summer vacation schedules. Plaintiffs argue it is because Defendants had concerns about the service dog at the Communications Center since Ms. Baker first mentioned it in 2004 and the request was now moving forward to the interactive process meeting.
Many of the same considerations apply to the disciplinary action for the October 2007 call. Defendants had not invoked formal discipline for Ms. Baker's repeated performance issues as a Dispatcher. Ms. Baker received positive evaluations as a Call Taker after her voluntary demotion until August 2007. Defendants used the questionable September 2007 LOR to support their decision to again invoke progressive discipline to, among other [*107]  things, fail Ms. Baker's demotion probation, resulting in her layoff after three years of employment with PCSD. Captain Wilson ultimately decided to forego the next step in progressive discipline which was suspension. Defendants initiated their final action soon after Ms. Baker filed her Charge of Discrimination. It may well be that the final two instances of alleged misconduct were indeed the "straw that broke the camel's back." However, the record contains facts from which a the trier of fact could conclude otherwise.
"An employee's claim of retaliatory discharge requires a determination of an employer's true motivation, an elusive factual question which is difficult to ascertain and generally unsuitable for summary disposition." Miller, 885 F.2d at 506. Here, whether Plaintiffs are required to or not, they have cited specific and substantial evidence from which a jury could infer that the reasons Defendants provided for their adverse actions directed at Ms. Baker were pretextual. Determining Defendants' true reasons for such employment actions requires evaluation of credibility of those involved in the decision. "'Credibility determinations, the weighing of the evidence, and the drawing of legitimate inferences [*108]  from the facts are jury functions, not those of a judge... ruling on a motion for summary judgment.'" Cornwell, 439 at 1034 (quoting Anderson, 477 U.S. at 255). Defendants' MSJ is denied on this issue.

F. Whether PCSD is a proper defendant
Defendants argue that the Pima County Sheriff's Department should be dismissed because in Arizona, a sheriff's department "is simply an administrative creation of the sheriff to allow him to carry out his statutory duties and is not a 'person' amenable to suit...." Sharp v. Maricopa Cnty. 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 24059, 2009 WL 647349, *2 (D.Ariz. Mar. 12, 2009) (section 1983 suit brought by prisoner alleging defendants' deliberate indifference to serious medical needs).
Plaintiffs argue that the case cited by Defendants is not an employment discrimination case and they point out that PCSD has previously sued and been sued in its own name. (ACRD Response, pp. 17-18 (citing Ortega Melendres v. Arpaio, 598 F.Supp.2d 1025, 1039 (D.Ariz. 2009)).
Under Fed.R.Civ.P. 17, the capacity of an entity other than an individual or corporation to sue or be sued is governed by the law of the state in which the district court is held. In Arizona, a government entity may be sued only if the legislature has given that entity power to be sued. Payne v. Arpaio, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 110553, 2009 WL 3756679, *4 (D.Ariz. Nov. 4, 2009)(involving section 1983 and ADA claims)(citations omitted). While the Arizona statutes have given the State's counties the power to be sued, no statute confers that [*109]  power on the sheriff's department. Id. Arizona case law on the issue is "sparse to non-existent" and the District of Arizona is divided on this issue. Id. However, the District Court for the District of Arizona has noted that there is a consensus that city police departments are non-jural entities that may not be sued in their own names. Id. Moreover, this Court agrees with the Honorable Neil V. Wake's reasoning in Payne that the lack of objection to prior actions brought by the sheriff's office dispels the precedential value of such cases, "and there is no doctrine of jural status by estoppel, at least without detrimental reliance in the case at hand." Id. In light of the Arizona legislature's failure to confer separate jural status on the sheriff's office, Defendants' Motion to dismiss the PCSD is granted on this issue.52 See Id.

IV. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, Plaintiffs have carried their burden of demonstrating that material issues of genuine fact exist regarding their claims of discrimination and retaliation. However, Defendants prevail in their argument that PCSD should be dismissed. Accordingly, IT IS ORDERED that:
(1) Defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment (Doc. 179) [*110]  is GRANTED IN PART to the extent that Defendant Pima County Sheriff's Department is DISMISSED and DENIED IN PART as to all other issues; and
(2) Plaintiffs' Joint Motion to Strike Defendants' Supplemental Statement of Facts (Doc. 212) is DENIED.
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the parties shall have until June 10, 2011 to lodge the Joint Proposed Final Pretrial Order. The content of the Joint Proposed Final Pretrial Order shall include, but not be limited to, that prescribed in the form of Joint Proposed Final Pretrial Order attached hereto. The Court will set a date for the pretrial conference after receipt of the Joint Proposed Final Pretrial Order.
DATED this 31st day of March, 2011.
/s/ Héctor C. Estrada
Héctor C. Estrada
United States Magistrate Judge

JOINT PROPOSED FINAL PRETRI ORDER
Following is the Joint Proposed Final Pretrial Order to be considered at the pretrial conference.

A. COUNSEL FOR THE PARTIES
Plaintiff(s):
Defendant(s):

B. STATEMENT OF JURISDICTION
Cite the statute(s) that gives the Court jurisdiction, and whether jurisdiction is disputed.
(E.g.: Jurisdiction in this case is based on diversity of citizenship under Title 28 U.S.C. § 1332. Jurisdiction is (not) disputed.)

C. NATURE OF ACTION
Provide [*111]  a concise statement of the type of case, the cause of the action, and the relief sought.
(E.g.: This is a products liability case wherein the plaintiff seeks damages for personal injuries sustained when he fell from the driver's seat of a forklift. The plaintiff contends that the forklift was defectively designed and manufactured by the defendant and that the defects were a producing cause of his injuries and damages.)

D. CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES
With respect to each count of the complaint, counterclaim or cross-claim, and to any defense, affirmative defense, or the rebuttal of a presumption where the burden of proof has shifted, the party having the burden of proof shall list the elements or standards that must be proved in order for the party to prevail on that claim or defense.
(E.g.: In order to prevail on this products liability case, the plaintiff must prove the following elements . . . )
(E.g.: In order to defeat this products liability claim based on the statute of repose, the defendant must prove the following elements . . . )

E. STIPULATIONS AND UNCONTESTED FACTS

F. CONTESTED ISSUES OF FACT AND LAW
State the ultimate issues of fact and law which must be decided at trial. State [*112]  only the issues of fact and law necessary and material for a verdict in this case. Each issue must be stated separately and specifically.

G. LISTS OF WITNESSES
Each party shall list the witnesses it intends to call at trial and shall indicate whether the witness is a fact witness or expert witness.

H. LIST OF EXHIBITS
Each party must submit with this proposed order a list of numbered exhibits, with a description of each containing sufficient information to identify the exhibit, and indicating whether an objection to its admission is anticipated. At the Pretrial Conference, the Court will set the deadline for the filing of objections to exhibits.

I. MOTIONS IN LIMINE
At the pretrial conference, the Court will set the deadline for the filing of motions in limine.

J. LIST OF ANY PENDING MOTIONS

K. PROBABLE LENGTH OF TRIAL

L. FOR A BENCH TRIAL
Proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law shall be served and filed on each party with this proposed order.

M. FOR A JURY TRIAL
Stipulated jury instructions shall be filed thirty (30) days before trial. Instructions which are not agreed upon, and a concise argument in support of the instruction, shall be filed and served upon each party thirty (30) days [*113]  before trial. Objections to the non-agreed upon instructions shall be filed and served upon each party within ten (10) days.

N. CERTIFICATION
The undersigned counsel for each of the parties in this action do hereby certify and acknowledge the following:
1. All discovery has been completed.
2. The identity of each witness has been disclosed to opposing counsel.
3. Each exhibit listed herein: (a) is in existence; (b) is numbered, and: (c) has been disclosed and shown to opposing counsel.

O. ADOPTION
The Court may adopt this Joint Proposed Pretrial Order as the Joint Final Pretrial Order.
DATED: O   


End of Document

