Barnhardt v. E. I. Assocs., Architects & Eng’rs
United States District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania
February 3, 2022, Decided; February 3, 2022, Filed
CIVIL ACTION NO. 1:19-cv-00873

Reporter
2022 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 20214 *
MARK S. BARNHARDT, Plaintiff, v. E. I. ASSOCIATES, ARCHITECTS AND ENGINEERS, A PROFESSIONAL CORPORATION, Defendant.
Subsequent History: Adopted by Barnhardt v. E.I. Assocs., 2022 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 244476 (M.D. Pa., July 5, 2022)
Counsel:  [*1] For Mark S. Barnhardt, Plaintiff: Derrek William Cummings, Larry A. Weisberg, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Weisberg Cummings, P.C., Harrisburg, PA; Steve Todd Mahan, Jr., LEAD ATTORNEY, Weisberg Cummings, PC, United Sta, Harrisburg, PA.
For E.I. Associates, Architects and Engineers, a Professional Corporation, Defendant: Tamara S. Grimm, O'Hagan Meyer, Philadelphia, PA.
Judges: JOSEPH F. SAPORITO, JR., United States Magistrate Judge. WILSON, J.
Opinion by: JOSEPH F. SAPORITO, JR.
Opinion



REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION
This civil action commenced on May 21, 2019, when the plaintiff, Mark S. Barnhardt, appearing through counsel, filed the complaint in this matter against his former employer, the defendant, E. I. Associates, Architects and Engineers ("E.I. Associates"). In his complaint, Barnhardt claims that his former employer discriminated against him on the basis of a disability by refusing his request for a reasonable accommodation and discharging him from employment, in violation of Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12111 et seq., and the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act ("PHRA"), 42 P.S. § 951 et seq. He further claims that this same conduct constituted retaliation in violation of the ADA and PHRA. (Doc. 1.) E.I. Associates answered the complaint. (Doc. 5.) After the completion of discovery, E.I. Associates filed the instant motion for summary [*2]  judgment. (Doc. 34.) The motion is fully briefed and ripe for decision. (Doc. 35; Doc. 36; Doc. 38; Doc. 39; Doc. 40; Doc. 41; Doc. 42.)

I. Legal Standard
Under Rule 56 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, summary judgment should be granted only if "there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). A fact is "material" only if it might affect the outcome of the case. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). A dispute of material fact is "genuine" only if the evidence "is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the non-moving party." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248. In deciding a summary judgment motion, all inferences "should be drawn in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, and where the non-moving party's evidence contradicts the movant's, then the non-movant's must be taken as true." Pastore v. Bell Tel. Co. of Pa., 24 F.3d 508, 512 (3d Cir. 1994).
The party seeking summary judgment "bears the initial responsibility of informing the district court of the basis for its motion," and demonstrating the absence of a genuine dispute of material fact. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). If the movant makes such a showing, the non-movant must set forth specific facts, supported by the record, demonstrating that "the evidence presents a sufficient disagreement to require submission to the jury." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 251-52.
In evaluating [*3]  a motion for summary judgment, the Court must first determine if the moving party has made a prima facie showing that it is entitled to summary judgment. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a); Celotex, 477 U.S. at 331. Only once that prima facie showing has been made does the burden shift to the nonmoving party to demonstrate the existence of a genuine dispute of material fact. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a); Celotex, 477 U.S. at 331.
Both parties may cite to "particular parts of materials in the record, including depositions, documents, electronically stored information, affidavits or declarations, stipulations (including those made for the purposes of the motion only), admissions, interrogatory answers or other materials." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(1)(A). "An affidavit or declaration used to support or oppose a motion must be made on personal knowledge, set out facts that would be admissible in evidence, and show that the affiant or declarant is competent to testify on the matters stated." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(4). "Although evidence may be considered in a form which is inadmissible at trial, the content of the evidence must be capable of admission at trial." Bender v. Norfolk S. Corp., 994 F. Supp. 2d 593, 599 (M.D. Pa. 2014); see also Pamintuan v. Nanticoke Mem'l Hosp., 192 F.3d 378, 387 n.13 (3d Cir. 1999) (noting that it is not proper, on summary judgment, to consider evidence that is not admissible at trial).

II. Undisputed Material Facts
The plaintiff, Mark Barnhardt, began [*4]  his employment with E.I. Associates as a designer in 1998. In 2006, Barnhardt became the senior vice president ("SVP") of the firm's Harrisburg office. As SVP, Barnhardt's job duties included overseeing the profit and loss of the office, bringing in new business, making sure that business was produced accurately, maintaining client relationships, and attending site meetings with clients. His architectural duties as SVP included producing conceptual designs of a project, and then other people would execute those designs using CAD or Revit software. Barnhardt himself had very limited experience with the AutoCAD software. Barnhardt continued as SVP through December 2016, and his responsibilities remained the same throughout the years since his promotion to the position in 2006. As SVP, Barnhardt reported directly to Gaetano "Guy" Cipriano, president of E.I. Associates.
Sometime around the year 2000, Barnhardt was diagnosed with kidney disease. Ultimately, he underwent a kidney transplant in August 2008. At all times relevant to this action, Barnhardt was a disabled individual, as defined by the ADA.
Throughout his career, Barnhardt made multiple requests for time off from work for medical [*5]  appointments. All of these requests were accommodated by E.I. Associates. This included a three-year period in which Barnhardt was required to attend regularly scheduled kidney dialysis appointments, which occurred three days per week.
In August 2008, Barnhardt requested an accommodation to undergo kidney transplant surgery. This request included time off for the procedure, as well as a part-time schedule post-surgery until he was able to return to work on a full-time basis. Cipriano and E.I. Associates accommodated these requests.
At his deposition, Cipriano testified that, sometime in 2011, Barnhardt asked Cipriano to stop asking him about his health because it was fine, and because it was insulting for Cipriano to keep asking him how he was feeling.
As of December 2016, everyone in the Harrisburg office reported to Barnhardt, including the business manager, Shelley Lazeration, and the construction administrator, Dan Bierzonski. Neither Lazeration nor Bierzonski had the authority to provide accommodations to Barnhardt, as they both reported directly to him.
In December 2016, E.I. Associates was involved in a two-week-long trial over a contract dispute with a local school district, preceded [*6]  by several months of trial preparation. Barnhardt was the main witness on behalf of E.I. Associates, providing three days of testimony and attending the trial daily, while attending to his other professional duties in the evening. Throughout the trial, Cipriano and Barnhardt spoke on a nearly daily basis about the trial and how it was progressing. During these calls, Barnhardt told Cipriano that he was fatigued from trial preparation, and that the trial proceedings had left him exhausted and not feeling well.1 During the trial, Barnhardt never requested any accommodations from Cipriano.
On Thursday, December 15, 2016, at 6:55 a.m., Barnhardt sent Lazeration an email, copying Cipriano, in which he stated:
I understand your concerns and I was also interested in having Daniele stay with EI Associates. I thought she had promise to evolve into a good fit for the position. EI Associates just hired a director of marketing for a $90,000 salary that has never made a sales call or been at a school board meeting, attended just one interview, and indicated that she does not want to do evening meetings. EI Associates is paying her more than some of the registered architects in the Harrisburg office. [*7]  Then there are those of us senior staff who haven't received a salary increase for several years and spend our days and evenings at meetings on behalf of EI Associates.2
I am providing notice that as of 1 January 2017 I am stepping down as Senior Vice President of EI Associates Harrisburg Office. I no longer have the commitment and trust of the Harrisburg employees that I once had. A change of leadership would be beneficial to the firm. I will continue employment with EIA as a staff architect providing the design and construction supervisions of current projects in the office.
I will no longer be responsible to sign/seal design documents or other official correspondence for the Harrisburg office. My electronic architectural seal and signature will be removed from the system and no longer placed on documents for the official business of the Harrisburg office.3 I will complete the year in my current position and assist in the transfer of the management and business development of the Harrisburg office to the person of your selection. I will complete the budget and business plan for 2017 for their use moving forward for the successful outcome of the firm.
This move is due to my personal health [*8]  and the increased stress of the recent events that have occurred at EI Associates. The time has come for changes to be made for the benefit of EI Associates and everyone involved. Thank you for your understanding and your professional friendship over the years.
Mark S. Barnhardt
(Doc. 35-9.)
Barnhardt's intention when writing the email was to express to Cipriano that there was a problem at the Harrisburg office. Barnhardt testified at his deposition that, in this email, he sought the accommodation of moving into another role, that of an ordinary staff architect at the firm.4
Cipriano provided a copy of the email to Peter Rees, the human resources director of EI Associates. At his deposition, Rees testified that he understood the email to be Barnhardt's resignation from the specific position of SVP of the Harrisburg office, not necessarily resignation from all employment at E.I. Associates.
Immediately after receiving Barnhardt's email, Cipriano tried to contact him to discuss the email and engage in a dialogue about what was going on. Cipriano called Barnhardt on his cellphone and his work phone, and he sent him an email to discuss the situation. Cipriano left a message on Barnhardt's cellphone, [*9]  and possibly also a message on his work phone.
That same day, December 15, 2016, Barnhardt emailed Robert Schuster, a project architect and vice president at E.I. Associates, advising Schuster that he would need to cover a job conference at Manheim because Barnhardt would not be finished with another meeting in time to make it there. His email to Schuster did not mention anything about not feeling well.
On December 16, 2016, Robert Fosdal, the controller of E.I. Associates, emailed Barnhardt and others to schedule a meeting on December 19, 2016, at 10:00 a.m. to discuss plans for the Harrisburg office in the new year. Attendees were to include Barnhardt, Fosdal, Rees, Lazeration, and Bierzonski. At deposition, Barnhardt testified that, after receiving Fosdal's email, he met with Lazeration and Bierzonski in his office and advised them that he couldn't meet that day because he was sick and needed to attend a medical appointment that day, and he told them they needed to change the meeting date.5
On December 19, 2016, at 9:23 a.m., Lazeration emailed Barnhardt to see if he was coming into the office for the meeting. At 10:02 a.m., Barnhardt responded by email that he had a doctor's appointment, [*10]  as well as scheduled vacation time, and would not be coming into the office. He advised Lazeration to "please proceed" with the meeting.6
Cipriano testified at his deposition that Lazeration called him that day, December 19, 2016, and informed him that Barnhardt's office had been cleaned out. He testified that Lazeration also sent him photographs depicting Barnhardt's office without photographs or diplomas on the walls, and with all of his personal effects removed. Barnhardt and Lazeration, however, testified that Barnhardt had actually removed items from the wall and from his office in preparation for it being painted in November, and he had not had an opportunity to put them back due to the trial. Lazeration also testified that she was involved in boxing up a "significant amount of material" from his office and having it delivered to his house after December 20, 2016.
On December 20, 2016, Cipriano wrote a letter to Barnhardt, which was hand-delivered to him at home by an employee of E.I. Associates. In the letter, Cipriano stated:
I received your e-mail dated Thursday, 15 December 2016 in which you resigned your position as Sr. Vice President of EI Associates, Architects [*11]  & Engineers, PC effective 31 December 2016. Your resignation is hereby accepted. The firm does not have a position as a Staff Architect available. Therefore your employment will end effective the date of your resignation, 31 December 2016.
I understand that you have already removed your personal effects from your office. If you believe that any of your personal effects remain in your office please arrange with Shelley to have them sent to you. Please return all company property which is in your possession.
(Doc. 35-13.) At his deposition, Cipriano testified that he had "had enough" after not hearing from Barnhardt during the intervening five days since his email, and Cipriano had decided that he was "not going to pursue a professional association with him anymore."7
At 3:39 p.m. on December 20, 2016, after receiving Cipriano's hand-delivered letter, Barnhardt called Cipriano on the phone. They spoke for approximately 31/2 minutes. Although the substance of their brief conversation is not entirely clear, Cipriano quickly terminated the phone call "because [he] had nothing else to say." At his own deposition, Barnhardt testified that Cipriano "wouldn't enter into a discussion with me. He [*12]  indicated [the] decision [was] made and hung up on me."
At the time when Barnhardt resigned from his position as SVP and his employment with E.I. Associates was terminated entirely, the parties dispute whether a funded alternative position existed at E.I. Associates, or whether Barnhardt was qualified for any such position that did exist. E.I. Associates had advertised an available vacancy for a "project architect/manager" from September 2016 through April 2017. The position was ultimately filled by another individual, Peter Ortiz, in April 2017.8 At his deposition, Cipriano testified that Barnhardt was not qualified to fill the position because he lacked the necessary AutoCAD software skills or experience. Cipriano also admitted, however, that Barnhardt met the qualifications described in the job posting that had been advertised.9

III. Discussion
In his six-count complaint, Barnhardt asserts three separate legal claims under the ADA, and three corresponding, parallel claims under the PHRA. See generally Salley v. Circuit City Stores, Inc., 160 F.3d 977, 979 n.1 (3d Cir. 1998) ("[A] claim under the PHRA is coextensive with a claim under the ADA."); Kelly v. Drexel Univ., 94 F.3d 102, 105 (3d Cir. 1996) (noting that "Pennsylvania courts . . . generally interpret the PHRA in accord with its federal counterparts"). [*13] 
First, Barnhardt claims that E.I. Associates discriminated against him on the basis of disability when it failed to provide him with a reasonable accommodation—specifically, transfer or reassignment to a staff architect position.10 Second, Barnhardt claims that E.I. Associates discriminated against him on the basis of disability when it terminated his employment altogether.11 Third, Barnhardt claims that E.I. Associates retaliated against him for exercising his statutorily protected right to request a reasonable accommodation when it terminated his employment after he requested transfer or reassignment to a staff architect position.12
We analyze the plaintiff's discrimination and retaliation claims under the familiar burden-shifting framework set forth in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). Fowler v. AT&T, Inc., 19 F.4th 292, 298 (3d Cir. 2021) (discrimination); Shaner v. Synthes, 204 F.3d 494, 500 (3d Cir. 2000) (retaliation). As summarized by the Supreme Court of the United States:
Under McDonnell Douglas, a plaintiff must first establish a prima face case of discrimination. The burden then shifts to the employer to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its employment action. If the employer meets this burden, the presumption of intentional discrimination disappears, but the plaintiff can still prove disparate treatment by, for [*14]  instance, offering evidence demonstrating that the employer's explanation is pretextual.
Raytheon Co. v. Hernandez, 540 U.S. 44, 49 n.3, 124 S. Ct. 513, 157 L. Ed. 2d 357 (2003) (citations omitted).
To establish a prima face case of discrimination under the ADA, a plaintiff must establish that: (1) he was disabled; (2) he was otherwise qualified for the position at issue, with or without reasonable accommodation; (3) he was subject to an adverse employment action; and (4) the adverse employment action was because of his disability. See Fowler, 19 F.4th at 299; Sulima v. Tobyhanna Army Depot, 602 F.3d 177, 185 (3d Cir. 2010). To establish a prima face case of retaliation under the ADA, a plaintiff must establish that: (1) he engaged in a protected activity, and the retaliator knew of the involvement; (2) adverse action was taken by the defendant either during or after the protected activity that was sufficient to deter a person of ordinary firmness from engaging in the protected activity; and (3) a causal connection between the protected activity and the adverse action. Derrick F. v. Red Lion Area Sch. Dist., 586 F. Supp. 2d 282, 300 (M.D. Pa. 2008); see also Shaner, 203 F.3d at 500.
The defendant here contends that it is entitled to summary judgment because, for various reasons, the plaintiff cannot establish a prima facie case of discrimination or retaliation. Because we find the existence of a genuine dispute of material fact with respect to each of the defendants' [*15]  arguments, we recommend that the motion be denied.

A. Adverse Employment Action
We first consider the defendant's argument that, with respect to his discriminatory discharge and retaliation claims, there was no adverse employment action because, rather than being terminated by E.I. Associates, Barnhardt voluntarily resigned his employment. "[I]t is well-settled that 'an employee's voluntary resignation does not constitute an adverse employment action . . . .'" Stoud v. Susquehanna Cty., 471 F. Supp. 3d 606, 618 (M.D. Pa. 2020) (quoting another source). But here, the non-moving plaintiff has pointed to sufficient evidence for us to conclude that a reasonable jury could find that, although Barnhardt resigned his position as SVP of the firm's Harrisburg office, he did not resign his employment with the firm altogether, expressly stating his intention to step back from a leadership role to an ordinary "staff architect" role. Thus, a genuine dispute of material fact remains, and summary judgment on this point is inappropriate.

B. Qualified With or Without Reasonable Accommodation
We next consider several arguments by the defendant with respect to the statement in Barnhardt's December 15 email that he would step back from SVP to serve in a "staff architect" [*16]  position, which the plaintiff has construed as a request for a reasonable accommodation.13
As the Third Circuit has explained,
An employer's obligation to provide a reasonable accommodation does not require the employer to create a new job. However, an employer may be required to transfer an employee to an existing position. In such a failure-to-transfer case, the plaintiff bears the burden of demonstrating: (1) that there was a vacant, funded position; (2) that the position was at or below the level of the plaintiff's former job; and (3) that the plaintiff was qualified to perform the essential duties of this job with reasonable accommodation.
Donahue v. Consolidated Rail Corp., 224 F.3d 226, 230 (3d Cir. 2000) (citations omitted).
The parties do not dispute that there is no position with the label of "staff architect" at E.I. Associates. The plaintiff contends, and testified at his deposition, that he used this term generically. There also appears to be no dispute that the only vacant, funded position available at the time of Barnhardt's resignation from the SVP position and the termination of his employment was that of a "project architect," and this position was clearly below the level of Barnhardt's former job as senior vice president in [*17]  charge of the Harrisburg office.
The defendant advances several grounds for summary judgment on this element of the plaintiff's prima facie case. First, the defendant argues that Barnhardt was not qualified to perform the job of "project architect" because he was not proficient in the use of AutoCAD software. Second, the defendant argues that Barnhardt's December 15 email resigning his role as SVP did not request a reasonable accommodation at all. Third, the defendant argues that, even if Barnhardt requested an accommodation for his disability, he thereafter failed to engage in good faith with his employer in the interactive process to determine what accommodation might be appropriate.

1. Technical Qualifications
The defendant contends that there is no such position as "staff architect" at E.I. Associates, but it acknowledges that, at the time of Barnhardt's resignation from the SVP position and his termination from the firm, E.I. Associates had been advertising a vacant position for such a "project architect" position. The defendant argues, however, that Barnhardt was not qualified to perform the position of "project architect" because he was unfamiliar with AutoCAD software, which is [*18]  apparently used routinely to produce architectural drawings.
Whether a particular function is essential is a factual determination that must be made on a case by case basis based upon a review of all relevant evidence. Deane v. Pocono Med. Ctr., 142 F.3d 138, 148 (3d Cir. 1998) (en banc). The Third Circuit has cautioned against usurping the role of the jury in the context of determining whether a given job function is "essential." Skerski v. Time Warner Cable Co., 257 F.3d 273, 279-83 (3d Cir. 2001).
"Whether a job duty is an 'essential function' turns on whether it is 'fundamental' to the employment position. The term 'essential function' does not include the 'marginal' functions of the position." Turner v. Hershey Chocolate U.S., 440 F.3d 604, 612 (3d Cir. 2006) (citation omitted) (quoting 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(1)). The statutory language of the ADA itself provides that, in assessing whether a given job function is essential, "consideration shall be given to the employer's judgment as to what functions of a job are essential, and if an employer has prepared a written description before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job, this description shall be considered evidence of the essential functions of the job." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). Implementing regulations promulgated by the EEOC provide a non-exhaustive list of evidentiary examples that may assist courts with identifying the "essential functions" of a job: [*19] 
(i) The employer's judgment as to which functions are essential;
(ii) Written job descriptions prepared before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job;
(iii) The amount of time spent on the job performing the function;
(iv) The consequences of not requiring the incumbent to perform the function;
(v) The terms of a collective bargaining agreement;
(vi) The work experience of past incumbents in the job; and/or
(vii) The current work experience of incumbents in similar jobs.
29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(3). "[N]one of the factors nor any of the evidentiary examples alone are necessarily dispositive." Skerski, 257 F.3d at 279.
The defendant has pointed to the deposition of Guy Cipriano, president of E.I. Associates, who testified that Barnhardt was not qualified to perform the job of "project architect" because he was not proficient in AutoCAD, and that all project architects in the office used AutoCAD. The plaintiff has responded by pointing to the job description for the "project architect" position, which was advertised from September 2016 through April 2017. That job advertisement did not identify the use of AutoCAD or any other computer-assisted design software as a job function, and Cipriano admitted at his deposition that Barnhardt [*20]  was qualified to perform the functions of the job as described in the advertisement.
Based on this relatively scant record on this particular issue, we conclude that a reasonable jury could find that Barnhardt was qualified to perform the duties of the position of a "project architect" at E.I. Associates, with or without reasonable accommodations. Thus, a genuine dispute of material fact remains, and summary judgment on this point is inappropriate.

2. Request for Accommodation
The defendant argues that Barnhardt's December 15 email did not constitute sufficient notice of a request for accommodation under the ADA because it did not make it clear that he wanted assistance for his disability.
"The law does not require any formal mechanism or 'magic words[]' to notify an employer . . . that the employee needs an accommodation." Conneen v. MBNA Am. Bank., N.A., 334 F.3d 318, 332 (3d Cir. 2003).
[W]hile the notice does not need to be in writing, be made by the employee, or formally invoke the magic words "reasonable accommodation," the notice nonetheless must make clear that the employee wants assistance for his or her disability. In other words, the employer must know of both the disability and the employee's desire for accommodations for that disability. [*21] 
Taylor v. Phoenixville Sch. Dist., 184 F.3d 296, 313 (3d Cir. 1999). The employer's knowledge that the employee has a disability, standing alone, is insufficient; the employer must also know that the employee desires an accommodation or assistance for his disability. See Jones v. United Parcel Serv., 214 F.3d 402, 408 (3d Cir. 2000).
What matters under the ADA are not formalisms about the manner of the request, but whether the employee or a representative for the employee provides the employer with enough information that, under the circumstances, the employer can be fairly said to know of both the disability and the desire for an accommodation.
Taylor, 184 F.3d at 313.
Here, Cipriano and E.I. Associates were very well aware of Barnhardt's medical condition and history, as well how the strenuous demands of his duties as SVP had impacted his health during a recent trial. Viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving plaintiff, the evidence shows that Barnhardt had repeatedly apprised Cipriano that the civil trial immediately preceding his December 15 email had left him feeling fatigued, exhausted, and not feeling well. While his December 15 email did not expressly state that he was requesting an accommodation for his disability, it clearly indicated Barnhardt's desire to relinquish his SVP duties and be transferred to a less strenuous [*22]  position as a "staff architect" effective January 1, 2017, and it clearly indicated that this desire was motivated, at least in part, by his "personal health and the increased stress of the recent events" at work.
Based on the evidence of record, viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving plaintiff, we find that a reasonable jury could conclude that E.I. Associates was provided with enough information that, under the circumstances, it could be fairly said to know of both the disability and the desire for an accommodation. Thus, a genuine dispute of material fact remains, and summary judgment on this point is inappropriate.

3. Interactive Process
Once the employer knows of an employee's disability and the employee's desire for an accommodation, the employer is obligated to engage in an "interactive process" with the employee to determine an appropriate accommodation for the disability. The defendant argues that the plaintiff failed to engage in this interactive process in good faith, thus forfeiting his failure-to-accommodate claim.
"The ADA itself does not refer to the 'interactive process.'" Shapiro v. Twp. of Lakewood, 292 F.3d 356, 359 (3d Cir. 2002).
Rather, the text of the ADA requires only that an employer make a reasonable accommodation [*23]  to the known physical or mental disability of a qualified person with a disability unless the employer can show that the accommodation can would impose an undue hardship on the employer. 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). However, applicable regulations provide that in order "[t]o determine the appropriate reasonable accommodation it may be necessary for the [employer] to initiate an informal, interactive process with the [employee] in need of accommodation. This process should identify the precise limitations resulting from the disability and the potential reasonable accommodations that could overcome those limitations." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3).
Conneen, 334 F.3d at 329 (alterations in original). "[B]oth parties have a duty to assist in the search for an appropriate reasonable accommodation and to act in good faith." Id. at 330 (quoting Mengine v. Runyon, 114 F.3d 415, 420 (3d Cir. 1997)).
When the interactive process works well, it furthers the purposes of . . . the ADA. The employers will not always know what kind of work the worker with the disability can do, and conversely, the worker may not be aware of the range of available employment opportunities, especially in a large company. Thus, the interactive process may often lead to the identification of a suitable position. If it turns out there is no job which the worker [*24]  (with or without accommodation) is capable of performing, then the company cannot be held liable for an ADA . . . violation.
Donahue, 224 F.3d at 233 (quoting Mengine, 114 F.3d at 420). As the Third Circuit has observed, sitting en banc: "[A]n employer who fails to engage in the interactive process runs a serious risk that it will erroneously overlook an opportunity to accommodate a statutorily disabled employee, and thereby violate the ADA." Deane, 142 F.3d at 149; see also Donahue, 224 F.3d at 233 n.8 (quoting Deane, 142 F.3d at 149).
Here, the defendant argues that, over the course of a five-day period, beginning with Barnhardt's December 15 email and ending with Cipriano's December 20 letter terminating his employment, E.I. Associates attempted to contact Barnhardt "numerous times" without success, and Barnhardt made no attempts to contact Cipriano. While an employee's failure to return his or her employer's repeated calls over an extended period of time may indeed constitute a failure to engage in the interactive process in good faith, see, e.g., Anisko v. Eldorado Dev. Corp., Case No. 2:16-cv-02020-JAD-GWF, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 157765, 2018 WL 4409354, at *2, *3 (D. Nev. Sept. 17, 2018) (finding the employee responsible for a breakdown in the interactive process where the employee failed to return any of her employer's weekly calls over a period of two months or more), the evidence [*25]  of record here, viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving plaintiff, shows that, following Barnhardt's December 15 email resigning his position as SVP effective January 1, 2017, and stating his intention to continue his employment thereafter as a "staff architect": (a) Cipriano made two calls to Barnhardt on Thursday, December 15, 2016—one on his cellphone and one on his work phone, leaving a single voicemail message—and he sent a single email to Barnhardt that same day; (b) Fosdal sent an email to Barnhardt and others on Friday, December 16, 2016, to schedule a meeting at the Harrisburg office for Monday, December 19, 2016; (c) Barnhardt spoke with two of the other attendees, Lazeration and Bierzonski, on Friday, December 16, 2016, and advised them that he would be unable to attend due to a previously scheduled medical appointment; and (d) immediately after receiving Cipriano's December 20 letter terminating his employment effective December 31, 2016, Barnhardt called Cipriano to speak with him, but Cipriano ended the phone call after 31/2 minutes. Based on this and the other evidence of record, a reasonable jury could find that Barnhardt participated in the interactive [*26]  process in good faith.14 Thus, a genuine dispute of material fact remains, and summary judgment on this point is inappropriate.

C. Undue Hardship
Finally, the defendant contends that transferring Barnhardt to a "staff architect" position would have imposed an undue hardship on E.I. Associates. The defendant argues that, because Barnhardt was not qualified to perform the existing job of "project architect," accommodation of his disability would have required the creation of a new job—a "staff architect" position that did not require the use of AutoCAD software—which would impose an undue hardship on E.I. Associates. See generally 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A) (providing that failure to provide reasonable accommodation is not actionable discrimination if the employer "can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business of [the employer]").
Of course, as we have previously noted, the ADA does not require an employer to create a new job to accommodate an employee's disability as a matter of law. See Turner, 440 F.3d at 614; Donahue, 224 F.3d at 230. But this particular argument by the defendant is based on a faulty premise. The plaintiff has expressly disclaimed any contention that E.I. Associates should have created [*27]  a new position to accommodate his disability. Rather, the plaintiff contends that his transfer to an existing, vacant "project architect" job would have been a reasonable accommodation. As we have previously articulated, there is a genuine dispute of material fact with respect to whether the use of AutoCAD or other computer-assisted design software is an essential function of that existing position, as well as a genuine dispute of material fact with respect to whether both parties engaged in the interactive process in good faith—a process designed to explore if some other accommodation might be feasible. The defendant's undue-burden argument is responsive to a claim that the plaintiff simply has not advanced in this case.
Thus, we find summary judgment on this point inappropriate.

IV. Recommendation
For the foregoing reasons, it is recommended that the defendant's motion for summary judgment (Doc. 34) be DENIED and this matter be marked down for trial before a jury.
Dated: February 3, 2022
/s/ Joseph F. Saporito, Jr.
JOSEPH F. SAPORITO, JR.
United States Magistrate Judge


End of Document

