Baumberger v. Equifax Inc.
United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division
July 18, 2023, Decided; July 18, 2023, Filed
CIVIL ACTION NO. 1:22-cv-818-MLB-CMS

Reporter
2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 123507 *
KURT BAUMBERGER, Plaintiff, v. EQUIFAX INC., Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Equifax Inc., Defendant: Bailey Green, James Joseph Swartz Jr, Seyfarth Shaw LLP, Atlanta, GA.
For Kurt Baumberger, Plaintiff: Eleanor Mixon Attwood, Marissa Torgerson, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Legare Attwood & Wolfe LLC, Decatur, GA.
Judges: Catherine M. Salinas, United States Magistrate Judge.
Opinion by: Catherine M. Salinas
Opinion



FINAL REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION
Plaintiff Kurt Baumberger ("Baumberger") brings claims in this case against Defendant Equifax Inc. ("Equifax") under Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended by the Americans with Disabilities Amendments Act of 2008 ("ADAAA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq. [Doc. 1, Compl.]. Baumberger's claims include a regarded-as-disabled violation of the ADA (Count One), actual discrimination in violation of the ADA (Count Two), a record-of-disability violation of the ADA (Count Three), failure to accommodate in violation of the ADA (Count Four), and retaliation in violation of the ADA (Count Five). [Id.]. In general, Baumberger claims in this lawsuit that he became ill with stage-three esophageal cancer and that his former employer, Equifax, failed to accommodate his disability and discriminated and retaliated against him by terminating his employment.
Equifax moves for summary judgment, arguing that Baumberger was responsible for managing the accommodation to which Equifax agreed and that [*2]  Baumberger's termination was not discriminatory or retaliatory but rather was part of a business decision to restructure. [Docs. 38, 38-1]. Baumberger has responded in opposition to the summary judgment motion, and Equifax has filed a reply. [Docs. 48, 50]. On June 23, 2023, I held oral argument on the motion for summary judgment and gave both parties an opportunity to file supplemental briefs. [Doc. 57, Minute Sheet]. The parties have now filed those supplemental briefs, [Docs. 58, 59], and the motion is ripe for resolution. For the reasons stated below, I will recommend that the motion for summary judgment be granted in part and denied in part and that Counts One and Three of the complaint be dismissed as duplicative.

I. SUMMARY JUDGMENT STANDARD
Summary judgment is authorized when "the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). The party seeking summary judgment bears the burden of demonstrating the absence of a genuine dispute as to any material fact. See Adickes v. S. H. Kress & Co., 398 U.S. 144, 157, 90 S. Ct. 1598, 26 L. Ed. 2d 142 (1970); Bingham, Ltd. v. United States, 724 F.2d 921, 924 (11th Cir. 1984). The movant carries this burden by showing the court that there is "an absence of evidence to support the nonmoving party's case." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 325, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). The [*3]  court must view the evidence and all factual inferences in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Adickes, 398 U.S. at 158-59.
Once the moving party has adequately supported its motion, the nonmoving party must come forward with specific facts that demonstrate the existence of a genuine issue for trial. Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 587, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986). The nonmoving party must "go beyond the pleadings" and present competent evidence designating "specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." Celotex, 477 U.S. at 324. Generally, "[t]he mere existence of a scintilla of evidence" supporting the nonmoving party's case is insufficient to defeat a motion for summary judgment. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 252, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986).
When considering motions for summary judgment, the court does not make decisions as to the merits of disputed facts. See Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249. Rather, the court only determines whether there are genuine issues of material fact to be tried. Applicable substantive law identifies those facts that are material and those that are not. Id. at 248. Disputed facts that do not resolve or affect the outcome of a suit will not properly preclude the entry of summary judgment. Id.

II. FACTS
Considering the foregoing summary judgment standard, I find the following facts for the purpose of resolving Equifax's pending motion for summary [*4]  judgment only.

A. Baumberger's Employment at Equifax
Baumberger began employment at Equifax in the position of Enterprise Innovation Officer on December 2, 2019. [Doc. 39, Def.'s Stmt. of Mat. Facts ("DSMF") ¶ 1; Doc. 48-1, Pl.'s Resp. to Def.'s Stmt. of Mat. Facts ("PRSMF") ¶ 1; Doc. 48-2, Pl.'s Stmt. of Mat. Facts ("PSMF") ¶ 13; Doc. 51, Def.'s Resp. to Pl.'s Stmt. of Mat. Facts ("DRSMF") ¶ 13]. Prasanna Dhore ("Dhore"), to whom Baumberger reported, served as the head of the Data & Analytics Center of Excellence ("D&A COE") for Equifax from 2012 to August 2021. [DSMF ¶ 4; PRSMF ¶ 4; PSMF ¶ 1; DRSMF ¶ 1].
Starting in 2018, Dhore began creating a distinct group within Equifax focused solely on "Innovation" so that Equifax could monetize the information technology systems. [PSMF ¶ 2; DRSMF ¶ 2]. In June 2018, while Dhore was creating the Innovation group, Dhore's D&A COE went through a restructuring that resulted in nearly 500 employees being shifted around Equifax. [PSMF ¶ 3; DRSMF ¶ 3]. Despite the large shift in personnel, Dhore continued developing the Innovation group in late 2018 through early 2019. [PSMF ¶ 4; DRSMF ¶ 4]. Dhore envisioned that this new group would focus on the "long [*5]  game" and would need three to five years to envision and produce products. [PSMF ¶ 5; DRSMF ¶ 5]. The new group would be supervised by an Enterprise Innovation Officer, who would report directly to Dhore. [PSMF ¶ 6; DRSMF ¶ 6].
In April 2019, Dhore named Chris Yasko ("Yasko") as the Interim Enterprise Innovation Officer. [PSMF ¶ 7; DRSMF ¶ 7]. Dhore then set out to fill the role permanently and contacted Judy Mar ("Mar"), the unit's HR business partner, to assist in creating a job description and post. [PSMF ¶ 8; DRSMF ¶ 8]. In July 2019, after receiving Baumberger's resume from an internal resource, Equifax reached out to Baumberger about his interest in the Enterprise Innovation Officer role. [PSMF ¶ 9; DRSMF ¶ 9; Doc. 32-1, Deposition of Kurt Baumberger "Baumberger Dep." at 119-20].1 Then, in August 2019, Equifax shifted employees out of the D&A COE. [PSMF ¶ 10; DRSMF ¶ 10]. Nevertheless, Dhore proceeded with seeking to fill the Enterprise Innovation Officer position and interviewed Baumberger. [PSMF ¶ 11; DRSMF ¶ 11]. After interviewing Baumberger and several other candidates, Equifax offered Baumberger the position in November 2019. [PSMF ¶ 12; DRSMF ¶ 12]. There was some deliberation [*6]  about bringing Baumberger on as a contractor, but Equifax ultimately extended an actual employment offer. [PSMF ¶ 14; DRSMF ¶ 14].
As mentioned previously, Baumberger began in the position on December 2, 2019. [DSMF ¶ 1; PRSMF ¶ 1; PSMF ¶ 13; DRSMF ¶ 13]. Baumberger's job description included, but was not limited to, the following duties:
[An] executive . . . responsible for defining and fostering a culture of innovation across the overall company that fosters and attracts successful innovators and entrepreneurs. . . . [A] [d]ata driven decision maker; able to bring order to chaos and drive large, highly complex initiatives. Coach and mentor, empowering teams to learn and perform at their highest potential while embracing diversity in thinking.
[Doc. 38-17, Job Description at 1; DSMF ¶ 2; PRSMF ¶ 2].
On Baumberger's first day, he received and signed the Employee Handbook, which informs employees how to request a reasonable accommodation or request a modification of an existing accommodation. [DSMF ¶ 3; PRSMF ¶ 3]. The Employee Handbook stated that such requests could be made orally or in writing to the employee's manager or Human Resources. [Doc. 32-3, Ex. A to Baumberger Dep. at 153]. [*7] 
Baumberger testified that his work schedule changed often while he worked for Equifax and that he worked from forty to sixty hours a week. [DSMF ¶ 5; PRSMF ¶ 5; Baumberger Dep. at 160-61]. While Baumberger reported to Dhore, Dhore did not manage Baumberger's time because Dhore's view was that Baumberger was a senior executive in charge of managing his own time. [DSMF ¶ 6; PRSMF ¶ 6].

B. Baumberger's Cancer Diagnosis, Treatment, and Surgery
After Baumberger started working for Equifax, he attended a conference and had trouble swallowing while there. [PSMF ¶ 15; DRSMF ¶ 15]. By February 2020, Baumberger learned that he had stage-three esophageal cancer. [PSMF ¶ 16; DRSMF ¶ 16]. That same month, Baumberger informed Dhore and Mar of his diagnosis. [DSMF ¶ 7; PRSMF ¶ 7; PSMF ¶¶ 17, 20; DRSMF ¶¶ 17, 20]. Baumberger testified that Dhore, in response to the news, expressed concern with how they would move forward if Baumberger was out of the office. [Baumberger Dep. at 183]. Dhore testified that his focus in response to learning of Baumberger's diagnosis was empathy and not what they were going to do about the Enterprise Innovation Officer role. [Doc. 33-1, Deposition of Prasanna Dhore "Dhore [*8]  Dep." at 71].
Between February and September 2020, Baumberger either had time off or worked remotely while undergoing treatment and surgery.2 [DSMF ¶ 8; PRSMF ¶ 8; Baumberger Dep. at 186-88, 228; Docs. 38-5-38-16]. In March 2020, Baumberger began treatment at Duke University, which included fifteen rounds of radiation, five courses of chemotherapy, and five rounds of immune therapy. [PSMF ¶ 21; DRSMF ¶ 21]. Baumberger worked remotely during the entire month-long course of treatment at Duke, scheduling his treatments to occur on days and times that would not interrupt the team's normal work hours. [PSMF ¶ 22; DRSMF ¶ 22]. Baumberger testified that he missed two radiation treatments because Dhore had scheduled meetings that conflicted with the treatments and, upon learning of the conflict, Dhore had communicated to Baumberger that it did not matter that Baumberger had a conflicting doctor's appointment. [Baumberger Dep. at 201].
On June 29, 2020, Baumberger underwent surgery. [DSMF ¶ 10; PRSMF ¶ 10; PSMF ¶ 25; DRSMF ¶ 25]. A few days later, while he was recovering in the hospital, Mar emailed Baumberger a form to request medical leave. [PSMF ¶ 26; DRSMF ¶ 26]. Mar also alerted Dhore to [*9]  Baumberger's need for medical leave. [PSMF ¶ 27; DRSMF ¶ 27]. Prior to and during his leave of absence, Baumberger delegated the Innovation work to his team and ensured that his team met sprint deliverables on the 15th and end of each month. [DSMF ¶ 12; PRSMF ¶ 12].
Baumberger's physicians predicted that Baumberger would return to work on a part-time basis on August 1, 2020. [DSMF ¶ 11; PRSMF ¶ 11; PSMF ¶ 28; DRSMF ¶ 28]. However, Baumberger suffered a health setback after surgery; he contracted pneumonia, which required him to return to the hospital and have feeding tubes reinserted. [DSMF ¶ 11; PRSMF ¶ 11; PSMF ¶ 29; DRSMF ¶ 29]. On July 31, 2020, Mar informed Dhore that Baumberger's return-to-work date would be delayed. [PSMF ¶ 30; DRSMF ¶ 30].

C. Baumberger's Return to Work and Accommodation Request
Baumberger was not able to return to work until September. [DSMF ¶ 11; PRSMF ¶ 11]. Although Baumberger wanted to return at 100% capacity (and informed Mar of the same), Baumberger's physicians disagreed and wanted Baumberger to return on a gradual basis. [Baumberger Dep. at 192; Doc. 38-16, Accommodation Request]. Before Baumberger's return on September 14, 2020, his physicians submitted [*10]  paperwork to Equifax regarding a request that he be allowed to return to work on a gradual basis, as a reasonable accommodation under the ADA. [PSMF ¶ 31; DRSMF ¶ 31]. There is evidence that Dhore asked Mar whether they had to abide by the doctor's recommendations. [Baumberger Dep. at 194]. Equifax granted his request and allowed him to return to work at a 50% schedule on September 14, 2020, increasing to a 75% schedule on October 5, 2020, and to a 100% schedule on November 2, 2020. [DSMF ¶ 13; PRSMF ¶ 13; PSMF ¶ 32; DRSMF ¶ 32]. After approving this accommodation, Mar told Baumberger: "Should your schedule or return plans change, please notify us right away so that we can reassess." [DSMF ¶ 14; PRSMF ¶ 14; Accommodation Request at 2]. Mar also requested that Baumberger provide his modified schedule to Dhore and his team so that they could plan meetings accordingly. [DSMF ¶ 15; PRSMF ¶ 15; Accommodation Request at 2].
Moreover, Baumberger points to evidence indicating that other than telling him to provide the modified schedule to Dhore and his team, Equifax did nothing else substantively to implement or monitor Baumberger's gradual return to work. [Dhore Dep. at 89-91; Baumberger Dep. [*11]  at 228-30]. According to Dhore, Baumberger was a senior executive who could monitor his own schedule and request assistance when needed. [Dhore Dep. at 90-91]. In Equifax's view, Baumberger was responsible for monitoring and managing his own time (as he had always done) and could set his team planning meetings around his reduced work schedule. [Doc. 38-16, Accommodation Request].
Baumberger testified that in early October 2020 (when he was supposed to be working at 50% capacity), he spoke with Dhore regarding the work that needed to be done in relation to his ADA accommodation and Dhore told him that "the work has got to get done." [DSMF ¶ 17; PRSMF ¶ 17; Baumberger Dep. at 229-33]. Baumberger further testified that he mentioned his accommodation to Dhore, and Dhore responded, "I understand, but the work has still got to get done." [Baumberger Dep. at 228]. He also testified that he told both Dhore and Mar that he was working more than a 50% schedule. [Id. at 229]. The parties dispute whether Dhore indicated to Baumberger that Baumberger had to do all the work alone, but Baumberger testified that Dhore "communicated to [him] that [Dhore] was frustrated about the progress that everyone [*12]  had made while [Baumberger] was out and that there were mistakes that had been made . . . and so he needed [Baumberger] to get in there and to correct those mistakes and get things back on track." [Id. at 232]. Baumberger further testified that Dhore "had directed [him] to take care of [the work] and to do it and not to delegate it." [Id. at 239]. According to Baumberger, he understood this to mean that he needed to do all the work himself. [Id.].
Baumberger testified that shortly after his conversation with Dhore, Mar reminded Baumberger that his work capacity would increase to 75% capacity, and Baumberger informed her that he was already working at 100% capacity. [DSMF ¶ 19; PRSMF ¶ 19; Baumberger Dep. at 230-32]. Baumberger testified that Mar's response was that "she's not surprised." [Baumberger Dep. at 229-30].
Baumberger testified that on one occasion in mid to late October (when he was supposed to be working at 75%), Dhore insisted that Baumberger cancel a physical therapist appointment in order to meet with Dhore later in the day. [DSMF ¶ 21; PRSMF ¶ 21; Baumberger Dep. at 236]. Baumberger testified that he tried to explain to Dhore that he needed to get in his cardio so that [*13]  he could get back to 100%, but that Dhore stated that he did not care and that the only time he had available to meet was at that time. [Baumberger Dep. at 236].
Baumberger testified that Dhore also inquired about the likelihood of cancer recurrence and the survivability rate. [Baumberger Dep. at 192]. Baumberger testified that he told Dhore that the recurrence rate was 75% within the first five years and that the death rate was 50%. [Id. at 192-93]. Baumberger testified that Dhore then made the comment that "we don't know what's going to happen," and he asked Baumberger whether he could count on him to do the things needed for 2021, including business planning. [Id. at 193]. Dhore denies asking Baumberger about the recurrence and survival rate of his cancer and does not remember conversing with Baumberger or Mar about those topics. [Dhore Dep. at 93-95]. Although Equifax disputes it, Baumberger testified that he told Mar that Dhore had asked him about his chance of survival, and that Mar responded that Baumberger should not have told Dhore. [Baumberger Dep. at 198-99; Mar Dep. at 177-78].
Baumberger testified that he was familiar with Equifax's Open Door Policy. [Baumberger Dep. at [*14]  237]. That policy "offers all employees the freedom to discuss any concerns they have related to the Company or their employment," starting with their manager and then escalating the concerns, if needed, to a higher-level manager and then to the Human Resources Business Partner. [Doc. 32-2, Ex. A to Baumberger Dep. at 149-50]. Notwithstanding his familiarity with the Open Door Policy, Baumberger testified that he did not feel, "based on what [he] had been told[,]" that his inability to comply with his reduced schedule during the accommodation period was an issue he should report to Dhore's boss, Mark Begor, who was Equifax's Chief Executive Officer. [Baumberger Dep. at 237-38].

D. Equifax's Decision to Restructure and to Eliminate Baumberger's Position
In early November 2020 (just as Baumberger was returning to a full-time schedule), Equifax decided to restructure the Data & Analytics ("D&A") department once again, moving important functions away from Dhore's D&A group and decreasing Dhore's budget and responsibilities. [DSMF ¶ 24; PRSMF ¶ 24]. Dhore testified that as a result of the decrease in his responsibilities, he determined that D&A no longer needed a high-level executive Enterprise [*15]  Innovation Officer position between him (as group leader) and the Innovation teams and therefore decided to eliminate the Enterprise Innovation Officer position. [Dhore Dep. at 99, 157]. According to Equifax witnesses, Equifax had contemplated eliminating Baumberger's position as early as October 2020 as part of the anticipated reorganization. [Dhore Dep. at 98-100; Mar Dep. at 204]. By November 16, 2020, Baumberger's name appeared on a list of five people to be eliminated, and he was the only person with a permanent position to be eliminated. [Mar Dep. at 192-96; Dhore Dep. at 95-98; Doc. 34-1 at 453].
It is undisputed that during the reorganization, two new Innovation positions were contemplated—VP of Innovation Strategy and VP of Innovation Execution. [DSMF ¶ 29; PRSMF ¶ 29; Dhore Dep. at 122-23]. Although these two proposed positions had similarities to the Enterprise Innovation Officer position and included many of Baumberger's duties and responsibilities, they were both lower-level positions than Baumberger's had been. [Dhore Dep. at 114-15, 140-43; Doc. 45-1, 30(b)(6) Deposition of Corporate Representative Nate Hilburger "Hilburger Dep." at 41-44; Deposition of John Fenstermaker [*16]  "Fenstermaker Dep." at 97]. Although the new positions had not been formally approved, Dhore interviewed candidates for one of the positions and even pitched a candidate to the CEO on November 27, 2020. [PSMF ¶ 46; DRSMF ¶ 46; Dhore Dep. at 106-09; Doc. 33-1, Ex. 43]. It is undisputed that Dhore failed to consider Baumberger for either of those contemplated positions and did not tell him about them. [PRSMF ¶ 28; Dhore Dep. at 141-42; Mar Dep. at 214-15].
Before Thanksgiving of 2020, Baumberger informed Dhore that he had a cancer scan scheduled for December 7, 2020, and that he would need the day off. [PSMF ¶ 47; DRSMF ¶ 47]. On December 3, 2020, just days before the scan, Dhore and Mar informed Baumberger that he was terminated because his position was being eliminated. [DSMF ¶ 26; PRSMF ¶ 26; PSMF ¶ 48; DRSMF ¶ 48]. During the termination meeting, Dhore and Mar emphasized to Baumberger that the termination was due to the global reorganization, and not his performance. [DSMF ¶ 27; PRSMF ¶ 27]. According to Baumberger, Dhore also told him that he should "focus on transition and getting [his] health back." [Doc. 47-1, Declaration of Kurt Baumberger "Baumberger Decl." ¶¶ 5-6]. Notes from [*17]  the termination meeting reflect that Baumberger was considered to be in good standing and could apply for other positions in the future. [Doc. 47-1 at 4]. At the time of Baumberger's termination, neither of the two new positions had been authorized and they were not discussed during the meeting. [DSMF ¶ 30; PRSMF ¶ 30].
The reorganization that affected the D&A group occurred in December 2020. [PSMF ¶ 52; DRSMF ¶ 52; Doc. 38-3, Declaration of Christopher Yasko "Yasko Decl." ¶ 15; Dhore Dep. at 99-103, 106]. As a result of the reorganization, only one permanent position—Baumberger's Enterprise Innovation Officer position—was eliminated; Dhore took on additional direct reports; and the positions held by Baumberger's former direct reports, John Fenstermaker and Chris Yasko, were retooled. [Yasko Decl. ¶¶ 17, 18; PSMF ¶ 55; DRSMF ¶ 55].
Eventually, Dhore took over significant aspects of the former Enterprise Innovation Officer role and became the Chief Data & Analytics & Innovation Officer, allowing funds to go towards other positions. [DSMF ¶ 28; PRSMF ¶ 28]. Only one of the two contemplated positions—the Innovation Strategy position (renamed VP of Data & Analytics Strategy)—was ultimately [*18]  approved and posted, but not until four months after Baumberger's termination. [DSMF ¶ 31; PRSMF ¶ 31]. Although Baumberger would have been qualified for the VP of Data & Analytics Strategy position, neither Dhore nor Mar mentioned it to Baumberger or contemplated moving him to it. [PSMF ¶ 45; DRSMF ¶ 45]. Baumberger never applied for it, and ultimately, the position was never filled. [Yasko Decl. ¶ 28; DSMF ¶ 32; PRSMF ¶ 32].

III. DISCUSSION
Equifax moves for summary judgment on all the claims in Baumberger's complaint. Below, I first will address Baumberger's failure-to-accommodate claim. I then will address Baumberger's discrimination claims based on the elimination of his position and the termination of his employment. I will conclude by addressing Baumberger's retaliation claim.

A. Failure to Accommodate
In Count Four of the complaint, Baumberger alleges that (1) he is a qualified individual with a disability, (2) he requested an accommodation for his disability in the form of a gradual return-to-work schedule, and (3) even though Equifax granted the accommodation, Equifax did not abide by it and required him to work his full duties. [Compl. ¶¶ 76-86]. For the reasons set forth below, [*19]  I will recommend that the district judge grant Equifax summary judgment on this claim.
The ADA was enacted "to provide a clear and comprehensive national mandate for the elimination of discrimination against individuals with disabilities" and "to provide clear, strong, consistent, enforceable standards addressing discrimination against individuals with disabilities." 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101(b)(1), (b)(2). Title I of the ADA, which covers disability discrimination in employment, prohibits covered employers from discriminating "against a qualified individual on the basis of disability in regard to job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). The ADA's prohibition on disability discrimination includes a failure to provide reasonable accommodation to the limitations of an individual with a disability. 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(a) ("the term 'discriminate against a qualified individual on the basis of disability' includes . . . not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who is an applicant or employee, unless such covered entity [*20]  can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business of such covered entity").
To survive summary judgment on a failure-to-accommodate claim, a plaintiff must produce sufficient evidence to permit a jury to find "(1) [he] was a qualified individual with a disability; (2) [he] made a specific request for a reasonable accommodation; and (3) [his] employer . . . failed to provide a reasonable accommodation, or engage in the requisite interactive process in order to identify a reasonable accommodation." D'Onofrio v. Costco Wholesale Corp., 964 F.3d 1014, 1021 (11th Cir. 2020) (citation omitted). Furthermore, "discrimination in the form of a failure to reasonably accommodate is actionable under the ADA only if that failure negatively impacts the employee's hiring, advancement, discharge, compensation, training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of his employment." Beasley v. O'Reilly Auto Parts, 69 F.4th 744, 754 (11th Cir. 2023) (citing 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a); Holly v. Clairson Indus., L.L.C., 492 F.3d 1247, 1263 n.17 (11th Cir. 2007)).3 As such, a plaintiff must present evidence of an adverse employment decision related to, or that resulted from, the defendant's failure to provide the requested accommodation. Beasley, 69 F.4th at 754.
Here, Equifax concedes that Baumberger can establish he was a qualified individual with a disability and that he made a specific request for a reasonable [*21]  accommodation. [Doc. 38-1 at 15]. Equifax argues, among other things, that even if Baumberger can present an issue of material fact as to whether there was a failure to accommodate, Baumberger cannot point to any evidence that a failure to accommodate resulted in an adverse employment action. [Id. at 15 n.3; Doc. 50 at 13, 14-15]. Having reviewed the evidence of record and the parties' respective arguments, I find that Baumberger has presented disputed issues of fact regarding whether Equifax failed to provide a reasonable accommodation, but I agree with Equifax that the failure-to-accommodate claim still is subject to summary judgment because there is no nexus between Equifax's failure to accommodate and an adverse employment action.
In my view, an employer that fails to implement or honor a reasonable accommodation that the employer has previously granted effectively fails to accommodate a disability. In this case, Baumberger has raised issues of fact concerning whether Equifax abided by the accommodation that it granted. In this regard, Equifax granted Baumberger's request to return to work at a 50% schedule on September 14, 2020, increasing to a 75% schedule on October 5, 2020, [*22]  and returning to a 100% schedule on November 2, 2020. Baumberger had the responsibility to monitor his schedule and time. Baumberger did so and noticed shortly after returning to work that he was having to work at 100% capacity to meet the demands of his workload.
Baumberger's deposition testimony indicates that Baumberger attempted to communicate with Dhore and Mar about the problem he was having with the agreed-upon schedule, but neither Dhore nor Mar responded in a manner that reflected a focus on accommodating Baumberger's disability. Baumberger testified that when he notified Dhore and Mar that he was working at a greater capacity than specified in the schedule, Dhore responded that the work had to get done and Mar responded that she was not surprised. Baumberger further testified that he specifically mentioned his accommodation to Dhore, and Dhore responded, "I understand, but the work has still got to get done." [Baumberger Dep. at 228]. Equifax argues that Dhore never told Baumberger that he could not or should not delegate some of the work that had to get done, but there is conflicting evidence concerning what Dhore communicated to Baumberger about delegating the work. According [*23]  to Baumberger's deposition testimony, Dhore "communicated to [him] that he was frustrated about the progress that everyone had made while [Baumberger] was out and that there were mistakes that had been made . . . and so he needed [Baumberger] to get in there and to correct those mistakes and get things back on track." [Baumberger Dep. at 232]. Baumberger also testified that Dhore "had directed [him] to take care of [the work] and to do it and not to delegate it." [Id. at 239]. Viewing this evidence in the light most favorable to Baumberger, a reasonable jury could conclude that Equifax failed to accommodate Baumberger's disability when it disregarded Baumberger's attempts to re-engage in the interactive process and seek Equifax's assistance in implementing his gradual return-to-work schedule as agreed.
Equifax next argues that even if Baumberger created a fact issue as to whether it failed to abide by the accommodation, Baumberger's failure-to-accommodate claim still fails because there is no evidence that he suffered any adverse employment action because of such failure to accommodate. Equifax points out that the only complained of adverse action in this case is Baumberger's termination [*24]  and that he makes no attempt to tie the termination to Equifax's failure to accommodate his need for a reduced schedule. See Holly, 492 F.3d at 1263 n.17 (noting that where a plaintiff raises a failure-to-accommodate claim involving a termination, a plaintiff must show that "but for [the] failure to accommodate his disability, he would not have been terminated"). I agree.
This is not a case, for example, where Equifax failed to accommodate Baumberger's disability and then terminated his employment based on an issue with his work performance related to his unaccommodated disability. To the contrary, it is undisputed that Baumberger performed his job well and that he was not terminated for any performance-related issue. [Doc. 48 at 1; PSMF ¶ 49; DRSMF ¶ 49; Baumberger Dep. at 251-52; Dhore Dep. at 161; Mar Dep. at 217].
In his supplemental brief, Baumberger argues that because he was a qualified individual with a disability, Equifax was obligated to give him the preferential treatment that an accommodation affords, and that Equifax impermissibly forced him to shift his full energy away from his health and recovery by not honoring his accommodation. [Doc. 58 at 3]. Baumberger further argues that work assignments can [*25]  be a condition of employment and that Equifax's failure to accommodate him negatively impacted a condition of his employment when Equifax required him to complete more work assignments than his accommodation allowed. [Id. at 5]. This argument, however, ignores the Eleventh Circuit's holding that the denial of an accommodation must "negatively impact[] the employee's hiring, advancement, discharge, compensation, training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of his employment." See Beasley, 69 F.4th at 754. Moreover, Baumberger cites no Eleventh Circuit authority holding that work assignments like those in this case are the type of adverse employment action necessary to support a failure-to-accommodate claim.
Given my reading of Beasley, I conclude that Baumberger has failed to meet the Eleventh Circuit's test on this element of his failure-to-accommodate claim. Accordingly, I am constrained to recommend that the district judge grant summary judgment in Equifax's favor on Count Four of the complaint.

B. Discrimination in Violation of the ADA
In Counts One through Three of the complaint, Baumberger alleges that he was an individual with a disability because (1) Equifax regarded him as a person with an impairment [*26]  as defined by the ADA (Count One), (2) he met the definition of an individual with a disability under the ADA and Equifax was aware of his disability (Count Two), and (3) he met the definition of an individual with a disability under the ADA and Equifax was aware of his history and record of disability (Count Three). [Compl. ¶¶ 43, 53, 54, 65, 66]. Baumberger further alleges in Counts One through Three that Equifax terminated him because Equifax regarded him as disabled (Count One), because he was actually disabled (Count Two), and/or because of his record of disability (Count Three). [Id. ¶¶ 47, 59, 71].
Equifax concedes that Baumberger had cancer, a condition that enables Baumberger to meet the definition of an individual with a disability under the ADA, and that Equifax was aware of his disability. During oral argument on the summary judgment motion, Baumberger acknowledged that he plead Counts One and Three in the alternative and that there is no need for him to continue to proceed with those claims, given Equifax's acknowledgement of his cancer. Accordingly, with Baumberger's agreement and no objection stated by Equifax, I will recommend that the district judge dismiss Counts One [*27]  and Three as duplicative.
As for the remaining discrimination claim in Count Two, Equifax argues that Baumberger has not produced sufficient evidence to establish either a prima facie case of discrimination or to demonstrate that the legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason proffered for his termination is a pretext for intentional discrimination. Baumberger disagrees and argues that there is ample evidence to support a prima facie case and pretext. [Doc. 48 at 13]. Baumberger alternatively argues that he has presented a convincing mosaic of discrimination. [Id. at 34-35]. Equifax has not directly addressed Baumberger's argument that he has presented a "convincing mosaic" of discrimination, and that phrase does not even appear anywhere in Equifax's briefs. See generally [Docs. 38-1, 50, 59]. For the reasons that follow, I find that Baumburger has provided a convincing mosaic of discrimination that is sufficient to survive summary judgment.
Where, as in the instant case, there is no direct evidence of discrimination, a circumstantial case of discrimination may be made using the burden-shifting framework set forth in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973), or by presenting "a convincing mosaic of circumstantial evidence that would [*28]  allow a jury to infer intentional discrimination" by the employer. See Smith v. Lockheed-Martin Corp., 644 F.3d 1321, 1328 (11th Cir. 2011). The Eleventh Circuit has explained that a plaintiff will survive summary judgment if he can present circumstantial evidence to create a triable issue concerning the employer's discriminatory intent. Smith, 644 F.3d at 1328. "A triable issue of fact exists if the record, viewed in a light most favorable to the plaintiff, presents a convincing mosaic of circumstantial evidence that would allow a jury to infer intentional discrimination by the decisionmaker." Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). The "convincing mosaic" allows the court to consider relevant evidence of discrimination that does not fall within the ambit of the traditional prima facie case under McDonnell Douglas, and to permit a plaintiff's claim to proceed where he is unable to meet one of the prima facie elements under McDonnell Douglas but nevertheless presents sufficient circumstantial evidence of discrimination. See Scott v. Soc. Involvement Missions Inc., No. 1:17-cv-4963-AT-CCB, 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 230784, 2020 WL 7237702, at *4 (N.D. Ga. Dec. 9, 2020). According to the Eleventh Circuit:
A "convincing mosaic" may be shown by evidence that demonstrates, among other things, (1) "suspicious timing, ambiguous statements . . . , and other bits and pieces from which an inference of discriminatory intent might be drawn," (2) systematically [*29]  better treatment of similarly situated employees, and (3) that the employer's justification is pretextual.
Lewis v. City of Union City, Ga., 934 F.3d 1169, 1185 (11th Cir. 2019) (citation omitted).
Here, Equifax offers as its legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason that it eliminated Baumberger's position and terminated his employment due to a business restructuring of the D&A group. [Doc. 38-1 at 1-2, 7-8, 10]. In response, Baumberger argues that evidence of the following facts could allow a jury to reasonably conclude that this stated reason is unworthy of belief and that Equifax acted with an unlawful animus: (1) the exploration of creating new positions (and the ultimate creation of a single new position) similar to Baumberger's Enterprise Innovation Officer position, and the failure of Equifax to discuss the possibility of him transitioning to one of those new positions; (2) the close temporal proximity between his request for an accommodation upon returning to work and the elimination of his position; (3) Dhore's comments indicating his animus towards Baumberger's disability and the leave and accommodation it necessitated; (4) Equifax's failure to accommodate Baumberger's request for a gradual return-to-work schedule; and (5) the elimination of the [*30]  Enterprise Innovation Officer position well before its anticipated term. [Doc. 48 at 35].

1. Proposed New Positions Similar to Enterprise Innovation Officer Role
Baumberger points to evidence that at the same time his position was being eliminated, two new positions were being contemplated that would have encompassed many of Baumberger's responsibilities. There is no dispute that one of these positions was never approved, that the other was not approved until after Baumberger was terminated, and that the approved position did not have management duties. [DSMF ¶ 31; PRSMF ¶ 31; Doc. 48 at 18; Doc. 58 at 6]. I consequently find that the potential creation of these positions was not necessarily inconsistent with Equifax's stated desire to eliminate the management-level Enterprise Innovation Officer position. However, a jury could find that Equifax's failure to even inform Baumberger that there might be new positions created during the reorganization that he was qualified for shows discriminatory intent. This is especially true given that in November 2020 (before Baumberger was terminated), Dhore was conducting interviews for one of the roles and had identified someone whom he considered [*31]  the best candidate. [Doc. 33-1 at 279-80]. Although the new positions would have meant a reduction in title and monetary compensation, there is evidence that there was some overlap in the salary grades for the Enterprise Innovation Officer position and the proposed Innovation Strategy position. [Doc. 58 at 6].4 A reasonable jury could agree with Baumberger that the salary disparity and title change were not so significant to make it reasonable for Equifax to withhold information about the positions from Baumberger, especially when one considers that the alternative was for Baumberger to be terminated. A reasonable jury could find that Dhore did not want Baumberger to remain a part of the Innovation group because of his disability, even in a lower-level position.5

2. Time Between Medical Leave and Termination
Baumberger next contends that the timing also raises an inference of discrimination: he returned from medical leave September 14, 2020, and by late October, there had been discussions about terminating his employment. By November 16, 2020, Baumberger's name appeared on a list of five people to be eliminated, and he was the only person with a permanent position to be eliminated. When [*32]  viewed in the light most favorable to Baumberger, the close temporal proximity between Baumberger's return from leave of absence (and requested accommodation) and the decision to eliminate his position could be probative as to Dhore's intent. A reasonable jury could deem the timing suspicious. Lewis, 934 F.3d at 1185 (stating that a "convincing mosaic" can be shown by evidence demonstrating suspicious timing).

3. Dhore's Comments
Dhore's comments also are circumstantial evidence supporting an inference of discrimination, including those comments that were not made close to the termination decision. See Jenkins v. Nell, 26 F.4th 1243, 1251 (11th Cir. 2022) (stating in the context of a "convincing mosaic" of race discrimination that decision-maker's "racially-biased comments can be circumstantial evidence to support an 'inference of discrimination' even if the comments were not made close to the termination decision and were too remote in time or too attenuated to constitute direct evidence of discrimination"). Here, Baumberger testified as to multiple comments Dhore made during the ten-month period between the time that Dhore learned of Baumberger's cancer diagnosis and the time that Dhore communicated the termination decision, including:
• When Dhore learned [*33]  about Baumberger's cancer diagnosis in February 2020, Dhore asked Baumberger "specifically how are we going to move forward if you're out of the office?" [Baumberger Dep. at 183].
• Upon Baumberger's return from leave in September 2020, Dhore asked him about the likelihood of recurrence and his survivability rate. [Id. at 192, 198-99].
• After Baumberger informed Dhore that the recurrence rate for esophageal cancer within the first five years was 75% and that the survivability rate was 50%, Dhore asked Baumberger whether he could count on Baumberger to do the things needed for 2021, including business planning, given that they "don't know what's going to happen." [Id. at 192-93].
• When Baumberger reminded Dhore about his gradual return-to-work accommodation, Dhore stated, "the work has still got to get done." [Id. at 228, 229].
• Around that same time, Dhore asked Mar whether "they had to abide by the doctor's recommendations." [Id. at 194].
• During the termination meeting, Dhore told him that he wanted him to "focus on transition and getting his health back." [Baumberger Decl. ¶¶ 5-6].
These statements, considered in conjunction with the entire record and viewed in the light most favorable [*34]  to Baumberger, could show that Dhore (the decision-maker) had serious concerns about how Baumberger's cancer diagnosis was impacting and could possibly continue to impact the work of the Innovation group. Some of the comments also reflect Dhore's animus towards accommodating Baumberger's disability.6 A reasonable jury could infer intentional discrimination based on these comments. See Jenkins, 26 F.4th at 1251; Smith, 644 F.3d at 1328.

4. Failure to Accommodate Baumberger's Request for a Gradual Return-to-Work Schedule
Finally, I agree with Baumberger that the manner in which Equifax handled his gradual return-to-work accommodation raises an inference of discrimination. While I have concluded that the failure-to-accommodate claim is not viable due to the absence of an adverse employment action resulting from the failure to accommodate, the evidence showed problems with how Equifax implemented Baumberger's ADA accommodation. As discussed above, there is evidence that Equifax did not abide by the accommodation it agreed to and that when Baumberger attempted to discuss the problem, Dhore simply responded that the work had to get done. There is evidence that Mar stated that she was not surprised Baumberger was working at a greater [*35]  capacity than specified in the schedule and that Dhore directed Baumberger to take care of the work and not to delegate it. A reasonable jury could infer from this evidence that Dhore had a bias against Baumberger because of his disability and the accommodation Baumberger requested.

5. Summary
In sum, Baumberger has presented enough evidence of a convincing mosaic of discrimination for his discrimination claim to go before a jury. This case aligns with those where district courts have denied summary judgment based on the convincing mosaic analysis or where the Eleventh Circuit has reversed the trial court's grant of summary judgment on this basis. See, e.g., Jenkins, 26 F.4th at 1250 (reversing trial court's grant of summary judgment where the plaintiff did not have comparator evidence to show discrimination under the McDonnell Douglas framework but the plaintiff had evidence of discriminatory comments by the decision-maker, evidence of differential treatment by the decision-maker of another employee who was not a strict comparator but had engaged in similar alleged misconduct as plaintiff, and evidence that other employees in plaintiff's protected category had left the department since the decision-maker at issue had taken [*36]  over); Scott v. Soc. Involvement Missions, Inc., No. 1:17-cv-4963-AT-CCB, 2020 WL 7685222, at *9 (N.D. Ga. Jan. 21, 2020) (denying summary judgment, based on the convincing mosaic theory, where an employer told a pregnant woman that she was going to be put on unpaid FMLA leave in part because the employer did not want "any liabilities" or "legal actions" and where the employer could have easily accommodated the plaintiff's pregnancy but chose not to do so); Lee v. Christian, 221 F. Supp. 3d 1370, 1378 (S.D. Ga. 2016) (denying summary judgment where the plaintiff did not have comparator evidence but did have evidence of several comments that reflected gender bias as well as evidence of secret meetings). Like these cases, the instant case has "bits and pieces" of evidence that could support an inference of discrimination. See Lewis, 934 F.3d at 1185. A reasonable jury could find that this evidence casts doubt on Equifax's explanation for eliminating Baumberger's position as a part of the reorganization and that the but-for cause for the elimination of the position was Dhore's belief that Baumberger would require additional accommodation in the future as a result of his disability. Accordingly, I will recommend that the district judge deny summary judgment as to Baumberger's discrimination claim in Count Two of the complaint.

C. Retaliatory Termination
In Count Five, Baumberger claims [*37]  that Equifax retaliated against him in violation of the ADA when it terminated his employment. [Compl. ¶¶ 87-97]. For the same reasons that I will recommend that summary judgment be denied as to Count Two, I likewise will recommend that summary judgment be denied as to Count Five.
The ADA's anti-retaliation provision states that "[n]o person shall discriminate against any individual because such individual has opposed any act or practice made unlawful by this chapter or because such individual made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this chapter." 42 U.S.C. § 12203(a). To prevail on his ADA retaliation claim, a plaintiff must establish each of the following elements of his prima facie case: (1) he engaged in a statutorily protected expression, (2) he suffered an adverse employment action, and (3) there was a causal link between the two. Frazier-White v. Gee, 818 F.3d 1249, 1258 (11th Cir. 2016).
The third element—a causal connection between the protected conduct and the adverse employment action—is construed broadly. "[A] plaintiff merely has to prove that the protected activity and the . . . [adverse] action are not completely unrelated." Higdon v. Jackson, 393 F.3d 1211, 1220 (11th Cir. 2004) (alterations in original) (citations omitted). [*38]  A plaintiff can show a genuine question of causation "by showing close temporal proximity between the statutorily protected activity and the adverse employment action." Thomas v. Cooper Lighting, Inc., 506 F.3d 1361, 1364 (11th Cir. 2007) (citation omitted). "But mere temporal proximity, without more, must be 'very close.'" Id. (quoting Clark County Sch. Dist. v. Breeden, 532 U.S. 268, 273, 121 S. Ct. 1508, 149 L. Ed. 2d 509 (2001)). Such close temporal proximity "is sufficient circumstantial evidence of a causal connection for purposes of a prima facie case." Schechter v. Georgia State Univ., 341 F. App'x 560, 562 (11th Cir. 2009) (citations omitted).
Once a plaintiff establishes a prima facie case, the employer "has an opportunity to articulate a legitimate, non-retaliatory reason for the challenged employment action." Brandon v. Lockheed Aeronautical Sys., 393 F. Supp. 2d 1341, 1358 (N.D. Ga. 2005) (citations omitted). The plaintiff retains the "ultimate burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the reason provided by the employer is a pretext for prohibited, retaliatory conduct." Id. (citation omitted).
The Eleventh Circuit does not appear to have considered in a published decision whether a plaintiff may rely on a convincing mosaic theory to establish circumstantial evidence of retaliation. See Bailey v. Metro Ambulance Servs., 992 F.3d 1265, 1273 n.1 (11th Cir. 2021) (per curiam) (noting that the Eleventh Circuit has not "considered in a precedential opinion whether a plaintiff can sustain her burden to establish a circumstantial case of retaliation [*39]  by relying on the 'convincing mosaic' theory" and declining to consider the issue because on appeal the plaintiff abandoned the convincing mosaic theory in support of his retaliation claim). In many unpublished opinions, however, the Eleventh Circuit has assumed that a plaintiff can. See id.; see also Calvert v. Doe, 648 F. App'x 925, 929 (11th Cir. 2016) (per curiam) (concluding that the plaintiff had established "'a convincing mosaic of circumstantial evidence' that would permit a jury to infer that the [employer] retaliated against him because of his previous lawsuit").
Here, Baumberger specifically argues that he has presented a convincing mosaic of retaliation. [Doc. 48 at 34-35]. Equifax has not refuted this argument or argued that the convincing mosaic theory does not or should not apply to Baumberger's retaliation claim. Instead, Equifax articulates the same reasons in defense against Baumberger's retaliation claim as it did against his discrimination claim—none of which addressed the convincing mosaic theory. In the context of the discrimination claim, I have found that Baumberger has presented a convincing mosaic of discrimination, which casts reasonable suspicion on Equifax's explanation for eliminating Baumberger's position [*40]  as a part of the restructuring and raises a genuine dispute as to discriminatory animus. This evidence similarly creates a genuine dispute of material fact as to retaliatory animus in the context of the retaliation claim, especially since Baumberger made his request for accommodation in September 2020 and the decision to eliminate his position was made only two months later in November 2020. Based on this temporal proximity evidence and the other evidence previously mentioned that supports the convincing mosaic theory, a jury should decide whether the but-for cause of the elimination of Baumberger's position during the reorganization was unlawful retaliation in response to Baumberger's accommodation request. Accordingly, I will recommend that summary judgment be denied as to the retaliation claim.

IV. CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, I RECOMMEND that Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment be GRANTED IN PART AND DENIED IN PART. Specifically, I RECOMMEND that summary judgment be GRANTED in Equifax's favor as to the failure-to-accommodate claim in Count Four and that it be DENIED as to the disability discrimination claim in Count Two and as to the retaliation claim in Count Five.
Further, [*41]  I RECOMMEND that the discrimination claims in Counts One and Three be DISMISSED AS DUPLICATIVE of Count Two.
As this is a Final Report and Recommendation, there is nothing further in this action pending before the undersigned. Accordingly, the Clerk is DIRECTED to terminate the reference of this matter to the undersigned.
SO RECOMMENDED this 18th day of July, 2023.
/s/ Catherine M. Salinas
Catherine M. Salinas
United States Magistrate Judge


End of Document

