Baylets-Holsinger v. Pa. State Univ.
United States District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania
May 2, 2018, Decided; May 2, 2018, Filed
Civil No. 4:18-CV-0060

Reporter
2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 76010 *
ANTOINETTE A. BAYLETS-HOLSINGER, Plaintiff v. THE PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY, Defendant
Subsequent History: Adopted by, Dismissed without prejudice by, Motion granted by, Remanded by Baylets-Holsinger v. Pa. State Univ., 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 95769 (M.D. Pa., June 7, 2018)
Magistrate's recommendation at Baylets-Holsinger v. Pa. State Univ., 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 187264 (M.D. Pa., Oct. 30, 2018)
Magistrate's recommendation at Baylets-Holsinger v. Pa. State Univ., 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 49381 (M.D. Pa., Mar. 22, 2019)
Magistrate's recommendation at Baylets-Holsinger v. Pa. State Univ., 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 101682 (M.D. Pa., June 17, 2019)
Summary judgment granted by Baylets-Holsinger v. Pa. State Univ., 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 121848 (M.D. Pa., July 10, 2020)
Counsel:  [*1] Antionette A. Baylets-Holsinger, Plaintiff, Pro se, Bellefonte, PA.
For The Pennsylvania State University, Defendant: James M. Horne, McQuaide Blasko, Inc., State College, PA; Philip K Miles, III, McQuaide Blasko Law Offices, State College, PA.
Judges: Martin C. Carlson, United States Magistrate Judge. Judge Brann.
Opinion by: Martin C. Carlson
Opinion



REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION

I. INTRODUCTION
Antoinette A. Baylets-Holsinger, proceeding pro se, initiated this civil action against her former employer, The Pennsylvania State University, by filing a complaint on January 9, 2018. (Doc. 1.) In that complaint, she alleges that Penn State subjected her to unlawful gender-based discrimination, retaliated and harassed her either because she was a whistle blower or because she had a disability, and perhaps interfered with her right to avail herself of her rights under the Family Medical Leave Act. It does not appear that Penn State fired the plaintiff after a lengthy tenure at the university; rather, the plaintiff seems to allege that the conditions of her employment became unbearable for a number of reasons, and eventually compelled her to resign involuntarily. She seeks an array of damages for the defendant's alleged treatment [*2]  of her.
Just what Penn State or its agents are alleged to have done is, however, unclear from the plaintiff's allegations, which are laid out over 18 pages of single-spaced, unnumbered paragraphs. The plaintiff's complaint suffers because it seems to assume a degree of knowledge by the Court regarding a number of relevant facts, as the complaint will frequently make sweeping charges of "discrimination" or "retaliation" or some other kind of mistreatment that is sometimes referred to simply as "the situation," (Compl. at 2), without ever providing relevant and specific factual allegations to explain just what it is the plaintiff is complaining about.
Much of the problems with the complaint also stem from its construction. By any measure the complaint fails to comport with basic pleading requirements prescribed by the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. Instead, the complaint presents as an unwieldy and somewhat inscrutable collection of grievances and legal conclusions unsupported by an intelligible, straightforward factual narrative explaining exactly why the plaintiff believes she is entitled to relief under any of the various legal theories pled.
On March 19, 2018, Penn State filed a [*3]  timely motion to dismiss the complaint pursuant to Rules 8, 10, and 12(b)(6) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. (Doc. 14.) The defendant further moves to have the complaint stricken pursuant to Rule 12(f). (Id.) On April 2, 2018, Penn State filed a brief in support of its motion in which it highlights the myriad defects in the plaintiff's pleading. (Doc. 15.) The plaintiff has neglected to respond to the motion in any fashion, and her deadline for responding has long since passed. For the reasons that follow, it will be recommended that the motion be granted, but that the plaintiff be permitted to file an amended complaint that addresses the pleading defects identified and discussed in this report.

II. BACKGROUND
At the outset, we emphasize the plaintiff's factual narrative offered in support of her complaint is especially difficult to follow. The complaint begins by reciting an array of federal civil rights statutes that the plaintiff claims the defendant violated, including Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000e et seq. ("Title VII"), the Americans With Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 12201 et seq., and the Family Medical Leave Act, 29 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq. The plaintiff describes her claims generally as regarding "Violations of Federal Laws on the basis of Discrimination, Harassment, Sexual Harassment, [*4]  and Retaliation." (Compl, ¶ 1.) This generality of description is due in large measure to the fact that the plaintiff assumes that much of the factual background relevant to her claims is somehow tacitly conveyed elsewhere in the complaint. Despite the opaque quality of many of the plaintiff's allegations, and the conclusory assertions that make up much of the pleading, will endeavor to summarize the complaint to the extent possible.
The plaintiff began working for Penn State in August of 1990. (Doc. 1-1, p. 1.) Although it is not clear what her position was at that time, from 2000 until 2016, the plaintiff worked in the Software Licensing Group within Information Technology Services (ITS). In or around 2009, the plaintiff was promoted to Senior Contract Administrator. (Id.)
It appears that the plaintiff's complaints regarding her treatment at work begin in 2013 or 2014, around the time there were new administrators or supervisors hired in her work area. (Id., p. 2.) The plaintiff does not explain what it was that these supervisors may have done in particular, but it seems that she found her work environment to be stressful, and increasingly so through 2015 and into 2016 when she claims she went [*5]  on medical leave for stress and anxiety in September of that year. (Id.) The plaintiff alleges that during this time she had a higher workload than a male colleague, and she began reporting complaints allegedly made by other female employees that a male co-worker had engaged in sexually harassing behavior. Around the same time, she claims she was passed over for a job outside of her work area that she had sought, and she claims she also reported improper spending by supervisors, including an overspend of $1 million. (Id., pp. 3-5.) It appears that the plaintiff believes she was retaliated for this report, and was placed on a performance improvement plan (PIP) and was also subjected to certain disciplinary process. (Id., pp. 4-5.)
Much of the complaint indicates that the plaintiff complained through University channels regarding what she viewed as mistreatment, but she contends that nothing was done in response. (Id., pp. 3-7.) She alleges that this period of time was particularly stressful, contributed to or caused a spike in her anxiety levels, and resulted in her going on medical leave on September 16, 2016. (Id., p. 8.) She then alleges that she availed herself of leave time, apparently under both the FMLA and Penn State's [*6]  own policies. (Id., pp. 8-11.) During much of this time the plaintiff was being paid while on leave, drawing on sick and vacation days that she had accumulated, as well as vacation days that her co-workers donated for her. (Id.)
It appears that while she was on leave, the plaintiff was endeavoring to secure a different placement at Penn State. (Id.) In response to her lobbying, she alleges that she was presented with three options, including returning to employment in a different, non-exempt position within ITS; returning to her prior job, pending resolution of her pending disciplinary process; or separating from Penn State under a severance agreement that would have also released all claims. (Id., pp. 9-10.) Finding none of these options suitable, on January 6, 2017, the plaintiff resigned from Penn State. She thereafter filed a grievance with the EEOC, and upon completion of that administrative process received a right-to-sue letter (Doc. 1-1, pp. 9-11; Doc. 1-2.) This litigation followed.

III. DISCUSSION
Penn State advances several arguments in favor of its motion to dismiss. Acknowledging that the plaintiff is pro se, and therefore to be afforded some leniency with respect to her pleading, Penn State nevertheless [*7]  argues that the complaint is so irregular, and so substantially fails to allege facts and claims that it prejudices Penn State's ability to understand and fairly respond to the allegations being made.
After arguing that the pleading fails to meet the most basic requirements prescribed by Rule 8 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, Penn State takes aim at the plaintiff's substantive claims, and argues that the complaint contains inadequate factual allegations that could support a claim under any theory, making dismissal appropriate pursuant to Rule 12(b)(6).
Lastly, Penn State argues that many of the allegations in the complaint are immaterial and improper, and should be stricken pursuant to Rule 12(f). For the reasons discussed below, we find that the complaint violates several basic rules governing pleadings in federal court, and otherwise fails to state a claim. Accordingly, it will be recommended that the complaint be dismissed, but with leave granted for the plaintiff to file an amended complaint to address the deficiencies identified.

A. The Complaint Violates Rule 8 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure
In general it is true that in federal court, pro se pleadings are to be "liberally construed," and "a pro se complaint, however inartfully pleaded, must be held to less stringent standards [*8]  than formal pleadings drafted by lawyers." Erickson v. Pardus, 551 U.S. 89, 94, 127 S. Ct. 2197, 167 L. Ed. 2d 1081 (2007) (quoting Estelle v. Gamble, 429 U.S. 97, 106, 97 S. Ct. 285, 50 L. Ed. 2d 251 (1976)). Rule 8, which governs the form of pleadings in federal court, also underscores one of the animating principles of the Federal Rules by providing that "[a]ll pleadings shall be so construed as to do substantial justice." Fed. R. Civ. P. 8(f). However, there are limits to the liberality that may be afforded to pro se complaints, and such pleadings still must be presented in a fashion that permits a defendant to understand the nature of the plaintiff's claims, and to respond to the allegations. Upon consideration, we find that the plaintiff's pleading fails to meet this minimal requirement, and thus should be dismissed, for several reasons.
Rule 8(a)(2) provides that a complaint must contain a "short and plain" statement of the claim showing that the plaintiff is entitled to relief. Rule 8 further provides that each allegation should be simple, concise and direct. Rule 10 prescribes additional requirements, providing that a plaintiff should state her claim in numbered paragraphs, with each limited as far as practicable to a single set of circumstances. In this case, the plaintiff's complaint simply fails to adhere to any of these requirements, even under a relaxed standard. The complaint, [*9]  which begins initially in numbered paragraph form, quickly devolves into a string of single-spaced paragraphs that go on and on, page after page, yet which amount to only a generalized collection of allegations that are long on legal conclusions but short on facts. Furthermore, many of the allegations seem to have no relation to the legal claims being asserted — most notably, a common theme running throughout the complaint that the plaintiff has been punished for whistle-blowing, yet the complaint contains no claim relating to such activity.
When a complaint is "illegible or incomprehensible," or when a complaint "is also largely unintelligible," Stephanatos v. Cohen, 236 F. App'x 785, 787 (3d Cir. 2007), an order dismissing a complaint under Rule 8 is appropriate. See, e.g., Mincy v. Klem, 303 F. App'x 106 (3d Cir. 2008); Rhett v. N.J. State Superior Court, 260 F. App'x 513 (3d Cir. 2008). Furthermore, dismissal under Rule 8 is proper when a complaint leaves "the defendants having to guess at what of the many things discuss constituted [a cause of action];" Binsack v. Lackawanna County Prison, 438 F. App'x 158 (3d Cir. 2011), or when the complaint is so "rambling and unclear" as to defy response. Tillio v. Spiess, 441 F. App'x 109, 110 (3d Cir. Aug. 4, 2011). Typically, dismissal of a complaint for failure to comply with Rule 8 is "'reserved for those cases in which the complaint is so confused, ambiguous, vague, or otherwise unintelligible that its true substance, if any, is well disguised.'" [*10]  Id. (quoting Simmons v. Abruzzo, 49 F.3d 83, 86 (2d Cir. 1995)). Furthermore, even where a court finds that a pro se complaint is "rambling and unclear" and otherwise fails to comport with the guidelines prescribed by Rule 8, "district courts generally must allow plaintiffs leave to amend deficient complaints prior to dismissal unless doing so would be futile." Id.; cf. Grayson v. Mayview State Hosp., 293 F.3d 103, 108 (3d Cir. 2002).
Turning to the plaintiff's complaint, we are constrained to find that it plainly violates Rule 8 in ways that are substantial and genuinely preclude the defendant from answering the allegations fairly. Unlike some complaints, which are actually illegible or are so profoundly difficult to read or interpret, it appears that the plaintiff has endeavored to craft a narrative of her many grievances against her former employer in a manner that makes sense to her, but in so doing assumes facts that are nowhere alleged, and presents a series of allegations that jump from conclusion to conclusion without having any apparent factual predicate. The complaint also frequently assumes an understanding on the part of the reader that is, in the end, unwarranted and ultimately defies any meaningful response. After initially making an attempt to present the allegations in reasonable format, the [*11]  plaintiff quickly abandons any semblance of order and launches into a 13-page single-spaced "timeline" that provides all manner of allegations that span times and events that do not appear to be a basis for the plaintiff's actual claims alleged, and are riddled with unnecessary details that often are unclear.
Aside from the unwieldy format in which the allegations are presented in "timeline" format, the complaint is filled with numerous matters that appear to be irrelevant except insofar as they give the impression that the employment relationship became increasingly contentious and difficult for the plaintiff to endure. For example, one animating theme that threads through the complaint's timeline is that the plaintiff believes she was retaliated against for engaging in whistle-blowing activity regarding misuse of funds on a contract. (Doc. 1-1, p. 5.) Yet, upon review of the entire complaint, it is clear that the plaintiff has made no claim at all regarding whistle-blowing activity. She also includes, in painstaking and often confusing fashion, recitations regarding the dates and contents of emails and phone conversations with numerous parties, and gets into granular detail regarding [*12]  whether or not a meeting was listed on a supervisor's calendar, whether her name happened to be visible on a computer, and whether the rooms in her office building have glass doors and walls. (Id., pp. 6-7.) It is impossible to understand what relevance these allegations have to the plaintiff's actual claims, which seem to relate to allegations of disability discrimination and retaliation, and gender discrimination.
We submit that the defects in the format of the plaintiff's complaint, including its failure to adhere to basic requirements that the allegations be set forth in a short and plain style, in paragraph format that enables a meaningful answer or other response, and the inclusion of factual allegations that have no apparent relevance to the legal claims actually asserted, warrants dismissal of the complaint without prejudice to the plaintiff being permitted to file an amended complaint in a concise and direct fashion in accordance with Rules 8 and 10 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.

B. The Complaint Fails to State a Claim

1. Rule 12(b)(6) — The Legal Standard
In addition to identifying the basic defects in the form of the plaintiff's complaint, Penn States has also moved to dismiss the complaint pursuant to Rule 12(b)(6) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, asserting that the plaintiff has [*13]  failed to allege facts that state a claim upon which relief may be granted. With respect to this benchmark standard for legal sufficiency of a complaint, the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit has aptly noted the evolving standards governing pleading practice in federal court, stating that:
Standards of pleading have been in the forefront of jurisprudence in recent years. Beginning with the Supreme Court's opinion in Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 127 S. Ct. 1955, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929 (2007) continuing with our opinion in Phillips [v. County of Allegheny, 515 F.3d 224, 230 (3d Cir. 2008)]and culminating recently with the Supreme Court's decision in Ashcroft v. Iqbal 556 U.S. 662, 129 S. Ct. 1937, 173 L. Ed. 2d 868 (2009) pleading standards have seemingly shifted from simple notice pleading to a more heightened form of pleading, requiring a plaintiff to plead more than the possibility of relief to survive a motion to dismiss.
Fowler v. UPMC Shadyside, 578 F.3d 203, 209-10 (3d Cir. 2009).
In considering whether a complaint fails to state a claim upon which relief may be granted, the Court must accept as true all allegations in the complaint and all reasonable inferences that can be drawn therefrom are to be construed in the light most favorable to the plaintiff. Jordan v. Fox Rothschild, O'Brien & Frankel, Inc., 20 F.3d 1250, 1261 (3d Cir. 1994). However, a court "need not credit a complaint's bald assertions or legal conclusions when deciding a motion to dismiss." Morse v. Lower Merion Sch. Dist., 132 F.3d 902, 906 (3d Cir. 1997). Additionally a court need not "assume that [*14]  a ... plaintiff can prove facts that the ... plaintiff has not alleged." Associated Gen. Contractors of Cal. v. California State Council of Carpenters, 459 U.S. 519, 526, 103 S. Ct. 897, 74 L. Ed. 2d 723 (1983). As the Supreme Court held in Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 127 S. Ct. 1955, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929 (2007), in order to state a valid cause of action a plaintiff must provide some factual grounds for relief which "requires more than labels and conclusions, and a formulaic recitation of the elements of a cause of actions will not do." Id. at 555. "Factual allegations must be enough to raise a right to relief above the speculative level." Id.
In keeping with the principles of Twombly, the Supreme Court has underscored that a trial court must assess whether a complaint states facts upon which relief can be granted when ruling on a motion to dismiss. In Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 129 S. Ct. 1937, 173 L. Ed. 2d 868 (2009), the Supreme Court held that, when considering a motion to dismiss, a court should "begin by identifying pleadings that, because they are no more than conclusions, are not entitled to the assumption of truth." Id. at 679. According to the Supreme Court, "[t]hreadbare recitals of the elements of a cause of action, supported by mere conclusory statements, do not suffice." Id. at 678. Rather, in conducting a review of the adequacy of complaint, the Supreme Court has advised trial courts that they must:
[B]egin by identifying pleadings that because they are no more than conclusions [*15]  are not entitled to the assumption of truth. While legal conclusions can provide the framework of a complaint, they must be supported by factual allegations. When there are well-pleaded factual allegations, a court should assume their veracity and then determine whether they plausibly give rise to an entitlement to relief.
Id. at 679.
Thus, following Twombly and Iqbal, a well-pleaded complaint must contain more than mere legal labels and conclusions. Rather, a complaint must recite factual allegations sufficient to raise the plaintiff's claimed right to relief beyond the level of mere speculation. As the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit has stated:
[A]fter Iqbal, when presented with a motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim, district courts should conduct a two-part analysis. First, the factual and legal elements of a claim should be separated. The District Court must accept all of the complaint's well-pleaded facts as true, but may disregard any legal conclusions. Second, a District Court must then determine whether the facts alleged in the complaint are sufficient to show that the plaintiff has a 'plausible claim for relief.' In other words, a complaint must do more [*16]  than allege the plaintiff's entitlement to relief. A complaint has to 'show' such an entitlement with its facts.
Fowler, 578 F.3d at 210-11.
In practice, consideration of the legal sufficiency of a complaint entails a three-step analysis: "First, the court must 'tak[e] note of the elements a plaintiff must plead to state a claim.' Iqbal, 556 U.S. at 675. Second, the court should identify allegations that, 'because they are no more than conclusions, are not entitled to the assumption of truth.' Id. at 679. Finally, 'where there are well-pleaded factual allegations, a court should assume their veracity and then determine whether they plausibly give rise to an entitlement for relief.' Id." Santiago v. Warminster Twp., 629 F.3d 121, 130 (3d Cir. 2010).

2. The Plaintiff Fails to State a Claim Under any of the Three Federal Laws Identified in the Complaint
Although the plaintiff's complaint does not adequately explain the factual basis for her claims, she does identify at the outset of the complaint that she is alleging
Violations of Federal Laws on the basis of Discrimination, Harassment, Sexual Harassment and Retaliation, as per EECO Number: 915.002 Vicarious Employer Liability for Unlawful Harassment by Supervisors, Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), Title I of the Americans with Disabilities [*17]  Act of 1990 (ADA) for failure to provide a reasonable accommodation; AND the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA) for failure to adhere to 'restoration of same or equivalent job' requirements.
(Doc. 1, ¶ 1.) We address the legal requirements for each claim, and briefly explain why the plaintiff's complaint fails to allege facts to support a claim under any of the statutes identified.

a. FMLA Interference
It is not clear whether the plaintiff is claiming that Penn State interfered with her right to take FMLA leave, or if she is claiming that Penn State discriminated or retaliated against her for availing herself of rights under the statute. To make a claim for interference under the FMLA, a plaintiff must establish:
(1) he or she was an eligible employee under the FMLA; (2) the defendant was an employer subject to the FMLA's requirements; (3) the plaintiff was entitled to FMLA leave; (4) the plaintiff gave notice to the defendant of his or her intention to take FMLA leave; and (5) the plaintiff was denied benefits to which he or she was entitled under the FMLA.
Ross v. Gilhuly, 755 F.3d 185, 191-92 (3d Cir. 2014) (quoting Johnson v. Cmty. Coll. of Allegheny Cnty., 566 F. Supp. 2d 405, 446 (W.D. Pa. 2008)). A plaintiff must thus show not only that she was entitled to FMLA leave, but that the employer denied her those benefits. [*18]  Sommer v. The Vanguard Grp., 461 F.3d 397, 399 (3d Cir. 2006). The employee does not need to show that she was treated differently from other employees, and the employer cannot justify the denial of FMLA benefits by establishing a legitimate business purpose for its decision. Id. at 399. Moreover, "[b]ecause the FMLA [interference claim] is not about discrimination, a McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting analysis is not required." Id.
The Third Circuit Court of Appeals has emphasized that interference claims are not coterminous with claims of FMLA retaliation, and indeed has explained that "[a]n interference claim is not about discrimination[;] it is only about whether the employer provided the employee with the entitlements guaranteed by the FMLA." Ross, 755 F.3d at 192 (quoting Callison v. City of Phila., 430 F.3d 117, 120 (3d Cir. 2005)) (alteration in Ross). In plain terms, "for an interference claim to be viable, the plaintiff must show that FMLA benefits were actually withheld." Ross, 755 F.3d at 192.
In this case, we struggle to perceive exactly what FMLA benefits the plaintiff claims the defendants withheld from her. It appears that the plaintiff sought to take time away from work long before she resigned, and that contends that she took this time — as she saw fit — in order to address the stress and anxiety that she experienced from work. (Doc. 1-1, [*19]  p. 8.) There seems to be no real dispute in the facts alleged that the plaintiff took the full amount of leave she claims she was due and needed to take — 12 weeks — and which she claims Penn State permitted her to take. (Doc. 1-1, pp. 8-11.) Furthermore, during nearly all of this time, the plaintiff continued to be paid because she was in a pay status due to her accumulated vacation and sick time, or vacation time that colleagues donated to her. (Id.)
She further alleges that she was permitted the opportunity to return to her pre-leave position with a successful completion of her pending disciplinary proceedings, and was also offered the option of moving to a different job position or accepting a severance offer that was tendered. (Doc. 1-1, pp. 9-11.) According to the complaint, the plaintiff elected to reject the work options that were offered to her, resigned her employment with Penn State, and accepted an offer with another employer. (Doc. 1-1, p. 11.) Because the plaintiff has not identified any FMLA benefits that the defendant denied her, and because it appears that the plaintiff encountered no obstacles in taking the leave she claims she needed, we agree with the defendants [*20]  that the plaintiff has not articulated an FMLA interference claim, and any interference claim should be dismissed.

b. FMLA Retaliation
The FMLA expressly prohibits employers from discriminating or retaliating against employees who have opposed any practice made unlawful under the FMLA, 29 U.S.C. § 2615(a)(2), and implementing regulations make clear that an employer "is prohibited from discriminating against employees or prospective employees who have used FMLA leave. For example . . . employers cannot use the taking of FMLA leave as a negative factor in employment actions such as hiring, promotions or disciplinary actions . . . ." 29 C.F.R. § 825.220(c).
In the typical FMLA retaliation claim, an employee alleges that after taking FMLA-qualifying leave, she was subjected to adverse employment action, including termination other retaliatory action, because she took time away from work for FMLA-qualifying reasons. See, e.g., Freeman v. Phila. Hous. Auth., No. 12-1422, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 100774, at *31 (E.D. Pa. July 18, 2018) (describing retaliation claims as those "where an employee requested or took FMLA leave, remained at or returned to work, and then was subject to some type of adverse employment action such as termination or demotion.").
To prevail on her FMLA retaliation claim, the plaintiff has the burden of establishing a prima [*21]  facie case by showing that she invoked a right to FMLA-qualifying leave, subsequently suffered an adverse employment decision, and demonstrate that the adverse action was causally related to her invocation of her FMLA rights. Ross, 755 F.3d at 193 (citing Lichtenstein v. Univ. of Pittsburgh Med. Ctr., 691 F.3d 294, 302 (3d Cir. 2012)). If the plaintiff establishes a prima facie case, the burden of production shifts to the employer to show a legitimate, non-retaliatory reason for the allegedly adverse employment decision. Lichtenstein, 691 F.3d at 302. If the employer satisfies this "minimal burden," id., the plaintiff has the burden of establishing evidence sufficient to cast doubt on the employer's legitimate, non-retaliatory reason. Id.
As noted above, the complaint alleges that the plaintiff availed herself of FMLA leave, and that she was offered the opportunity to return to her employment at the end of the leave period. She was also, alternatively, offered the option of taking a different job, or of accepting a severance offer. Although the complaint suggests that the plaintiff found none of these options attractive, the complaint is far less clear as to how Penn State discriminated or retaliated against the plaintiff for taking the FMLA leave that was available to her, particularly when the plaintiff herself [*22]  acknowledges that Penn State presented her with a menu of options for returning. Although the plaintiff seems to be asserting that she found some of her pre-leave treatment at work to be retaliatory in nature, these instances all preceded her use of FMLA leave, and thus the complaint fails to allege facts that would support a claim for FMLA retaliation.
c. The ADA
The purpose of the ADA is to "prevent employment discrimination of qualified individuals on account of their disability." Koller v. Riley Riper Hollin & Colagreco, 850 F. Supp. 2d 502, 512 (E.D. Pa. 2012) (citing 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a)). The Act requires employers to make "reasonable accommodations to the known physical and mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability, unless the employer demonstrates that such accommodations would impose an undue hardship in the operation of their business." Id. (quoting Fleck v. WILMAC, Corp., No. 10-5562, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 54039, at *10 (E.D. Pa. May 19, 2011)).
In order to make out a prima facie claim for workplace discrimination under the ADA, a plaintiff must demonstrate that she is (1) disabled within the meaning of the ADA, (2) is otherwise qualified to perform the essential functions of the job, with or without reasonable accommodations by the employer, and (3) has suffered an adverse employment decision as a result of the discrimination. Sulima v. Tobyhanna Army Depot, 602 F.3d 177, 185 (3d Cir. 2010); see also [*23]  Stadtmiller v. UPMC Health Plan, Inc., 491 F. App'x 334, 336 (3d Cir. 2012); Gaul v. Lucent Techs., 134 F.3d 576, 580 (3d Cir. 1998).
If the plaintiff makes a prima facie showing under this three-part standard, the burden shifts to the employer to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its adverse employment action. Id. If a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason is given, then the plaintiff must present evidence to demonstrate that the defendant's reasons were pretext for its unlawful action. Id. The plaintiff may meet this burden by identifying evidence that allows a factfinder either to disbelieve the employer's articulated legitimate justification, or to conclude that an invidious discriminatory reason was more likely than not a "but for" cause of the employment action. Fuentes v. Perskie, 32 F.3d 759, 764 (3d Cir. 1994).
With respect to a claim of harassment on the basis of disability, a plaintiff must allege and prove the following: (1) she was a qualified individual with a disability; (2) she was subject to unwelcome harassment; (3) the harassment was based on her disability or her request for accommodation; (4) the harassment was sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of her employment and to create an abusive working environment; and (5) the employer knew or should have known of the harassment and failed to take prompt remedial [*24]  action. Martin v. Allegheny Airlines, Inc., 126 F. Supp. 2d 809, 820 (M.D. Pa. 2000) (citing Walton v. Mental Health Ass'n of Southeastern Pennsylvania, 168 F.3d 661, 667 (3d Cir. 1999).
The ADA was substantially amended by the ADA Amendments Act of 2008 ("ADAAA"), Pub. L. No. 110-325, 122 Stat. 3553 (as codified in provisions of 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.), which became effective as of January 1, 2009, and therefore the amendments to the ADA area applicable to this case. In passing the amendments to the legislation, "Congress has made clear that the question of whether an individual's impairment is a disability under the ADA should not demand extensive analysis. Indeed, Congress has instructed that in construing the definition of 'disability' under the ADA, it shall be construed in favor of broad coverage of individuals under the ADA, to the maximum extent permitted by the terms of the [ADA]." Rubano v. Farrell Area Sch. Dist., 991 F. Supp. 2d 678, 690 (W.D. Pa. 2014) (internal citations and quotations omitted). Congress's purpose in amending the ADA was to "reinstat[e] a broad scope of protection" under the ADA. Pub. L. No. 110-325, 122 Stat. 3553 § 2(b). Under this statutory mandate, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC") revised its implementing regulations to define disability "broadly in favor of expansive coverage to the maximum extent permitted by the terms of the ADA." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.1(c)(4). Review of the definitions provided by the Act and its implementing regulations make clear the expansive reach of the statute's protections.
Under the ADAAA, [*25]  to qualify as disabled, a plaintiff must prove one of the following: (1) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities; (2) a record of such impairment; or (3) being regarded as having such impairment. 42 U.S.C. § 12102(1).
"Major life activities" include functions such as "caring for oneself, performing manual tasks, seeing, hearing, eating, sleeping, walking, standing, sitting, reaching, lifting, bending, speaking, breathing, learning, reading, concentrating, thinking, communicating, interacting with others, and working." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(i)(1)(i). In determining examples of major life activities, the regulations provide that the term "major" shall not be interpreted to create a "demanding standard" for disability. Id. § 1630.2(i)(2).
With respect to major life activities, the regulations provide that the term "substantially limits" shall be defined broadly in favor of expansive coverage, to "the maximum extent permitted by the terms of the ADA" and also is "not meant to be a demanding standard." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(1)(i). An impairment is considered a disability "if it substantially limits the ability of an individual to perform a major life activity as compared to most people in the general population." Id. § 1630.2(j)(1)(ii). However, [*26]  an impairment "need not prevent, or significantly or severely restrict, the individual from performing a major life activity in order to be considered substantially limiting," Id., although "not every impairment will constitute a disability[.]" Id. The thrust of the ADAAA and its implementing regulations thus call for broad coverage and consideration of an individual's own particular circumstances in determining whether that individual is suffers from a disability within the meaning of the Act.
An impairment that is episodic or even one that is in remission may still qualify as a disability so long as it "substantially limit[s] a major life activity when it is active." 42 U.S.C. § 12102(4)(D); accord Britting v. Sec'y, Dep't of Veterans Affairs, 409 F. App'x 566, 568 (3d Cir. 2011); Pallatto v. Westmorland County Children's Bureau, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 27008, at *29 (W.D. Pa. 2014). Likewise, a disability may continue even after a person has mitigating treatment, provided the person continues to be substantially limited in a major life activity. See, e.g., Mengel v. Reading Eagle Co., 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 45300, 2013 WL 1285477, at *3-4 (E.D. Pa. Mar. 29, 2013) (plaintiff continued to suffer from problems with balance after undergoing surgery on a brain tumor); see also Lloyd v. Housing Auth. of the City of Montgomery, 857 F. Supp. 2d 1252, 1263 (M.D. Ala. 2012) ("At bottom, the expanded definitions of 'disability' and 'major life activities' mean that treatable yet chronic conditions like hypertension and asthma render an affected person just as disabled as a wheelchair-bound [*27]  paraplegic — if only for the purposes of disability law.").
The amendments to the ADA thus broadened substantially the definition of disability, and whereas prior to the amendments Third Circuit case law held that "permanent or long term impact, or the expected permanent or long term impact of or resulting from impairment" were relevant considerations, Emory v. AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, 401 F.3d 174, 179-80 (3d Cir. 2005), the updated EEOC regulations have been changed and now provide that the "effects of an impairment lasting or expected to last fewer than six months can be substantially limiting." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(1)(ix).
Notwithstanding the liberalizing of the ADA rules governing disability and harassment claims, the complaint does not sufficiently allege that the plaintiff is entitled to relief under either a discrimination or harassment theory. Regarding her suggestion that Penn State failed to accommodate her alleged disability, the plaintiff fails at the outset to allege facts that demonstrate that she was, in fact, an employee with a disability. Indeed, the plaintiff frequently seems to be alleging that she was capable of performing a whole range of jobs, but that she found some aspects of her job to be stressful and anxiety-producing. Although she does not aver that she was incapable [*28]  of performing her job, she does allege that she believes she should have been considered for "multiple alternatives," and thus seems to be stating that she was, in fact, capable of working in a variety of capacities. We agree with Penn State that, as pled, the complaint alleges that the plaintiff believes that she was treated unfairly and that her unfair treatment caused her stress and anxiety, but does not sufficiently claim that the plaintiff was actually disabled or that she required particular accommodations. The plaintiff resorts to generality, alleging that she suffered from stress and anxiety, and hinting at what may have been other underlying medical challenges by contending that she had a "severe medical condition," though what that condition is the plaintiff does not explain in any way that we can perceive.
As it currently stands, we find that the plaintiff's ADA discrimination and harassment claims are not supported with adequate factual allegations that clearly and concisely explain how the plaintiff is a qualified individual with a disability, and how Penn State either discriminated against her or harassed her because of her alleged disability. The plaintiff's complaint [*29]  suffers, in large measure, because of the way in which the plaintiff has laid out a litany of grievances against Penn State and her supervisors, many of which appear to have nothing at all to do with any alleged disability. Indeed, much of the complaint — and the plaintiff's description of the stress she experienced — seem to predate the onset of any alleged disabling condition. For example, it is not clear how the plaintiff's complaints about overspending, and any retaliation she claims she experienced relating to her complaints, relate in any way to her anxiety-based claims. Although the plaintiff may be able to articulate a claim under the ADA regarding discrimination or harassment relating to her real or perceived disabilities, it is submitted that she should be directed to file an amended complaint to more clearly articulate her claims under this anti-discrimination statute, guided by the legal standards explained above, and in a manner that permits the defendant to understand the factual basis for the claims.

6. Title VII
Finally, the plaintiff has claimed that Penn State discriminated against her on the basis of sex or gender, or otherwise retaliated against her for engaging in [*30]  activity protected under Title VII.
Title VII forbids employers "to fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any individual, or otherwise to discriminate against any individual with respect to [her] compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, because of such individual's race, color, religion, sex, or national origin." 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(a)(1). As discussed with the other statutes proscribing discrimination discussed above, Title VII discrimination claims are governed by a burden-shifting framework. See Jones v. Southeastern Pa. Transp. Auth., 796 F.3d 323, 325-26 (3d Cir. 2015). In brief, that framework requires that the plaintiff demonstrate that (1) she is a member of a protected class, (2) she suffered an adverse employment action, (3) under circumstances that give rise to an inference of unlawful sex-based discrimination. Sarullo v. U.S. Postal Serv., 352 F.3d 789, 797 (3d Cir. 2003). The last element also requires that the plaintiff demonstrate a causal connection between her protected status and the allegedly adverse action. Id. at 798. The key focus of the prima facie test is "always whether the employer is treating 'some people less favorably than others because of their race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.'" Id. (citation omitted). The elements of the prima facie case "must not be applied woodenly, but must rather [*31]  be tailored flexibly to fit the circumstances of each type of illegal discrimination." Geraci v. Moody-Tottrup Int'l, Inc., 82 F.3d 578, 581 (3d Cir. 1996).
The plaintiff frequently suggests that her work environment was stressful, and at times it seems that she is suggesting that the workplace was actually a "hostile environment," which can also support a claim under Title VII when supported by sufficient factual allegations. "'[A] plaintiff may establish that an employer has violated Title VII by proving that discrimination based on sex created a hostile or abusive work environment.'" Jones, 796 F.3d at 328 (citing Meritor Savings Bank, FSB v. Vinson, 477 U.S. 57, 66, 106 S. Ct. 2399, 91 L. Ed. 2d 49 (1986)). In order to do so, a plaintiff must demonstrate that the sexual harassment in the workplace was "sufficiently severe or pervasive." Id. (quoting Vinson, 477 U.S. at 67). An employer may defend itself against such a claim, to the extent it is not based upon a tangible adverse action such as termination, by showing that the employer "exercised reasonable care to take advantage of the employer's safeguards and otherwise to prevent harm that could have been avoided." Faragher v. City of Boca Raton, 524 U.S. 775, 805, 118 S. Ct. 2275, 141 L. Ed. 2d 662 (1998).
With respect to a Title VII retaliation claim, a plaintiff must show that "(1) she engaged in activity protected by Title VII; (2) the employer took an adverse employment action against her; and (3) there was a causal [*32]  connection between her participation in the protected activity and the adverse employment action." Moore v. City of Phila., 461 F.3d 331, 340-41 (3d Cir. 2006) (quoting Nelson v. Upsala Coll., 51 F.3d 383, 386 (3d Cir. 1995)). "With respect to 'protected activity,' the anti-retaliation provision of Title VII protects those who participate in certain Title VII proceedings (the 'participation clause') and those who oppose discrimination made unlawful by Title VII (the 'opposition clause')." Moore, 461 F.3d at 341 (citing Slagle v. County of Clarion, 435 F.3d 262, 266 (3d Cir. 2006)). Regardless of the distinction between the two theories of retaliation, "the employee must hold an objectively reasonable belief, in good faith, that the activity they oppose is unlawful under Title VII." Id. (citing Clark County v. Breeden, 532 U.S. 268, 271, 121 S. Ct. 1508, 149 L. Ed. 2d 509 (2001) (per curiam)).
A plaintiff alleging Title VII retaliation must show that a reasonable employee would have found the allegedly retaliatory action "materially adverse" in that the conduct "well might have dissuaded a reasonable worker from making or supporting a charge of discrimination." Moore, 461 F.3d at 341. A plaintiff must also show a causal connection between the plaintiff's opposition to, or participation in proceedings against, unlawful discrimination and an action that might have discouraged a reasonable employee from making or supporting a charge of discrimination. "Many may suffer . . . harassment at [*33]  work, but if the reason for that harassment is one that is not proscribed by Title VII, it follows that Title VII provides no relief." Jensen v. Potter, 435 F.3d 444, 449 (3d Cir. 2006). This third element "identif[ies] what harassment, if any, a reasonable jury could link to retaliatory animus." Id. at 449-50. "The ultimate question in any retaliation case is an intent to retaliate vel non." Id. at 449 n.2.
If the employee establishes a prima facie case of retaliation, the burden shifts to the employer to advance a legitimate, non-retaliatory reason for its conduct, and if the employer does so "the plaintiff must be able to convince the factfinder both that the employer's proffered explanation was false, and that retaliation was the real reason for the adverse employment action." Moore, 461 F.3d at 342 (quoting Krouse v. Am. Sterilizer Co., 126 F.3d 494, 500-01 (3d Cir. 1997).
Turning to the instant complaint, we struggle to perceive how the plaintiff believes she suffered workplace discrimination on the basis of sex, or what her factual underpinnings of this claim might be. Reviewing the complaint, we do not find that the plaintiff has alleged sufficient allegations to support this claim, and while the complaint is itself a collection of complaints about the last few years during which the plaintiff worked at Penn State, and although it is conceivable [*34]  that the plaintiff believes some of these grievances related to her sex, they are not sufficiently alleged as such. Instead, the plaintiff complains, in generalized form, about her treatment by supervisors, their failures to respond to her various complaints about matters having nothing to do with sex or gender, and a host of other seemingly typical workplace frustrations.
What the plaintiff has not done is alleged facts to state or sufficiently suggest that these perceived infractions were motivated by a discriminatory animus or anything to do with her sex, and she has not stitched together a plausible factual narrative to put the defendant on notice regarding her theory as to how a collection of workplace grievances translates into a claim for Title VII discrimination or harassment. As with the other claims discussed above, the plaintiff should be directed to file an amended complaint to more cogently explain the basis for her claim that Penn State violated Title VII's proscription against sex-based discrimination.
Turning to the retaliation claim, we find that the plaintiff has identified two instances of alleged retaliation. In the first, the plaintiff alleges that in November 2015 [*35]  she was placed on a performance improvement plan ("PIP"). (Doc. 1-1, p. 4.) The plaintiff claims that this was done in retaliation for her making complaints about her workload and her supervisor three months earlier (Id.) In the second, some eight months later, the plaintiff was notified that Penn State was going forward with a formal HR 78 process. (Doc. 1-1, p. 5.) The plaintiff alleges that this action was taken not because of her sex or gender, but because she had spoken up about overspending on a contract. (Id.)
In neither instance can we perceive how the plaintiff's two examples of alleged retaliatory conduct had anything at all to do with her engaging in protected activity. Furthermore, the plaintiff fails to allege any facts that could demonstrate a causal link between any protected activity — which is itself not sufficiently pled — and the alleged retaliation itself. Typically to show causation a plaintiff must show either (1) an unusually suggestive temporal proximity between the protected activity and the allegedly retaliatory action or (2) a pattern of antagonism coupled with timing to establish a causal link. Lauren W. ex rel. Jean W. v. DeFlaminis, 480 F.3d 259, 267 (3d Cir. 2007). In this case, the plaintiff has failed to identify the protected [*36]  conduct in which she engaged, and she has failed to plead facts demonstrating a causal relationship between whatever protected conduct she may have engaged in, and the allegedly adverse actions that the plaintiff is claiming amounted to retaliation.
Even if we were to find that the plaintiff had alleged protected activity with respect to her complaints about her supervisor or other co-workers, the plaintiff claims that she was not retaliated against until several months later, which is not unusually suggestive. See LeBoon v. Lancaster Jewish Cmty. Ctr. Ass'n, 503 F.3d 217, 233 (3d Cir. 2007) (three months not unusually suggestive). Where temporal proximity is not unduly suggestive, courts will consider the timing of the alleged retaliation "plus other evidence" that might be sufficient to raise an inference of a causal relationship. Farrell v. Planters Lifesavers Co., 206 F.3d 271, 280 (3d Cir. 2000). The complaint does not allege facts to make this showing, and does not sufficiently notify the defendant as to what the plaintiff believes constituted unlawful retaliatory conduct.
In summary, the complaint does not contain a factual narrative tying the plaintiff's various workplace grievances with examples of protected activity in a way that could permit the defendant to answer the allegations. As with the plaintiff's other claims, [*37]  it is submitted that she should be permitted to file an amended complaint that more carefully explains the factual basis for her retaliation claims against the legal framework we have summarized in this report.
Finally, we note that, when presented with these obstacles to an informed understanding of the plaintiff's claims because plaintiff's complaint is unclear, the court may, sua sponte, order the plaintiff to file a more definite statement pursuant to Rule 12(e) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure in order to clarify the plaintiff's claims. See, e.g., Kyeame v. Buchheit, No. 1:07-CV-1239, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 92502, 2011 WL 3651369, at *1 (M.D. Pa. Aug. 18, 2011); MFS, Inc. v. Twp. of South Annville, No. 1:05BCVB1371, 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 82406, 2006 WL 3254535, at *7 (M.D.Pa. Nov.9, 2006); see also Moore's Federal Practice, § 12.36 (Matthew Bender 3d ed.) ("Because of its potential usefulness ... courts will occasionally order a more definite statement sua sponte, which they have the freedom to do"); Fikes v. City of Daphne, 79 F.3d 1079, 1082-83 (11th Cir.1996) (finding that a more definite statement can tighten a complaint and clarify which of several possible claims are being asserted).
In a case such as this, where the plaintiff's' claims cannot be readily and clearly understood, Rule 12(e) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure provides, in part, that the court may order a party to prepare: "a more definite statement of a pleading to which a responsive pleading is allowed but which is so vague or ambiguous that the [*38]  party cannot reasonably prepare a response." Further, under this rule "[i]f the court orders a more definite statement and the order is not obeyed within 14 days after notice of the order or within the time the court sets, the court may strike the pleading or issue any other appropriate order." Fed. R. Civ. P., Rule 12(e).
Here, we find that this particular complaint aptly:
highlight[s] the particular usefulness of the Rule 12(e) motion for a more definite statement. Under Rule 12(e), [the court may order] a more definite statement "[i]f a pleading ... is so vague or ambiguous that a party cannot reasonably be required to frame a responsive pleading." Fed.R.Civ.P. 12(e). . . . . When a complaint fashioned under a notice pleading standard does not disclose the facts underlying a plaintiff's claim for relief, the defendant cannot reasonably be expected to frame a proper, fact-specific . . . defense. . . . . The Rule 12(e) motion for a more definite statement is perhaps the best procedural tool available to the defendant to obtain the factual basis underlying a plaintiff's claim for relief.
Thomas v. Independence Tp., 463 F.3d 285, 301 (3d Cir. 2006)
Given the legal and factual ambiguity of the plaintiff's claims, and the shifting grounds upon which these claims appear to rest, we believe that the plaintiff should be required [*39]  to provide a more definite statement of these claims, before the court is tasked with assessing the legal merits of these alleged claims and engaging in an extended exegesis analyzing claims whose legal and factual elements remain uncertain. Therefore, it is recommended that the plaintiff also be directed pursuant to Rule 12(e) to submit a more definite statement of these claims.

IV. RECOMMENDATION
Accordingly, for the foregoing reasons, IT IS RECOMMENDED that the defendant's motion to dismiss the complaint be GRANTED and that the plaintiff be afforded leave to file an amended complaint.
The parties are further placed on notice that pursuant to Local Rule 72.3:
Any party may object to a magistrate judge's proposed findings, recommendations or report addressing a motion or matter described in 28 U.S.C. § 636 (b)(1)(B) or making a recommendation for the disposition of a prisoner case or a habeas corpus petition within fourteen (14) days after being served with a copy thereof. Such party shall file with the clerk of court, and serve on the magistrate judge and all parties, written objections which shall specifically identify the portions of the proposed findings, recommendations or report to which objection is made and the basis for such [*40]  objections. The briefing requirements set forth in Local Rule 72.2 shall apply. A judge shall make a de novo determination of those portions of the report or specified proposed findings or recommendations to which objection is made and may accept, reject, or modify, in whole or in part, the findings or recommendations made by the magistrate judge. The judge, however, need conduct a new hearing only in his or her discretion or where required by law, and may consider the record developed before the magistrate judge, making his or her own determination on the basis of that record. The judge may also receive further evidence, recall witnesses or recommit the matter to the magistrate judge with instructions.
Submitted this 2d day of May, 2018.
/s/ Martin C.Carlson
Martin C. Carlson
United States Magistrate Judge


End of Document

