Beasley v. O'Reilly Auto Parts
United States District Court for the Southern District of Alabama, Southern Division
September 10, 2021, Decided; September 10, 2021, Filed
CIVIL ACTION NO. 1:20-00092-N

Reporter
559 F. Supp. 3d 1226 *; 2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 171922 **; 2021 WL 4142671
TEDDY BEASLEY, Plaintiff, v. O'REILLY AUTO PARTS, Defendant.
Prior History: Beasley v. O'Reilly Auto Parts, 2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 176790, 2021 WL 4167873 (S.D. Ala., Aug. 12, 2021)
Counsel:  [**1] For Teddy Beasley, Plaintiff: Andrew Rozynski, LEAD ATTORNEY, PRO HAC VICE, Eisenberg & Baum LLP, New York, NY; Edward I. Zwilling, LEAD ATTORNEY, Law Office of Edward I Zwilling, LLC, Birmingham, AL; William Juhn, LEAD ATTORNEY, PRO HAC VICE, Eisenberg & Baum, LLP, New York, NY.
For O'Reilly Auto Parts, Defendant: H. William Wasden, LEAD ATTORNEY, Burr Forman, Mobile, AL; Michael David Strasavich, Burr & Forman LLP, Mobile, AL.
Judges: KATHERINE P. NELSON, UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE.
Opinion by: KATHERINE P. NELSON
Opinion



 [*1229]  MEMORANDUM OPINION
By order dated and entered August 12, 2021 (Doc. 71), the Court denied Plaintiff Teddy Beasley's motion for partial summary judgment (Doc. 50), granted the motion for summary judgment (Doc. 71) of Defendant O'Reilly Auto Parts ("O'Reilly") as to all of Beasley's claims, denied as moot Beasley's motion to strike the declaration of Heather Bolanos (Doc. 59), and dismissed Beasley's causes and claims in this civil action with prejudice. The Court now issues this memorandum opinion setting out the Court's reasoning behind those rulings.
The Court incorporates herein the reasoning set out in the Court's order dated and entered July 29, 2021 (Doc. 64), and provides the following [**2]  additional reasoning addressing the parties' supplemental briefing filed in response to the July 29 order (Docs. 68, 69):

I. Eleventh Circuit Precedent Requires a Showing of an Adverse Employment Action for ADA Failure-to-Accommodate Claims
The undersigned acknowledges that Beasley has cited ample non-binding authority from other circuits holding otherwise, but maintains that he is required to present evidence of an "adverse employment action" to sustain his failure-to-accommodate claim brought under Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), under the binding reasoning of Holly v. Clairson Industries, L.L.C., 492 F.3d 1247 (11th Cir. 2007), including footnote 17.1 The undersigned disagrees with Beasley's arguments that Holly's footnote 17 is non-binding dicta, or that it is inconsistent with Eleventh Circuit precedent predating the Holly decision.2
The panel in Holly, which squarely addressed an ADA failure-to-accommodate claim (along with a similar claim under Florida law that is analyzed using the same framework), began its analysis by reiterating the longstanding "controlling law in this Circuit[ that] '[t]he burden-shifting analysis of Title VII employment discrimination claims is applicable to ADA claims.' " 492 F.3d at 1255 (quoting Earl v. Mervyns, Inc., 207 F.3d 1361, 1365 (11th Cir. 2000) (per curiam)). Accord Hilburn v. Murata Elecs. N. Am., Inc., 181 F.3d 1220, 1226 (11th Cir. 1999); Todd v. Fayette Cty. Sch. Dist., 998 F.3d 1203, 1215 (11th Cir. 2021). The panel further reiterated circuit [**3]  precedent that, under this burden-shifting analysis, "[t]o establish a prima facie case of discrimination under the ADA, a plaintiff must show: (1) he is disabled; (2) he is a qualified individual; and (3) he was subjected to unlawful discrimination because of his disability." Holly, 492 F.3d at 1255-56 (citing Earl, 207 F.3d at 1365)). The second and third prongs were at issue in Holly. Id. at 1256.
In addressing the "subjected to unlawful discrimination" prong, the Holly panel rejected the district court's determination that the plaintiff was required to identify a  [*1230]  comparator employee, or otherwise present evidence showing that he was treated differently from non-disabled employees, to satisfy that prong—i.e., that he "was required to prove disparate treatment..." Id. at 1261-62. Noting that such a requirement "reflects ... a misunderstanding of the fundamental nature of a reasonable accommodation claim under the ADA[,]" the panel explained that "an employer's failure to reasonably accommodate a disabled individual itself constitutes discrimination under the ADA, so long as that individual is 'otherwise qualified,' and unless the employer can show undue hardship." Id. at 1262. This holding, the panel explained, modified the traditional Title VII burden-shifting analysis [**4]  by obviating any additional burden on a plaintiff to show that he was treated differently than a non-disabled employee, as well as any subsequent burden on the employer to show a legitimate non-discriminatory reason for the unequal treatment, or on the plaintiff to show pretext. Id. In other words, the panel explained, an employer "is not insulated from liability under the ADA by treating its non-disabled employees exactly the same as its disabled employees." Id.
However, in footnote 17, the Holly panel, aptly noting that this holding could be interpreted as rendering the "subjected to unlawful discrimination because of his disability" prong of an ADA prima facie case "void of content" in failure-to-accommodate cases, explained why it did not. Id. at 1263 n.17. Longstanding Eleventh Circuit precedent held that a plaintiff generally "must show that he has suffered an adverse employment action because of his disability (i.e., that he has suffered employment discrimination)" in order to establish the third prong of a prima facie case of ADA employment discrimination, Doe v. Dekalb Cty. Sch. Dist., 145 F.3d 1441, 1445 (11th Cir. 1998); see also McNely v. Ocala Star-Banner Corp., 99 F.3d 1068, 1077 (11th Cir. 1996) ("[T]he ADA protects against more than termination. It prohibits discrimination 'in regard to job application procedures, the [**5]  hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment.' 42 U.S.C.A. § 12112(a) (West 1995); see also id. § 12203 (anti-retaliation provision) (prohibiting employers to 'discriminate'). In other words, the ADA prohibits a broad variety of adverse employment actions, whenever those actions are taken for a prohibited reason."), and the panel explained that its holding did not alter that burden in failure-to-accommodate cases, stating: "In addition to requiring the plaintiff to show that he was 'unlawfully discriminated against'—that is, that his employer failed to reasonably accommodate his disability, leading to an adverse employment decision—the plaintiff must show that this discrimination occurred 'because of his disability'—that is, that the adverse employment decision was caused by his disability." Holly, 492 F.3d at 1263 n.17. Thus, far from being unnecessary to the case, Holly's footnote 17 was necessary to further contextualize how that opinion's analysis of failure-to accommodate claims fit in with the Eleventh Circuit's traditional three-prong prima facie case for ADA discrimination.
The undersigned acknowledges that there seems to be no Eleventh [**6]  Circuit case, either published or unpublished, that has expressly cited Holly's footnote 17 for the proposition that an ADA plaintiff must still show an adverse employment action for a failure-to-accommodate claim—indeed, there appears to be no published Eleventh Circuit decision to have considered footnote 17 at all.3 However, Holly is  [*1231]  in the books as a published panel decision, and simply because precedent has been overlooked in the past does not give a court license to disregard it once it has been squarely presented. Cf. Cohen v. Off. Depot, Inc., 204 F.3d 1069, 1072 (11th Cir. 2000) ("where two prior panel decisions conflict we are bound to follow the oldest one").
Beasley correctly points out that Eleventh Circuit decisions both pre-dating and post-dating Holly have omitted specific mention of an adverse employment action as an element of an ADA failure-to-accommodate claim. However, the undersigned does not read those cases' silence on the issue as irreconcilably in tension with Holly, as none of the cases Beasley cites purported to provide an exhaustive list of the elements of a failure-to-accommodate claim, and all were decided based on consideration of other elements.4
Moreover, contrary [**7]  to Beasley's contention, requiring a showing of an adverse employment action for a failure-to-accommodate claim is consistent with the plain language of the ADA. The ADA's general antidiscrimination provision states that "[n]o covered entity shall discriminate against a qualified individual on the basis of disability in regard to job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or  [*1232]  discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). Section 12112 goes on to provide various examples of what it means to "discriminate against a qualified individual on the basis of disability" for purposes of § 12112(a), including the failure to provide reasonable accommodations. Id. § 12112(b)(5)(A). However, as § 12112(a) makes clear, "discriminat[ion] against a qualified individual on the basis of disability," regardless of what form it takes, must be "in regard to job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." Id. § 12112(a) (emphasis added). "By its plain terms, § 12112(b) speaks directly to satisfaction of the discrimination clause but is silent as to the twenty-five [**8]  words Congress included in the in-regard-to clause. [Therefore], the in-regard-to clause must be satisfied by something more than an employer's failure to accommodate." Exby-Stolley v. Bd. of Cty. Commissioners, 979 F.3d 784, 823 (10th Cir. 2020) (en banc) (McHugh, J., dissenting), cert. denied sub nom. Bd. of Cty. Commissioners v. Exby-Stolley, No. 20-1357, 141 S. Ct. 2858, 210 L. Ed. 2d 962, 2021 U.S. LEXIS 3414, 2021 WL 2637869 (U.S. June 28, 2021).

II. Beasley Has Not Shown That He Suffered an Adverse Employment Action Because of His Disability
Beasley also argues that, regardless of whether circuit precedent requires him to do so, he can present evidence that he suffered an adverse employment action because of his disability to support his failure-to-accommodate claim, as well as his disparate impact claim. The undersigned is not convinced.
To constitute an "adverse employment action" to support a discrimination claim, "the employer's action must impact the 'terms, conditions, or privileges' of the plaintiff's job in a real and demonstrable way. Although the statute does not require proof of direct economic consequences in all cases, the asserted impact cannot be speculative and must at least have a tangible adverse effect on the plaintiff's employment ... [A]n employee must show a serious and material change in the terms, conditions, or privileges of employment. Moreover, the employee's subjective view [**9]  of the significance and adversity of the employer's action is not controlling; the employment action must be materially adverse as viewed by a reasonable person in the circumstances." Davis v. Town of Lake Park, Fla., 245 F.3d 1232, 1239 (11th Cir. 2001) (citing Doe, 145 F.3d at 1453), overruled on other grounds by Burlington N. & Santa Fe Ry. Co. v. White, 548 U.S. 53, 126 S. Ct. 2405, 165 L. Ed. 2d 345 (2006). Accord Jefferson v. Sewon Am., Inc., 891 F.3d 911, 920-21 (11th Cir. 2018). An ADA plaintiff must show that "the prohibited motivation makes the difference in the employer's decision, i.e., [that] it is a 'but-for' cause." McNely, 99 F.3d at 1076.
Beasley argues that O'Reilly's failure to provide him an interpreter at, or at least thorough  [*1233]  summaries of, company safety meetings subjected him to the adverse employment action of an unsafe work environment. By making him "unable to participate in or understand vital safety issues," Beasley claims, he was made to "fe[el] unsafe and unable to adequately perform his job as a result." (Doc. 69, PageID.1343). Beasley also argues that providing him with more information about what was discussed at safety meetings could have led to higher ratings in the "Safety-Housekeeping" factor on his performance evaluations. Beasley similarly argues that O'Reilly's failure to provide him an interpreter at, or at least thorough summaries of, job trainings, staff meetings, and performance reviews caused him to miss out on [**10]  "team building and disseminati[on of] key information for the job[,]" and affected his "ability to understand and perform the job[,]" which resulted in lower scores in the "Quality of Work," "Productivity," "Teamwork," and "Job Knowledge" factors, among others, on his performance evaluations. (Id., PageID.1343-1344). Beasley further argues that O'Reilly's provision of an interpreter at the company picnic could have improved his "Teamwork" performance review score.
However, Beasley has not pointed to any specific safety, training, or other job-related issue that his alleged inability to understand caused a "real and demonstrable" negative effect on his job performance. The mere possibility that his alleged inability to understand safety and training issues, or what was said at the company picnic, could have had some negative impact on his job performance is too speculative to constitute an adverse employment action, and his subjective belief that he was being deprived of vital information is insufficient to show one.
As was noted in the Court's July 29 order, Beasley's absenteeism and tardiness did appear to have a tangible adverse effect on his employment by lowering his scores in the [**11]  "Attendance" factor of his performance evaluations. However, Beasley has failed to show that he was subject to this adverse action "because of his disability." As for any purportedly preserved disparate impact claim, Beasley has failed to point to any evidence indicating that he was treated any differently than non-disabled employees over his absenteeism or tardiness.
For his failure-to-accommodate claim, Beasley asserts that his extended absence in July 2017 had actually been agreed to by O'Reilly ahead of time, and that if he had been provided an interpreter, he "and his supervisors would have been able to communicate more effectively their conflicting interpretations of his time-off approval and reasons for tardiness and absenteeism..." (Id., PageID.1345). Beasley also asserts that if O'Reilly had provided him with an interpreter when counseling him about his absenteeism and tardiness, he might not have been penalized at all, and further instances could have been avoided. However, Beasley "bears the burden of showing not only that [O'Reilly] failed to reasonably accommodate his disability, but that, but for [O'Reilly]'s failure to accommodate his disability, he would not have [received [**12]  lower performance evaluation scores]—in other words, [Beasley] must show that his disability caused him to be late[ or miss work], so that [O'Reilly]'s failure to give him any leeway in its punctuality policy, leading to his [lower evaluation scores], amounted to [lower scores] 'because of his disability.' " Holly, 492 F.3d at 1263 n.17. Beasley has pointed to no evidence that his deafness caused him to do so. Moreover, Beasley has failed to offer any specific way in which he could not adequately explain or discuss his absenteeism or tardiness using a combination of verbal communication and written communication through his cell phone; his speculation that having an interpreter available might have allowed him to avoid being penalized for his absences or tardiness is not substantial evidence sufficient to withstand summary judgment for O'Reilly. See Cordoba v. Dillard's Inc., 419 F.3d 1169, 1181 (11th Cir. 2005) ("Speculation does not create a genuine issue of fact; instead, it creates a false issue, the demolition of which is a primary goal of summary judgment.").5
 [*1234]  Because Beasley did not show that he suffered an adverse employment action because of his disability, summary judgment was due to be granted in favor of O'Reilly on his ADA disparate impact and failure-to-accommodate [**13]  claims.

III. Alternatively, Beasley Has Not Shown that He Was Prevented from Performing Any Essential Job Function by O'Reilly's Purported Failure to Provide an Accommodation
Alternatively, the undersigned agrees with O'Reilly that it was due summary judgment on Beasley's failure-to-accommodate claim because Beasley has not shown that O'Reilly's failure to provide any accommodation prevented him from performing his essential job functions.6 Binding Eleventh Circuit precedent holds that an "accommodation is 'reasonable' and necessary under the ADA only if it enables the employee to perform the essential functions of the job." Lucas v. W.W. Grainger, Inc., 257 F.3d 1249, 1259-60 (11th Cir. 2001) (emphasis added) (citing LaChance v. Duffy's Draft House, Inc., 146 F.3d 832, 835 (11th Cir. 1998) ("An 'accommodation' is 'reasonable'—and, therefore, required under the ADA—only if it enables the employee to perform the essential functions of the job." (citing 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(2)(ii) (1995))), and Willis v. Conopco, Inc., 108 F.3d 282, 284 (11th Cir. 1997) (per curiam) (same as LaChance)). Accord Holly, 492 F.3d at 1256 ("An accommodation is 'reasonable' and necessary under the ADA ... only if it enables the employee to perform the essential functions of the job." (citing Lucas, 257 F.3d at 1259-60, LaChance, 146 F.3d at 835, and 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(1)(ii)). "[I]f an employee does not require an accommodation to perform her essential job functions, then the employer is under no obligation to make an accommodation, [**14]  even if the employee requests an accommodation that is reasonable and could be easily provided." D'Onofrio v. Costco Wholesale Corp., 964 F.3d 1014, 1022 (11th Cir. 2020), cert. denied, 141 S. Ct. 1435 (Mem), 209 L. Ed. 2d 155 (2021).7 "The  [*1236]  plaintiff bears the burden of identifying an accommodation, and of demonstrating that the accommodation allows him to perform the job's essential functions." Lucas, 257 F.3d at 1255.
The plaintiff must also prove that he "made a specific request for a reasonable accommodation[,]" and that his "employer ... failed to provide a reasonable accommodation, or engage in the requisite interactive process in order to identify a reasonable accommodation." D'Onofrio, 964 F.3d at 1021 (citing Gaston v. Bellingrath Gardens & Home, Inc., 167 F.3d 1361, 1363 (11th Cir. 1999) (per curiam)). The interactive "process should identify the precise limitations resulting from the disability and potential reasonable accommodations that could overcome those limitations." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3). It is undisputed that, at an interactive process meeting occurring shortly before he started work, Beasley and O'Reilly agreed that Beasley would not require a sign language interpreter at all times but that he would be provided one whenever he felt one was needed. In the meantime, O'Reilly agreed [**15]  to allow Beasley to retain his cell phone while working so that he could communicate with his supervisors via text and email.
"[E]ven if an employer has voluntarily provided accommodations to the employee historically, that employer is not obligated to continue providing them and can discontinue such when they exceed what is legally required under the ADA." D'Onofrio, 964 F.3d at 1022. Therefore, the mere fact that O'Reilly promised to provide Beasley an interpreter any time he requested one, or even without a request, does not render any subsequent failure to do so an ADA violation. The undersigned disagrees with Beasley that his telling O'Reilly "an interpreter would be necessary from time to time" for future unspecified "important events and meetings" (Doc. 55, PageID.1160-1161) at the interactive process meeting constituted a "specific request for a reasonable accommodation" such that O'Reilly was required under the ADA to anticipate, on its own initiative, Beasley's need for an interpreter at all future events. Cf. Gaston, 167 F.3d at 1364 ("[T]he EEOC's interpretive guidelines, issued pursuant to its authority to issue regulations under the ADA, provide that '[i]n general ... it is the responsibility of the individual with a disability [**16]  to inform the employer that an accommodation is needed.' 29 C.F.R. pt. 1630 App. § 1630.9.").
 [*1237]  Beasley asserts that O'Reilly failed to provide him an interpreter at his request in the following instances: "once for his forklift training; once for his daily meeting; twice for his disciplinary action, and once for the company picnic." (Doc. 50, PageID.682 (record citations omitted)). For the daily meetings, Beasley alternatively claims that O'Reilly should have provided him detailed summaries of what was discussed.8 However, while the provision of these accommodations might have improved Beasley's employment experience, Beasley has failed to point to evidence indicating that O'Reilly's failure to provide any of these accommodations actually prevented him from performing the "essential functions" of his job.
Beasley only argues that O'Reilly's failure to provide him an interpreter at the company picnic deprived him from enjoying equal benefits and privileges of employment as those enjoyed by non-disabled employees. Because he does not claim that the failure to provide him an interpreter at the picnic prevented him from performing an essential job function, no failure to accommodate has been shown [**17]  in that instance. As for O'Reilly's other purported instances of failing to accommodate, the evidence of record shows that, other than Beasley's issues with absenteeism and tardiness, O'Reilly was satisfied with Beasley's job performance.
Beasley claims that the failure to provide him an interpreter at his forklift training resulted in a breakdown in communication and the training ultimately being suspended. However, Beasley has pointed to no evidence indicating that forklift operation constituted a significant component of Beasley's job, that the purportedly deficient forklift training impacted his ability to perform his job duties, or that O'Reilly ever held the purportedly deficient forklift training against Beasley. As for his absenteeism and tardiness, Beasley merely argues O'Reilly's failure to provide interpreters at disciplinary meetings prevented him from adequately explaining the reasons for his absences, and from receiving effective counseling to address these issues. However, he does not claim that his disability impaired his ability to show up for work on schedule, nor does he elaborate on how additional counseling could have ameliorated those issues. As for his extended [**18]  absence in July 2017, while Beasley's position is that he had received prior permission to take this leave, he fails to specify how he was prevented from adequately explaining this to O'Reilly management through a combination of verbal communication and written communication using his cell phone. The mere fact that Beasley feels he was unjustifiably disciplined does not mean that O'Reilly's purported failure to provide him an interpreter to explain himself was unreasonable compared to the other accommodations he was already receiving.
 [*1238]  Beasley speculates that the failure to provide interpreters at daily meetings, or at least provide detailed summaries, caused him to miss important operational and safety information, but does not point to any concrete examples of such information, or any evidence indicating that his job performance suffered as a result. Indeed, Beasley admits that he "picked up his work despite Defendant's lack of proper training and communication" by observing other employees, indicating that providing interpreters at meetings was not required for him to perform his essential job functions. See D'Onofrio, 964 F.3d at 1022 (an employer is under no obligation to make an accommodation "if an employee [**19]  does not require [one] to perform her essential job functions" (emphasis added)). That Beasley believes he could have performed his job better or more effectively if provided interpreters or given meeting summaries is insufficient to establish O'Reilly's liability under the ADA. Under Eleventh Circuit precedent, an employer's duty to provide reasonable accommodations under the ADA extends only to those that allow a disabled employee to perform essential job functions. It does not require an employer to provide any accommodation the employee believes could improve job performance, or to otherwise empower a disabled employee to become the model for all other employees.9
DONE this the 10th day of September 2021.
/s/ Katherine P. Nelson
KATHERINE P. NELSON
UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE


End of Document

