Berke v. Geo Grp., Inc.
United States District Court for the Southern District of Georgia, Waycross Division
May 14, 2019, Decided; May 14, 2019, Filed
No. 5:17-cv-115

Reporter
2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 251176 *
JOSEPH F. BERKE, III, Plaintiff, v. THE GEO GROUP, INC., Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For The GEO Group Inc., Defendant: Joshua M. Lott, ATTORNEY TO BE NOTICED, Littler Mendelson PC - ATL, Atlanta, GA; Rachel Catherine Werner, LEAD ATTORNEY, PRO HAC VICE, Littler Mendelson PC - ATL, Atlanta, GA.
For Joseph F. Berke III, Plaintiff: Paul Michael Scott, LEAD ATTORNEY, Brown Readdick Bumgartner Carter Strickland, Brunswick, GA; Emily Rose Hancock, ATTORNEY TO BE NOTICED, Brown Readdick & Bumgartner, Brunswick, GA.
For The GEO Group Inc., Defendant: J. Bradley Spalding, LEAD ATTORNEY, PRO HAC VICE, Littler Mendelson PC - TX, Houston, TX; Benson E. Pope, LEAD ATTORNEY, Littler Mendelson PC - ATL, Atlanta, GA.
For Joseph F. Berke III, Plaintiff: Richard K. Strickland, LEAD ATTORNEY, Brown Readdick Bumgartner Carter Strickland, Brunswick, GA: Steven G. Blackerby, LEAD ATTORNEY, Brown Readdick Bumgartner Carter Strickland, Brunswick, GA.
Judges: HON. LISA GODBEY WOOD, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: LISA GODBEY WOOD
Opinion



ORDER
Before the Court are Defendant The GEO Group, Inc.'s Motion for Summary Judgment, dkt. no. 58, and Plaintiff Joseph F. Berke, III's Cross Motion for Partial Summary Judgment, dkt. no. 59. These motions have been fully briefed and are ripe for review. For the following reasons, [*2]  Defendant's Motion, dkt. no. 58, GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART, and Plaintiff's Motion, dkt. no. 59, is DENIED.

BACKGROUND
This case involves Plaintiff Joseph Berke's employment with Defendant The Geo Group, Inc. Defendant runs a private prison, D. Ray. James Correctional Facility ("the Facility" or "the prison"), in Folkston, Georgia, pursuant to a contract with the Federal Bureau of Prisons. Dkt. No. 58-2 ¶¶ 1-3.1 Plaintiff has been employed as a correctional officer at the prison since December 2010. Id. ¶ 22. In late 2014, Plaintiff advised Defendant that he had Type II diabetes. Id. ¶ 29. Plaintiff's diabetes substantially limited his major bodily functions, including his endocrine functions. Dkt. No. 59-2 ¶ 2.2 Following his diabetes diagnosis, Plaintiff was prescribed medications, including two types of insulin injections. Id. ¶ 3.
When Plaintiff informed Defendant of his diabetes in late 2014, he also requested an accommodation to be allowed breaks, as needed, to take insulin during his shift using a syringe. Dkt. No. 58-2 ¶ 29. Defendant approved the accommodation request and allowed Plaintiff to walk to his car to take insulin shots as needed. Id. ¶ 30. However, the accommodation [*3]  also provided that "[i]nsulin syringe/needles should be kept in your car and cannot be brought into the facility." Id. ¶ 30. As such, if Plaintiff needed to take his insulin while at work using a syringe, he would have to go to his car to do so. Dkt. No. 59-2 ¶ 10. Plaintiff testified that this arrangement was problematic because he did not have scheduled meal breaks, there was oftentimes no one to relieve him and cover his post, and the walk to his car and back through security would take, at minimum, about twenty minutes. See Dkt. No. 60-1 at 200-01, 248, 254. But, Plaintiff admitted that he never asked to keep his insulin vials inside the Facility and the syringes in his car. Dkt. No. 58-2 ¶ 36.
Throughout his employment with Defendant, Plaintiff requested and was granted other accommodations. Plaintiff was granted intermittent FMLA leave to treat his diabetic condition. Id. ¶ 37. Specifically, Plaintiff was given several weeks of FMLA leave upon informing Defendant of his diagnosis in December 2014 because of his high blood sugar and loss of balance due to experiencing dizziness. Id. ¶ 42. Plaintiff took leave again in January and February 2015 to be reevaluated by his medical provider [*4]  after experiencing more dizzy spells. Id. ¶ 44. In February 2015, as a result of the interactive process with Plaintiff and his medical provider, Defendant limited Plaintiff's shifts to eight hours, which meant that he would be exempt from mandatory overtime. Id. ¶ 46.
Later, in June 2015, Plaintiff received a new prescription for insulin pens.3 Plaintiff testified that he got insulin pens because he saw Ralph McCormick, another employee at the prison, being allowed to bring his insulin pens inside the facility. Dkt. No. 60-1 at 208-09. When he got his prescription for the insulin pens, Plaintiff testified that he notified human resources that he had the prescription and requested to use them. Id. at 209-10. Plaintiff never submitted a written request, but he testified that he gave human resources a copy of his prescription for the insulin pens at the time that he got the prescription and orally requested the accommodation. Id. While Defendant maintains that he never requested such an accommodation and claims that if he had so requested, it would have been granted, Plaintiff testified that his request was denied because Nurse Cross indicated to him that an insulin pen, like a syringe, [*5]  was "still a sharp." Id. at 209.
On April 12, 2016, Plaintiff testified that he was denied another accommodation for a shift-assignment post without stairs. Dkt. No. 58-2 ¶ 48. Two symptoms of Plaintiff's diabetes were swelling and pain in his feet, which caused him to have difficulty walking and negotiating stairs on days that his feet were swollen. Dkt. No. 59-2 ¶¶ 18-19. Plaintiff testified that at the beginning of his shift on April 12, 2016, he informed his supervisor, Captain Paul Degener, that his feet were particularly swollen and hurting that day. Dkt. No. 60-1 at 215-16. He testified that he showed Degener his feet and that he could not even tie his boots all the way. Id. at 216. But, recognizing that they were short staffed that day, Plaintiff testified that he requested to be assigned to a post "where I ain't going to be walking a lot and stairs and stuff." Id. At this point, Plaintiff was in his typical assignment area, the hobby and craft area of the prison, but he was waiting to be reassigned because the prison was on lockdown, which meant his typical post would not be staffed. Id. at 217. At the time of his initial request, Plaintiff testified that Degener gave [*6]  no response. Id. at 219.
Within the next hour, Degener called Plaintiff into his office and assigned him to post J-2, which requires the assigned officer to walk up and down stairs. Id. at 219-20. Plaintiff testified that•in response to this assignment he explained his foot swelling and pain to Degener again, to which Degener allegedly responded "I have feet problems, too, and I do it." Id. at 220. When Plaintiff continued to inquire as to his post assignment and explain his foot pain, Degener said "I don't have time for this." Id. at 223. At this point, the conversation ended, and Plaintiff reported to J-2, and worked that shift for the next seven hours during which time he traversed stairs every thirty minutes or so. Id. at 224-25. Plaintiff testified that as a result of working the post with stairs on April 12, 2016, he began to notice symptoms of paralysis in his foot as soon as the swelling went down and that the paralysis still exists today. Id. at 326; 416.
Defendant, pointing to Degener's deposition testimony and declaration, disputes the events of April 12, 2016. Specifically, Degener testified that Plaintiff never requested an accommodation for a post assignment without stairs [*7]  on that day, that Plaintiff did not show Degener his foot, that he never had a conversation with Plaintiff about his feet, and that he never made any of the comments about having foot problems or not having time for this. See Dkt. No 60-4 at 31-32; Dkt. No. 82-3 ¶¶ 2-8, 11. In addition, Degener and Warden Johns declared that Degener did not have authority to grant an accommodation request and that had Plaintiff made such a request, Degener would have sent him to human resources. Dkt. No. 82-3 ¶ 2-6; Dkt. No. 82-2 ¶ 5. Moreover, Defendant disputes other facts that Plaintiff testified to such as the prison being on lockdown and that Degener called Plaintiff to his office for a shift assignment. Dkt. No. 82-2 ¶¶ 2; Dkt. No. 82-3 ¶ 3.
Despite these factual disputes, it is undisputed that Plaintiff requested, and was granted, a stair restriction from human resources in May 2016. Dkt. No. 58-2 ¶ 50. Then, in June 2016, Plaintiff complained to Associate Warden Finley about the problems with keeping his insulin and syringes in his car, and, in response, Defendant allowed Plaintiff to store his insulin syringes in lockers located in D Building, which is the main entrance to the Facility. Dkt. [*8]  No. 58-2 ¶ 51. At that location, there are between nine and twelve lockers that are locked with a key that is obtained from an officer who works at the main entry. Id. ¶ 52. This area is off limits to inmates as it is located outside the security entrance into the prison. Id. ¶ 54. Plaintiff testified that the locker accommodation was problematic because some of the lockers were broken and some were already in use by the time he arrived for his shift, dkt. no. 60-1 at 384, but he did not raise any complaint about the lockers until April 2017, dkt. no. 58-2 ¶ 60.
On January 27, 2017, Defendant sent a letter to Plaintiff informing him that his intermittent FMLA leave was due to expire on February 1, 2017, and asked Plaintiff to have his medical provider send updated information regarding Plaintiff's need for continued accommodations. Id. ¶ 62. In response, Plaintiff's medical provider indicated on February 11, 2017, that Plaintiff was unable to perform the following essential functions of his position: (1) bending and stooping as much as 60% of the time; (2) standing as much as 100% of the time; and (3) ensuring prompt and appropriate assistance to inmates in the event of an injury, illness [*9]  or trauma. Id. ¶ 63. The medical provider also noted that Plaintiff's "morbid obesity limits ability to ensure 'prompt' assistance." Id.
Defendant's job description for correctional officers states that certain working conditions that are "[e]ncountered on a regular basis" include, among other things, "frequently (31-60% [of the time]) . . . bending or stooping" and "continuously (61-100% [of the time]) . . . walking [and] standing." Dkt. No. 78-14 at 2. Other essential functions of a correctional officer's job include that he be able to engage physically with inmates, promptly assist inmates in emergencies, intervene to stop physical altercations between inmates, and pursue escaping inmates. Dkt. No. 58-2 ¶ 24.
On February 21, 2017, Defendant granted Plaintiff's accommodations in relation to his medical provider's letter regarding the essential functions that Plaintiff could no longer perform. Dkt. No. ¶ 65. Then, in June 2017, Defendant and Plaintiff completed this interactive process again with Defendant informing Plaintiff of his impending FMLA exhaustion and requesting additional updated medical information, and Plaintiff, in response, having his medical provider update his medical [*10]  information. Id. ¶¶ 66-69. At this point, Plaintiff testified that his ability to perform his job changed from hour to hour, id. ¶ 70, and on July 21, 2017, Plaintiff requested additional accommodations, including personal leave to miss work as needed due to his medical condition (as he had exhausted his FMLA leave). Id. ¶ 71. By this time, Plaintiff's health had continued to deteriorate, and when he did work, he experienced medical episodes marked by dizziness, profuse sweating, and repeated falls. Id. ¶¶ 72-73. As a result, Defendant decided to place Plaintiff on unpaid administrative leave pending receipt of further information from Plaintiff's medical provider with clarification regarding the restrictions listed in the medical provider's July 2017 letter. Id. ¶ 74. However, Plaintiff never provided the requested further clarification from his medical provider and still remains on unpaid administrative leave. Id. ¶ 77. While Plaintiff has not been terminated, he has also never submitted a request to return to work, and he has acknowledged that he does not plan to do so based on his medical condition and inability to perform the job duties of a correctional officer. Id. ¶¶ 80-82. [*11] 
In addition to the facts discussed above, a few other facts regarding Plaintiff's employment with Defendant are relevant to Plaintiff's claims. First, Plaintiff contends that sometime in the spring of 2016, someone wrote the term "ADA" next to Plaintiff's name (along with co-worker's names) on the bulletin board where the mandatory overtime list is posted at the facility. Id. ¶ 95. Second, Plaintiff also asserts that on the night of April 12, 2016, after Plaintiff had worked the post assignment with stairs, Degener called him and tried to make him work overtime, even though he had an overtime restriction, and during that phone call Degener allegedly told Plaintiff that "there ain't nothing wrong with you. I've got foot problems too." Id. ¶ 97; Dkt. No. 60-1 at 129-30. Finally, Plaintiff alleges that a nurse at the facility, Nurse Cross, after looking through Plaintiff's lunch bag and while pointing at Plaintiff's stomach said "[i]f you'd lose your belly . . . you wouldn't need insulin in this facility." Dkt. No. 58-2 1 98. This statement was allegedly made in the presence of other coworkers. Id.
On August 24, 2016, Plaintiff filed a Charge of Discrimination with the EEOC. Id. ¶ 117. [*12]  Plaintiff then commenced this action on August 31, 2017, alleging claims of (1) failure to provide reasonable accommodation in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. § 12112, et seq. ("ADA"); (2) retaliation in violation of the ADA; (3) hostile work environment in violation of the ADA; (4) actual or constructive discharge in violation of the ADA; and (5) intentional infliction of emotional distress, negligence, negligent training, and negligent supervision under Georgia law. Dkt. No. 58-2 ¶¶ 118. Defendant filed its Motion for Summary Judgment on January 1, 2019, dkt. no. 58, and Plaintiff filed his Cross-Motion for Partial Summary Judgment that same day, dkt. no. 59.

LEGAL STANDARD
Summary judgment is required where "the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). A fact is "material" if it "might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law." FindWhat Inv'r Grp. v. FindWhat.com, 658 F.3d 1282, 1307 (11th Cir. 2011) (quoting Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248 (1986)). A dispute is "genuine" if the "evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party." Id. In making this determination, the court is to view all of the evidence in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party and draw all reasonable inferences [*13]  in that party's favor. Johnson v. Booker T. Washington Broad. Serv., Inc., 234 F.3d 501, 507 (11th Cir. 2000).
The moving party bears the initial burden of demonstrating the absence of a genuine issue of material fact. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323 (1986). The movant must show the court that there is an absence of evidence to support the nonmoving party's case. Id. at 325. If the moving party discharges this burden, the burden shifts to the nonmovant to go beyond the pleadings and present affirmative evidence to show that a genuine issue of fact does exist. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 257.
The nonmovant may satisfy this burden in two ways. First, the nonmovant "may show that the record in fact contains supporting evidence, sufficient to withstand a directed verdict motion, which was 'overlooked or ignored' by the moving party, who has thus failed to meet the initial burden of showing an absence of evidence." Fitzpatrick v. City of Atlanta, 2 F.3d 1112, 1116 (11th Cir. 1993) (quoting Celotex Corp., 477 U.S. at 332 (Brennan, J., dissenting)). Second, the nonmovant "may come forward with additional evidence sufficient to withstand a directed verdict motion at trial based on the alleged evidentiary deficiency." Id. at 1117. Where the nonmovant attempts to carry this burden instead with nothing more "than a repetition of his conclusional allegations, summary judgment for the [movant is] not only proper but required." Morris v. Ross, 663 F.2d 1032, 1033-34 (11th Cir. 1981) (citing Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e)).

DISCUSSION
Plaintiff has brought [*14]  four ADA claims—failure to accommodate, retaliation, hostile work environment, and constructive discharge—and two state law claims—intentional infliction of emotional distress and negligence—against Defendant. Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment challenges each of these claims. Plaintiff's Cross Motion for Partial Summary Judgment only argues for summary judgment with respect to Plaintiff's claim that the Defendant failed to provide a reasonable accommodation under the ADA on April 12, 2016, when Captain Degener denied his request to work an assignment at a post that did not require him to traverse stairs.

I. Unopposed Issues
Before discussing the substance of the claims at issue in this case, it is helpful to recognize several issues raised in Defendant's Motion that Plaintiff does not dispute. First, Plaintiff agrees that any ADA claims for discreet acts that occurred before February 26, 2016, are time-barred because he filed his charge with the EEOC on August 24, 2016—meaning that he cannot recover for claims based on actions taken more than 180 days prior to that filing date. Dkt. No. 84 at 2; see Anderson v. Embarq/Sprint, 379 F. App'x 924, 926 (11th Cir. 2010) (recognizing that the ADA requires a plaintiff to file a charge with the EEOC [*15]  within 180 days from the alleged unlawful employment action). Second, Plaintiff agrees that he could no longer perform his essential job functions—and was therefore not a "qualified individual" under the ADA—when his administrative leave began in August 2017. Dkt. No. 84 at 2; see 42 U.S.C. § 12111 (2018). Third, Plaintiff withdraws his state law claims and his ADA constructive discharge claim, which means all that is at issue in this Order are Plaintiff's three claims under the ADA for failure to accommodate, retaliation, and hostile work environment. Dkt. No. 84 at 2.

II. ADA Failure to Accommodate Claim
The ADA states that "[n]o covered entity shall discriminate against a qualified individual on the basis of disability in regard to job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). This general prohibition against discrimination includes "not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who is an ... employee, unless such covered entity can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue [*16]  hardship on the operation of the business of such covered entity." Id. § 12112(b)(5)(A). "To state a prima facie claim for failure to accommodate, the plaintiff must show that: (1) he is disabled;4 (2) he is a qualified individual; and (3) he was discriminated against by way of the defendant's failure to provide a reasonable accommodation." McKane v. UBS Fin. Servs., Inc., 363 F. App'x 679, 681 (11th Cir. 2010) (citing Lucas v. W.W. Grainger, Inc., 257 F.3d 1249, 1255 (11th Cir. 2001)). "The plaintiff bears the burden of identifying an accommodation, and of demonstrating that the accommodation allows him to perform the job's essential functions." Id. (quoting Lucas, 257 F.3d at 1255-56).5
The ADA defines "qualified individual" to mean "an individual who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds or desires." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). The statute states that in determining whether a person is a qualified individual "consideration shall be given to the employer's judgment as to what functions of a job are essential, and if an employer has prepared a written description before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job, this description shall be considered evidence of the essential functions of the job." Id. The ADA also states that "[t]he [*17]  term 'reasonable accommodation' may include ... job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, reassignment to a vacant position ... and other similar accommodations." Id. § 12111(9). Finally, the ADA states that an "'undue hardship' means an action requiring significant difficulty or expense, when considering," among other factors "the nature and cost of the accommodation," the financial resources and operation of the facility, and "the type of operation or operations of the covered entity, including the composition, structure, and functions of the workforce of such entity." Id. § 12111(10).
In this case, Plaintiff made various accommodation requests over the course of his employment with Defendant. Some of those accommodations were granted and are not at issue in this order, such as his various requests for FMLA leave and his request to not work overtime. However, Plaintiff does assert failure to provide reasonable accommodations with respect to three requested accommodations—namely his request to use syringes at work to take prescribed insulin injections, his request to use insulin pens to take prescribed insulin injections, and his request on April 12, 2016, to be assigned to a post without [*18]  stairs because of his swollen foot. The Court will address each of these requested accommodations in turn.

A. Syringes
Plaintiff first alleges that Defendant failed to accommodate his request to use syringes at work to take his prescribed insulin injections. Specifically, he argues that he was denied his requested reasonable accommodation because Defendant required him to keep his insulin syringes in his car and later in a locker at the main entrance to the prison.
However, because Plaintiff argues that he was denied a reasonable accommodation to take his insulin in 2014, a challenge to that discrete act—the denial of his requested accommodation—is time-barred since it occurred prior to February 26, 2016. It is undisputed that in late 2014, Plaintiff advised Defendant of his type II diabetes and requested an accommodation "to be allowed breaks, as needed, to take insulin during his shift using a syringe." Dkt. No. 58-2 ¶ 29; Dkt. No. 85 ¶ 29. It is also undisputed that Defendant approved that request on December 12, 2014, and allowed Plaintiff to walk to his car to take insulin shots as needed but also told Plaintiff that "[i]nsulin syringe/needles should be kept in your car and cannot [*19]  be brought into the facility." Dkt. No. 58-2 ¶ 30; Dkt. No. 85 ¶ 30; Dkt. No. 78-27. To the extent that Plaintiff argues that Defendant's response was not a reasonable accommodation, Plaintiff had 180 days from December 12, 2014, to file a grievance with the EEOC regarding that discrete act for alleged ADA discrimination. See Nat'l R.R. Passenger Corp. v. Morgan, 536 U.S. 101, 110 (2002) ("A discrete retaliatory or discriminatory act 'occurred' on the day that it 'happened.' A party, therefore, must file a charge within ... 180 ... . days of the date of the act or lose the ability to recover for it."); Ramsey v. Greenbush Logistics, Inc., No. 3:17-CV-01167-AKK, 2017 WL 6492608, at *3 (N.D. Ala. Dec. 19, 2017) (citing Abram v. Fulton Cty. Gov't, 598 Fed. App'x 672, 676 (11th Cir. 2015)) (finding a denial of a requested accommodation to be a discrete act of discrimination). As discussed above, the parties stipulate that any discrete acts that occurred before February 26, 2016, are time-barred. As such, any challenge regarding Plaintiff's requested accommodation for breaks to take his insulin are time-barred.
Plaintiff testified that he complained multiple times about having to go to his car to take his insulin. See dkt. no. 60-1 at 206-07. Nevertheless, because those complaints concern the same accommodation requested in December 2014 and because a continuing violations theory does not apply to failure to accommodate [*20]  claims, any action based on those later complaints are also time-barred. See Ramsey, 2017 WL 6492608, at *3 (explaining that "the Supreme Court has explained that a continuing violation theory is inapplicable to discrete acts" such as a denial of a request for accommodation under the ADA). Moreover, even if future complaints were discrete acts, Plaintiff failed to identify any dates of any of these alleged complaints—besides the June 2016 complaint that led to the locker accommodation. As such, Plaintiff has failed to show that any such complaints occurred after February 26, 2016.
Furthermore, to the extent that Plaintiff's complaints regarding taking his insulin were new discrete acts that were not otherwise time-barred, such as his June 2016 request to keep his insulin and syringes somewhere other than his car, Plaintiff has failed to show that Defendant did not reasonably accommodate his request or otherwise identify a reasonable accommodation for using syringes. "The plaintiff bears the burden of identifying a reasonable accommodation that would allow a qualified individual to perform the job, and an employer is not required to accommodate an employee in any manner in which the employee desires." Gilliard v. Georgia Dep't of Corr., 500 F. App'x 860, 868 (11th Cir. 2012)(citing Stewart v. Happy Herman's Cheshire Bridge, Inc., 117 F.3d 1278, 1285-86 (11th Cir. 1997)); [*21]  see also Moore v. Accenture, LLP, No. 06-15650, 2007 WL 3313152, at *3 (11th Cir. Nov. 9, 2007) ("Stated more plainly, a qualified individual with a disability is not entitled to the accommodation of her choice, but only to a reasonable accommodation." (citation omitted)). Under the ADA, reasonable accommodations include "[m]odifications or adjustments to the work environment, or to the manner or circumstances under which the position held or desired is customarily performed, that enable an individual with a disability who is qualified to perform the essential functions of that position." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2. Here, as an initial matter, Defendant approved of Plaintiff's request to take breaks as needed to use insulin. When Plaintiff requested to keep his syringes somewhere other than his car because of the difficulties of going to and from his car multiple times a day, Defendant allowed him to store the syringes at the main entrance in a locker outside of security. Thus, Defendant did accommodate Plaintiff's requests to some extent.
Nevertheless, Plaintiff argues that Defendant failed to reasonably accommodate him because storing syringes in his car or the locker did not allow him to take insulin as needed. Specifically, Plaintiff testified that storing syringes in the car required a lot [*22]  of time, required him to go through security, required him to have someone cover for him—and Plaintiff testified that sometimes he could not find someone to cover for him—and did not allow him to take his insulin within a short amount of time of eating.6 As for the locker, Plaintiff testified that sometimes the lockers were already full by the time he arrived for his shift. Despite these problems with the accommodations provided by Defendant, it is Plaintiff's ultimate burden to identify a reasonable accommodation. Plaintiff has failed to identify any accommodation that would not require bringing syringes inside a prison.
Because of the nature of a prison, any accommodation involving syringes in the prison would be unreasonable, and for the same reasons, even if it were reasonable, Defendant has shown that such an accommodation would result in an undue hardship. See Earl v. Mervyns, Inc., 207 F.3d 1361, 1367 (11th Cir. 2000) ("[B]efore an employer has a duty to show undue hardship, the plaintiff first must show that a reasonable accommodation exists."). Defendant's prison houses inmates who have been convicted of various crimes, including violent crimes such as murder and assault. Dkt. No. 58-2 11 15-16. Inmates can use needles as weapons, for [*23]  drug use, or for tattoos. Id. ¶¶ 17-19. For these reasons, syringes are viewed as high-valued contraband. Id. ¶ 19.
Nevertheless, Plaintiff argues that Defendant could have reasonably accommodated him by allowing him to store his syringes in many different locations in the prison. He argues that they could have been stored in a locked control room in the building where Plaintiff was typically assigned, one of four lockers with padlocks near the desk where Plaintiff was normally stationed, a room in the administration building where keys, radios, and other equipment are kept, a locked HR filing room, or employee break rooms. Dkt. No. 84 at 11-12. Plaintiff also argues that the most obvious place where he could have kept his syringes was in the prison's medical facility.
Plaintiff's suggested accommodation locations fail to take into account Defendant's interest in keeping needles out of its facility. As stated above, an employee is not entitled to be accommodated in any manner that he wishes. The accommodation must be reasonable under the circumstances. Here, as a general matter, it would be unreasonable to require a prison to allow syringes to be brought into its controlled and secured [*24]  environment, where they could find their way into the hands of inmates. Indeed, allowing syringes into the prison at all risks them being lost, stolen, or exchanged with a guard willing to accept a bribe, which is a reality in prisons that courts recognize. See, e.g., United States v. Sihler, 562 F.2d 349, 350 (5th Cir. 1977) (discussing a prison guard that had been smuggling contraband to inmates); United States v. Watts, No. S3 09 CR 62 CM, 2011 WL 167627, at *2 (S.D.N.Y. Jan. 11, 2011) ("Once the contraband was successfully brought into the prison facilities—accomplished in part by the payment of bribes to [prison guards]—Jackie and others would distribute the items to various other inmates.").
More specifically, Warden Johns testified that syringes could not be kept in the main control room, which he described as "one of the most important, if not the most important area of the entire facility." Dkt. No. 79-4 at 97-98. He explained that because of its important role, the prison restricts traffic into the control room. Id. Pamela Paolantonio testified that the control room was a "restricted area" that only upper management and officers staffed to that area were allowed to enter, so allowing Plaintiff to store his syringes there would be an "issue of authorization."7 Dkt. No. 79-1 at 29. Warden Johns also testified that although [*25]  the control room had a pass-through window, using that for Plaintiff's syringes would require other officers to handle his syringes and be responsible for them, which the officers assigned to that area were not authorized to do.8 Dkt. No. 79-4 at 98.
Plaintiff's other suggested locations are also unreasonable. As for the prison's pharmacy and hospital, Warden Johns testified that those areas only hold medication and supplies for the inmates. Dkt. No. 79-4 at 97. As such, the prison had strict control procedures for keeping inmate medication accounted for and keeping those areas highly supervised regarding who comes in and out. Id. Ms. Paolantonio explained that the pharmacy staff had "to have an accountability of needles [and] ... . insulin vials" every shift. Dkt. No. 79-1 at 28. Allowing Plaintiff to store his syringes there would have required the medical and pharmacy staff to account for both inmate and staff medication and supplies. Dkt. No. 79-4 at 97; Dkt. No. 79-1 at 28. Regarding breakrooms and bathrooms, they could be accessed by inmates and "a whole host of other staff," making them not safe for storing syringes. Id.; Dkt. No. 79-1 at 30.
The locker where Defendant allowed [*26]  Plaintiff to store his syringes is distinguishable from these other areas because it is at the main entrance of the prison. Dkt. No. 79-4 at 98-99. As Warden Johns explained, this area was beyond the secure perimeter and thus was not accessible by inmates. Id. Moreover, each locker had one individual key so if Plaintiff had the key to an individual locker, no other employee could access that locker. Id. Therefore, allowing Plaintiff to store his syringes in the lockers does not present the same concerns as the other areas suggested by Plaintiff inside the prison facility.9 For these reasons, any accommodation that required Defendant to allow syringes into the prison would have been unreasonable, and Plaintiff has failed to establish a reasonable accommodation.10 For the same reasons, allowing syringes into the prison would have created an undue hardship on Defendant because it would be potentially opening itself up to injuries to guards or inmates, extra accounting procedures for medication and supplies, or possible liability. Considering the "type of operation ... including the composition, structure, and functions" of a prison, Defendant has shown that exposing itself to these dangers [*27]  by allowing syringes into a controlled prison environment would be an undue hardship. See 42 U.S.C. § 12111(10). For both of these reasons, Plaintiff's claims for failure to accommodate based on using syringes to take insulin fail as a matter of law.
Finally, as far as Plaintiff's complaint about the locker accommodation in April 2017, in addition to the reasons stated above, to the extent that complaint is a separate discrete act of a requested accommodation, Plaintiff's challenge to that act also fails because Plaintiff has failed to show that he was a qualified individual at that point. First, the parties agree that at the very latest, Plaintiff was no longer a qualified individual by August 2017. However, it is undisputed that in response to Defendant's letter asking for updated medical information related to Plaintiff's need for continued accommodations, Plaintiff's medical provider indicated on February 11, 2017, that Plaintiff was unable to perform various essential functions of his position. Dkt. No. 58-2 ¶¶ 62-63; Dkt. No. 85 ¶¶ 62-63. These functions included bending and stooping as much as 60 percent of the time, standing as much as 100 percent of the time, and ensuring prompt and appropriate [*28]  assistance to inmates in the event of an injury, illness, or trauma. Dkt. No. 58-2 ¶ 63; Dkt. No. 85 ¶ 63; see also Dkt. No. 78-13 at 20 (listing the "minimum requirements" and "working conditions" that are "[e]ncountered on a regular basis" as a part of Plaintiff's job, including "continuously" walking and standing). The medical provider also indicated that Plaintiff's "morbid obesity limits ability to ensure 'prompt' assistance." Dkt. No. 58-2 ¶ 63; Dkt. No. 85 ¶ 63.
Therefore, based on the medical provider's response to Defendant's inquire, at least as early as February 11, 2017, Plaintiff was no longer a qualified individual under the ADA. Plaintiff was no longer a qualified individual because at this point, despite multiple accommodations—including no overtime, limited post assignments, multiple periods of FMLA leave, and a syringe locker—Plaintiff could not perform the essential functions of his position as a prison guard. Beyond not being able to continuously walk or stand or provide prompt assistance to inmates or other guards, Plaintiff also could not work overtime or handle physical stress associated with working extended hours, which Defendant lists as minimum requirements [*29]  of his position. Dkt. No. 78-13 at 20. Moreover, it is undisputed that other essential functions of the job included physically engaging with inmates, promptly assisting in emergencies, intervening to stop physical altercations between inmates, and pursuing inmates in the event of attempted escape. Dkt. No. 38-2 ¶ 24; Dkt. No. 85 ¶ 24. If Plaintiff could no longer continuously stand, frequently bend or stoop, or provide prompt assistance, then it is reasonable to conclude that he could no longer perform these other essential functions. As such, Plaintiff has failed to show that he was a qualified individual in April 2017, and therefore, any claim related to a requested accommodation at that time fails.

B. Insulin Pens
Plaintiff also asserts that Defendant failed to accommodate his request to bring insulin pens, rather than syringes, into the prison to take his insulin injections, despite the fact that other employees were allowed to do so. The record is undisputed that at least one other employee, Correctional Officer Ralph McCormick, was permitted to bring insulin pens into the prison after his written request was approved on March 18, 2013. Dkt. No. 58-2 ¶ 85. Plaintiff testified that [*30]  he made an oral request for this accommodation when he received his prescription for the insulin pens and gave that prescription to human resources, but he stated that his request was denied.11 Dkt. No. 60-1 at 209-10.
However, while these facts would otherwise establish a claim for failure to accommodate under the ADA, Plaintiff's insulin pen claim is also time-barred. Plaintiff's Complaint states that "[i]n June of 2015, Plaintiff obtained a prescription for insulin pens rather than insulin syringes. Plaintiff did so with the hope that Defendant would allow him to bring his insulin pens into the Correctional Facility." Dkt. No. 1 I 27. While answering questions about various allegations in the Complaint during his deposition, Plaintiff affirmed that "as of June 2014" he was prescribed insulin pens. While these dates conflict, the important thing is that both are prior to February 26, 2016. This is important because Plaintiff testified that he requested this accommodation when he got the prescription for the insulin pens. Dkt. No. 60-1 at 209-10 ("I sent the same thing. I said, 'I've got insulin pens.' I took-every time I had a . . . prescription change . . . I'd take it to them to . [*31]  . . in my file. . . . Just whenever I had the prescription change I took that to them. . . . [W]henever I changed the prescription, I just took that to them."). Therefore, if Plaintiff requested the accommodation to use insulin pens at the time or near the time when he got his prescription, whether in June 2014, as he testified, or June 2015, as stated in the Complaint, any claim regarding that request is time-barred because it occurred prior to February 26, 2016.

C. April 12, 2016, Post Without Stairs Request
Lastly, Plaintiff asserts that Defendant denied his request for a reasonable accommodation on April 12, 2016, when he asked Captain Degener to be assigned to a post without stairs because of swelling in his foot caused by his diabetes.12 Plaintiff contends that he made this request, even showing Degener his foot, but was assigned to a post with stairs anyway, and as a result, he suffered permanent damage to his foot. Defendant sharply disputes the facts asserted by Plaintiff regarding this incident. Because the Court finds multiple genuine disputes of material fact exist as to this claim, summary judgment for either party is improper.
First, a genuine dispute of material fact exists [*32]  as to whether Plaintiff was a qualified individual under the ADA on April 12, 2016. As stated above, Plaintiff has failed to show that he was a qualified individual as early as February 2017, but this event involving the post assignment occurred almost a year earlier. At first blush, Plaintiff appears to fail to show that he was qualified in that he was in so much pain from his feet that he could not "walk a lot" or traverse stairs. Thus, he likely could not perform essential functions of his position like responding promptly to emergencies, intervening in inmate altercations, or even just continuously walking or standing. However, Plaintiff has pointed out that other employees requested and were granted temporary shift assignments with walking limitations or for posts without stairs. Specifically, Ms. Paolantonio, the union representative, stated that at least two other employees, Kimberly Harmon and Stephen Lee, had requested and were granted stair restrictions as a result of having knee replacements. Dkt. No. 79-1 at 33-34. Both Harmon and Lee were corrections officers like Plaintiff. Id. Paolantonio testified that Harmon was provided her stair restriction for a year and a half [*33]  and that as a result of her restriction, Harmon would be assigned to posts that did not require traversing stairs. Id. at 35-36. Paolantonio also explained that Larry Boyd had a post-assignment restriction related to his not being able to stand for long periods of time due to ankle problems. Id. at 37. Additionally, Paolantonio had her own accommodation for about four to five months for post assignments without stairs because of a torn foot tendon. Id. at 37. Finally, Plaintiff was eventually granted an accommodation for a post without stairs. Dkt. 58-2 ¶ 50; Dkt. No. 85 ¶ 50.
While these facts do not definitely establish that Plaintiff was a qualified individual on this date in question, they at least create a genuine dispute of material fact because if Defendant allowed other employees, who were presumably also responsible for performing essential functions like promptly responding to emergencies, to have shift restrictions like being assigned to a post without stairs, then that fact calls into question whether Plaintiff was not qualified at that time. In other words, if Defendant, despite its listed essential job functions, allowed other prison guards to work at the prison with post [*34]  assignment limitations, then a reasonable jury could find that Plaintiff was a qualified individual on April 12, 2016, when he requested the same type of post-assignment accommodation because that jury could conclude that such an accommodation would allow him to perform the essential functions of his job.
Second, a genuine dispute of material fact exists as to whether Plaintiff requested an accommodation in the first place. While Plaintiff testified that he made the request to Degener for a post without stairs, linked that request to his physical disability by referencing and even showing Degener his foot, and questioned why he was not accommodated when Degener assigned him to a post with stairs, Degener testified that he never had any conversation with Plaintiff about Plaintiff's feet and that Plaintiff never asked him to be assigned to a post that did not involve walking up and down stairs.13 He also swore in his declaration that Plaintiff had "never shown [him] his feet, and did not tell [him] that his feet were swollen and painful on April 12, 2016." Dkt. No. 82-3 ¶ 8. To succeed in bringing a failure to accommodate claim under the ADA, a Plaintiff must prove that he actually requested [*35]  a reasonable accommodation from Defendant. See Gaston v. Bellingrath Gardens & Home, Inc., 167 F.3d 1361, 1363 (11th Cir. 1999) (finding that a plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim failed because she never request a reasonable accommodation). Therefore, based on Plaintiff's and Degener's conflicting testimonies, a genuine dispute of material fact exists as to whether Plaintiff requested an accommodation on April 12, 2016.
Finally, as a corollary of the dispute of fact over whether Plaintiff requested an accommodation, a genuine [*36]  dispute of fact also exists as to whether Plaintiff's request was in fact denied. Plaintiff testified that after he had requested a post without stairs, Degener assigned him to such a post anyway, and when Plaintiff asked him why his request was denied, Degener responded by saying "I have feet problems, too, and I do it" and "I don't have time for this." Dkt. No. 60-1 at 220, 223. Degener swore in his declaration that he did not have the authority grant or deny a requested accommodation and that had Plaintiff requested one, he would have sent Plaintiff to human resources. Dkt. No. 82-3 ¶¶ 2-4. Warden Johns also swore in his declaration that Degener did not have such authority. Dkt. No. 82-2 ¶ 5. Degener also denied telling Plaintiff that he "had feet problems too" because he does not have any feet problems. Id. ¶ 7. Finally, Sidney McWhorter swore in her declaration that Plaintiff did not make any request to anyone in human resources for an accommodation on April 12, 2016. Dkt. No. 82-1 ¶¶ 2-3. Therefore, a genuine dispute of material fact exists as to whether Plaintiff was denied an alleged accommodation request on April 12, 2016.
Thus, because of these various disputes of material [*37]  fact regarding Defendant's alleged denial of Plaintiff's accommodation request on April 12, 2016, summary judgment is improper for either party on this claim.
* * *
For these reasons, Defendant's Motion, dkt. no. 58, is GRANTED with respect to Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claims as to his requests involving syringes or insulin pens but is DENIED as to Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim for the alleged denial of his request for a post without stairs on April 12, 2016. Plaintiff's Motion, dkt. no. 59, is DENIED.

III. ADA Retaliation Claim
The ADA states that "[n]o person shall discriminate against any individual because such individual has opposed any act or practice made unlawful by [the ADA] or because such individual made a charge . . . under [the ADA]." 42 U.S.C. § 12203(a). "This provision creates a prohibition on retaliation under the ADA that is similar to Title VII's prohibition on retaliation." Wofsy v. Palmshores Ret. Cmty., 285 F. App'x 631, 634 (11th Cir. 2008) (quoting Stewart v. Happy Herman's Cheshire Bridge, Inc., 117 F.3d 1278, 1287 (11th Cir. 1997)). "In order to prove an ADA retaliation claim, a plaintiff must show that: (1) he engaged in conduct protected by the ADA; (2) he was subjected to an adverse employment action at the time, or after the protected conduct took place; and (3) the defendant took an adverse employment action [*38]  against [him] because of [his] protected conduct." Collado v. United Parcel Serv., Co., 419 F.3d 1143, 1158 (11th Cir. 2005) (citations omitted) (internal quotation marks omitted)).
"An employee may be able to show that a request for an accommodation under the ADA is protected activity where she has a good faith, objectively reasonable belief that she [is] entitled to those accommodations." Myers v. Gwinnett Cty., No. 1:16-CV-824-RWS-JKL, 2017 WL 4865539, at *14 (N.D. Ga. July 20, 2017), report and recommendation adopted, No. 1:16-CV-824-RWS-JKL, 2017 WL 4948072 (N.D. Ga. Sept. 25, 2017). As for adverse action, "[t]he Supreme Court has said that a 'materially adverse action' is one that 'might have dissuaded a reasonable worker from making or supporting a charge of discrimination.'" Garrison v. City of Tallahassee, 664 F. App'x 823, 827 (11th Cir. 2016) (quoting Burlington N. & Santa Fe Ry. v. White, 548 U.S. 53, 54 (2006)). Finally, to make a prima facie case of causation, a plaintiff is required to show "(1) 'the decision-maker[s] [were] aware of the protected conduct'; and (2) 'the protected activity and the adverse action were not wholly unrelated.'" Singleton v. Pub. Health Tr. of Miami-Dade Cty., 725 F. App'x 736, 738 (11th Cir. 2018) (quoting Gupta v. Fla. Bd. of Regents, 212 F.3d 571, 590 (11th Cir. 2000)), abrogated on other grounds as recognized by Crawford Carroll, 529 F.3d 961, 973-74 (11th Cir. 2008). The Eleventh Circuit has explained that "close temporal proximity" between a decision-maker becoming aware of protected conduct and an adverse employment action will "generally be enough to create a factual issue on the causation element." Id.
"Where, as here, an employee alleges retaliation under . . . the ADA without direct evidence of [*39]  the employer's intent, we apply the burden shifting framework established in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973)." Batson v. Salvation Army, 897 F.3d 1320, 1328-29 (11th Cir. 2018). Therefore, under this framework, "[o]nce the employee has established a prima facie case, the burden shifts to the employer to articulate a nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse action." Id. (citation omitted). "If the employer does so, the burden shifts back to the employee to demonstrate that the employer's proffered reason was pretextual by presenting evidence sufficient to permit a reasonable factfinder to conclude that the reasons given by the employer were not the real reasons for the adverse employment decision." Id. (citation omitted) (internal quotation marks omitted).
In this case, Plaintiff's retaliation claim is based on Captain Degener's assigning of Plaintiff to a post with stairs on April 12, 2016. It is undisputed that Plaintiff's request for an accommodation of a shift assignment to a post without stairs because of his foot swelling caused by his type II diabetes was a protected activity under the ADA.14 However, Defendant argues that Plaintiff cannot show that he experienced an adverse employment action or that a causal link exists between his protected activity and any alleged adverse [*40]  action.
Plaintiff argues that he experienced an adverse employment action because in response to his requested accommodation to be assigned to a shift without stairs or much walking, Degener specifically chose to assign him to a post without chairs while stating that "I have feet problems, too, and I do it" and "I don't have time for this." Dkt. No. 60-1 at 220, 223. In response, Defendant argues that this alleged adverse action is merely an attempt to reclothe Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim as a retaliation claim without any additional facts, and as such, the mere denial of an accommodation cannot be an adverse employment action in this case.
Although it is a close call, the Court finds that Plaintiff has shown an adverse employment action. First, as a general matter, if Degener did specifically assign Plaintiff to a post with stairs in retaliation for his request, that would be an action that would discourage Plaintiff from requesting an accommodation under the ADA in the future. Second, the cases cited by Defendant for the proposition that a retaliation claim based on a denial of a requested accommodation is merely an attempt to reclothe the accommodation claim are distinguishable. [*41]  In both cases cited by Defendant, the Eleventh Circuit based its "reclothing" conclusion, at least in part, on the fact that the court had already rejected the failure to accommodate claim that was the basis for the retaliation claim. See Garrison v. City of Tallahassee, 664 F. App'x 823, 827 (11th Cir. 2016); Lucas v. W.W. Grainger, Inc., 257 F.3d 1249, 1261 (11th Cir. 2001). Here, the Court found that material disputes of fact prevented summary judgment on Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim for the events on April 12, 2016, so it cannot say that a retaliation claim based on those same facts fails as a matter of law. Third, Plaintiff is able to present just enough facts to differentiate this claim from his failure to accommodate claim—namely the statements allegedly made by Degener. In other words, a reasonable jury could determine—based on Degener's alleged insensitive comments about his own foot problems and "not having time for this"—that Plaintiff was not just denied a requested accommodation, but also specifically given a post with stairs to retaliate against him for asking for an accommodation in the first place.
The Court also finds that Plaintiff has shown a causal link between his requested accommodation and the adverse action that he experienced because of the close temporal proximity of those events. [*42]  First, reading the facts in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, Degener was aware of Plaintiff's protected conduct—his requested accommodation—when Plaintiff asked for it because Degener testified that he knew Plaintiff had diabetes—Plaintiff's documented disability with the prison—and Plaintiff asked for an accommodation for his foot swelling, which was caused by his diabetes. Dkt. No. 60-4 at 21-22; Dkt. No. 60-1 at 215-16. Second, Plaintiff has shown that the requested accommodation and the adverse action were not wholly unrelated because of the close temporal proximity of the events. Indeed, Plaintiff's request for a post without stairs was made on the same afternoon as Degener's denial of that request and his assignment of Plaintiff to a post with stairs along with his alleged comments. The causation burden here is not a high threshold, and for purposes of Plaintiff's prima facie case, the temporal proximity is at least enough to create a factual issue. See Singleton, 725 F. App'x at 738.
Therefore, because Plaintiff has met his burden on his prima facie case for retaliation, the burden shifts to Defendant to provide a non-discriminatory reason for his decision to assign Plaintiff to a post with stairs despite [*43]  Plaintiff's request to the contrary. Although this is generally a light burden for an employer to meet, see Smith v. Horner, 839 F.2d 1530, 1537 (11th Cir. 1988) (describing employer's burden at this stage as "exceedingly light"), an employer still must present some neutral, non-discriminatory basis for the actions that he or she took. Here, Defendant fails to do that.
Defendant's asserted non-discriminatory reason for Degener's actions is that Plaintiff had not previously requested a post-assignment accommodation, so any such request would not have been in the prison's system. See Dkt. No. 58 at 16 (explaining that Defendant's non-retaliatory reason was that "Berke had no accommodation or physician's restriction on file upon which Captain Degener could have relied to excuse him from an assignment to a post without stairs."); Dkt. No. 88 at 14 (arguing that there is no evidence of retaliatory motive because Plaintiff "had just two accommodations on file, which were longstanding"). As such, Degener had no reason to know or believe that Plaintiff was on a shift restriction. The problem with this asserted non-discriminatory reason is that it shows why Degener could assign Plaintiff to a post without stairs—it is reasonable to infer that [*44]  if he had a prior restriction, Degener would have had to comply with it—but it does not show why he chose to assign Plaintiff to a post with stairs in response to Plaintiff's specific request to not receive such an assignment. To say that Degener had no reason to know of past restrictions does not change the fact, under Plaintiff's version of events, that Degener was aware that Plaintiff had diabetes and that he specifically requested an accommodation for a post without stairs because of his swollen feet. Moreover, Defendant does not even specifically assert that Degener checked Plaintiff's file for what accommodations were listed when making his post assignment decision on April 12, 2016; rather, Degener maintains that no such conversation regarding Plaintiff's feet ever took place. As such, saying that Degener had no reason to know fails to provide a non-discriminatory basis for his decision to assign Plaintiff to a post without stairs.
Moreover, even if the Court found that Defendant had articulated a non-discriminatory reason, genuine disputes of material fact prevent the Court from saying that Plaintiff fails to establish that Defendant's asserted justification is pretext. In other [*45]  words, a reasonable jury could conclude based on Plaintiff's testimony of his request for an accommodation, Degener's denial, the temporal proximity of those events, and Degener's statements that any asserted non-discriminatory reason for those actions was actually pretext for retaliation under the ADA. In summary, Defendant's fail to show the absence of a genuine dispute of material fact on this issue. For these reasons, Defendant's Motion with respect to Plaintiff's claim for retaliation under the ADA is DENIED.

IV. ADA Hostile Work Environment Claim
The Eleventh Circuit has not yet recognized hostile work environment claims as cognizable under the ADA. See Palmer v. Albertson's LLC, 418 F. App'x 885, 889 (11th Cir. 2011) ("This Court has never held in a published opinion that a claim for hostile work environment is available under ADA."); Cooper v. CLP Corp., 679 F. App'x 851, 851-53 (11th Cir. 2017) ("Assuming, without deciding, that a claim of disability-based hostile work environment is cognizable under the ADA, we conclude that the district court properly granted summary judgment to defendant CLP on that claim."). However, assuming that such claims are cognizable, to establish such a claim, a plaintiff must "show that . . . [his] disability harassment [was] 'sufficiently severe or pervasive . . . to alter [*46]  the terms and conditions of work.'" Fodor v. E. Shipbuilding Grp., 598 F. App'x 693, 696 (11th Cir. 2015) (quoting Baldwin v. Blue Cross/Blue Shield of Ala., 480 F.3d 1287, 1300 (11th Cir. 2007)). "Factors relevant to the determination of whether a hostile work environment existed include 'the frequency of the discriminatory conduct; its severity; whether it is physically threatening or humiliating, or a mere offensive utterance; and whether it unreasonably interferes with an employee's work performance.'" Woodruff v. Sch. Bd. of Seminole Cty., Fla., 304 F. App'x 795, 799 (11th Cir. 2008) (quoting Harris v. Forklift Sys., Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 23 (1993)); see also Mosley-Coleman v. Potter, No. CV 309-033, 2009 WL 1811552, at *3 (S.D. Ga. June 24, 2009) (explaining that "the Supreme Court has stated that 'simple teasing, offhand comments, and isolated incidents (unless extremely serious) will not amount to discriminatory changes in the terms and conditions of employment.'" (quoting Faragher v. City of Boca Raton, 524 U.S. 775, 788 (1998)).
In this case, Plaintiff asserts that he experienced harassment during his employment with Defendant that created a hostile work environment. Specifically, Plaintiff points to the following acts that allegedly created this hostile environment: the prison's head nurse looked through Plaintiff's lunch bag, pointed at his stomach, and said—in front of other employees—that "if you'd lose that you wouldn't need insulin in this facility" and said that his need for insulin was not an emergency, dkt. no. 60-1 at 131; the April 12, 2016 comment from Degener that "I have feet problems, [*47]  too, and I do it" in reference to climbing stairs as well as the allegation that at one point he allegedly said "[t]here ain't nothing wrong with you," dkt. no. 60-1 at 220, 230; and an incident where someone wrote "ADA" next to Plaintiff and other employees names on a bulletin board where the mandatory overtime list is posted at the Facility, dkt. no. 58-2 ¶ 95; dkt. no. 85 ¶ 95. In response, Defendant argues that any claim for hostile work environment is barred by Plaintiff's failure to exhaust administrative remedies, and even if it is not barred, the facts presented are not so severe and pervasive as to constitute a hostile work environment.
Turning first to the procedural issue, the Court determines that Plaintiff did exhaust his administrative remedies with respect to his hostile work environment claim by filing a charge with the EEOC. Before filing an ADA claim in court, "a plaintiff must exhaust his administrative remedies by filing a charge of discrimination with the EEOC." Green v. Elixir Indus., Inc., 152 F. App'x 838, 840 (11th Cir. 2005). Therefore, "[i]n light of the purpose of the EEOC exhaustion requirement, we have held that a 'plaintiff's judicial complaint is limited by the scope of the EEOC investigation which can reasonably be expected [*48]  to grow out of the charge of discrimination.'" Gregory v. Ga. Dep't of Human Res., 355 F.3d 1277, 1280 (11th Cir. 2004) (citation omitted). However, courts are still "extremely reluctant to allow procedural technicalities to bar claims" on this basis. Id. "As such, [the Eleventh Circuit] has noted that 'the scope of an EEOC complaint should not be strictly interpreted.'" Id.
Here, although Plaintiff never uses the term "hostile work environment" in his EEOC charge, he nonetheless alleges facts from which a claim of hostile work environment can reasonably be expected to grow. Applying a liberal construction to the EEOC charge, it is clear that it references both the ADA note on the overtime board, which he describes as causing him to feel "humiliated in front of his peers," as well as the comments by Degener and the head nurse. It is reasonable to conclude that the scope of the EEOC complaint included a hostile work environment claim because such a claim could be expected to reasonably grow out of those alleged facts.
Nevertheless, the procedural bar is a non-starter because, turning to the merits, the Court concludes that Plaintiff has failed to establish facts showing harassment so severe or pervasive as to alter the terms and conditions of work. Plaintiff [*49]  relies on the alleged facts showing harassment discussed above to argue that there is at least a fact issue on the question of hostile work environment, but Plaintiff does not point to any case law to show how this conduct is sufficiently severe and pervasive. Defendant, on the other hand, points to at least two cases showing the high threshold for establishing a hostile work environment claim. See McCann v. Tillman, 526 F.3d 1370, 1379 (11th Cir. 2008) (rejecting plaintiff's race-based hostile work environment claim by concluding that "[a]lthough offensive, such instances of racially derogatory language alone, extending over a period of more than two years, are too sporadic and isolated to . . . [be] so objectively severe or pervasive as to alter the terms and conditions of her employment"); Gilliard v. Georgia Dep't of Corr., 500 F. App'x 860, 866 (11th Cir. 2012) (rejecting plaintiff's ADA hostile work environment claim where plaintiff was called a "cripple" and a "hopalong" by her supervisor by concluding that "the alleged harassment by [the supervisor] lasted for only one week in her nearly 11-month employment . . . and, thus, was not sufficiently severe or pervasive as to alter the terms and conditions of her employment"); see also Mosley-Coleman v. Potter, No. CV 309-033, 2009 WL 1811552, at *3 (S.D. Ga. June 24, 2009) (describing the standard for hostile work environment claims as "stringent"). [*50]  Here, Plaintiff only points to the "ADA" comment on the overtime bulletin board and to the comments made by Degener and the head nurse as the only instances of harassment over his multi-year employment with Defendant. These "sporadic" actions are not so pervasive as to alter the conditions of Plaintiff's employment. Moreover, although writing "ADA" next to Plaintiff's and others' names on the overtime board was insensitive and the comments by Degener and the head nurse, if said as Plaintiff alleges, were unkind, disrespectful, and rude in that they failed to appreciate the difficulties and struggles of Plaintiff's disability, they are more appropriately characterized as "mere offensive utterances" rather than severe actions or statements that interfered with Plaintiff's work. See Woodruff, 304 F. App'x at 799.; see also Alansari v. Tropic Star Seafood Inc., 388 F. App'x 902, 905 (11th Cir. 2010) (finding that derogatory comments and actions targeted at a plaintiff's Muslim religion "were more akin to 'mere offensive utterances' and not something that unreasonably interfered with [the plaintiff's] work of loading his truck and delivering his goods"). Cf. Jones v. UPS Ground Freight, 683 F.3d 1283, 1288-90 (11th Cir. 2012) (finding a jury question on plaintiff's hostile work environment claim where an African American truck driver presented evidence that [*51]  he was called an "Indian," told "I don't care what race you are, I trained your kind before," that people left banana peels on his truck, that other employees wore Confederate apparel on the worksite, and that two employees approached him at night with a crowbar to ask if he had reported the bananas and Confederate apparel to the manager). Therefore, Plaintiff has failed to present evidence establishing a hostile work environment claim, and as such, Defendant's Motion with respect to that claim is GRANTED.

V. Damages
Defendant also requests summary judgment on Plaintiff's claims for back pay and front pay, compensatory damages, and punitive damages. For the reasons that follow, the Court finds that issues of fact make summary judgment on these damages claims inappropriate.

A. Back Pay and Front Pay
In employment-discrimination cases, back pay and front pay are similar types of damages available for parties who prevail. "It is the duty of [a] district court, after a finding of discrimination, to place the injured party in the position he or she would have been absent the discriminatory actions," and in doing so, the district court has broad discretion to fashion relief in such a way to [*52]  "make whole victims of unlawful discrimination." Sowers v. Kemira, Inc., 701 F. Supp. 809, 826 (S.D. Ga. 1988) (citation omitted)(internal quotation marks omitted). Back pay and front pay are two remedies that a district court can use to fashion such relief. These damages are available to a plaintiff when "the defendant's discriminatory conduct caused the disability." Lathem v. Dep't of Children & Youth Servs., 172 F.3d 786, 794 (11th Cir. 1999); see Sowers, 701 F. Supp. at 827 (giving successful plaintiff both back pay and front pay). A successful plaintiff is presumptively entitled to back pay, but front pay is not as readily available. See Tobin v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 553 F.3d 121, 141 n.30 (1st Cir. 2009); Sowers, 701 F. Supp. at 827. Rather, front pay is to be used as an "alternative to reinstatement" where extenuating circumstances make plaintiff's reinstatement to his prior employment position unfeasible. Sowers, 701 F. Supp. at 827; Lewis v. Fed. Prison Indus., Inc., 953 F.2d 1277, 1281 (11th Cir. 1992). But, the Eleventh Circuit has cautioned that "[b]ecause of the potential for windfall, [the] use [of front pay] must be tempered," and therefore, "front pay remains a special remedy, warranted only by egregious circumstances." Lewis, 953 F.2d at 1281.
Defendant argues that because Plaintiff cannot show that any failure to accommodate was the but-for cause of Plaintiff's injuries (specifically his foot injuries), he cannot recover back pay or front pay as a matter of law. Specifically, Defendant points to the fact that all of the medical providers deposed [*53]  in this case testified that
Plaintiff's own behavior could have, contributed to Plaintiff's foot drop or increased the complications resulting from his uncontrolled diabetes, including his (1) poor diet; (2) lack of exercise; (3) tobacco use; (4) decision to leave much earlier for work than necessary; (5) failure to ask GEO for a scheduled meal as an accommodation; (6) decision not to bring insulin in his car on days cooler than 86 degrees; (7) refusal to use a recommended insulin pump; (8) decision to refuse physical therapy to cure foot drop because he did not want to travel; (9) decision to refuse pain management because he did not want to travel; and (10) his decision to decline bariatric surgery.
Dkt. No. 58-2 ¶ 101; dkt. No. 85 ¶ 101. Alternatively, Plaintiff points to Dr. Johns' report in which he states the following:
e) As a result of his inability to comply with his prescribed insulin regimen, Mr. Berke's diabetes remained poorly controlled for the entire period in question. In turn, this placed him at very high risk for diabetic complications, including diabetic neuropathy.
f) Due to his uncontrolled diabetes, he developed diabetic peripheral neuropathy in the spring of 2016, [*54]  resulting in pain in his feet and legs and loss of sensation in the distal lower extremities.
g) Also due to uncontrolled diabetes, he developed foot drop deformity of the left foot, which resulted in the development of an unnatural gait.
h) Due to his unnatural gait, he developed severe pain in his leg, hip, and back that was highly disabling. It is probable that his frequent walking and climbing of stairs at work with an abnormal gait hastened and exacerbated the pain.
i) Both the chances of these complications occurring, as well as their severity, more likely than not would have been significantly reduced with better glycemic control of his diabetes.
j) His inability to fully comply with his prescribed insulin regimen undoubtedly contributed to his poor diabetes control and more likely than not played a direct role in the development of his neuropathic complications.
Dkt. No. 72-6 at 9.
While it is true that Dr. Johns admitted in his deposition that his report assumed that the facts alleged in Plaintiff's Complaint were true and that he did not dispute the other testifying doctor's opinion that walking up and down stairs over the course of a single afternoon was unlikely to cause foot [*55]  drop, dkt. no. 72 at 31; dkt. no. 72-2 at 20-21, his report still supports Plaintiff's claim that Defendant's actions caused him to have uncontrolled diabetes and more importantly, that the alleged events of April 12, 2016, exacerbated severe foot and leg pain to the point that he developed paralysis in his left foot. Therefore, while the evidence in the record shows that a reasonable jury may be very unlikely to find that Defendant's actions caused Plaintiff's injuries, based on the facts presented by Plaintiff, a reasonable jury could still find as much, which would entitle Plaintiff to back pay and, possibly, front pay. In other words, a genuine dispute of material fact exists as to whether Defendant's actions, or rather Plaintiff's own conduct, caused his injuries. As such, summary judgment is improper on the issue of back and front pay, and Defendant's Motion with respect to those potential damages is DENIED.

B. Compensatory Damages
"To prevail on a claim for compensatory damages under . . . the ADA, a plaintiff must show that a defendant violated his rights under the statute[] and did so with discriminatory intent." McCullum v. Orlando Reg'l Healthcare Sys., Inc., 768 F.3d 1135, 1146-47 (11th Cir. 2014). "A plaintiff may prove discriminatory intent by showing that [*56]  a defendant was deliberately indifferent to his statutory rights." Id. at 1147. The Eleventh Circuit has explained that this is an "exacting standard" and that "[t]o establish deliberate indifference, a plaintiff must show that the defendant 'knew that harm to a federally protected right was substantially likely" and "failed to act on that likelihood." Id. (citations omitted). However, "[w]here the substantial likelihood of harm is obvious, a jury may infer that the defendant had actual knowledge of that substantial risk of harm." Id.
The Court first notes that, although neither party raised this issue in its briefing, it is highly unlikely that Plaintiff can recover compensatory damages for his ADA retaliation claim. Although the Eleventh Circuit has never addressed this issue, see Kovelesky v. First Data Corp., 534 F. App'x 811, 815-16 (11th Cir.2013) (recognizing that the Eleventh Circuit has not addressed this issue); Ganstine v. Sec'y, Fla. Dep't of Correction, 502 F. App'x 905, 910 n.6 (11th Cir.2012) (same), the Seventh and Ninth Circuits have found that employees cannot recover compensatory or punitive damages under the ADA, Kramer v. Bank of Am. Sec., 355 F.3d 961, 965 (7th Cir.2004), cert. denied, 542 U.S. 932 (2004); Alvarado v. Cajun Operating Co., 588 F.3d 1261, 1270 (9th Cir. 2009). At least three courts in the Northern District of Georgia have adopted the Seventh and Ninth Circuit's reasoning.15 See Vaughan v. World Changers Church Int'', Inc., No. 1:13-CV-0746-AT, 2014 WL 4978439, at *16 (N.D. Ga. Sept. 16, 2014); Long v. Printpack, Inc., No. 1:10-CV-0196-TCB, 2010 WL 11596910, at *8-9 (N.D. Ga. June 14, 2010); Ajuluchuku v. S. New England Sch. of Law, No. CIVA1:05CV00446JEC, 2006 WL 2661232, at *19 (N.D. Ga. Sept. 14, 2006); but see Rumler v. Dep't of Corr., Fla., 546 F. Supp. 2d 1334, 1342 (M.D. Fla. 2008) (disagreeing with the Seventh Circuit's reasoning and concluding [*57]  that the plaintiff could seek compensatory and punitive damages for an ADA retaliation claim).
These courts analyzed the text of the ADA and the specific provision of the Civil Rights Act of 1991, 42 U.S.C. § 1981a, that expanded the remedies available for certain discrimination claims to include compensatory and punitive damages. See e.g., Vaughan, 2014 WL 4978439, at *16-17. Because the plain language of 42 U.S.C. § 1981a lists out specific types of discrimination claims for which such damages are available and claims for retaliation under the ADA are not listed, these courts concluded that such damages are not available for ADA retaliation claims. See, e.g., Alvarado v. Cajun Operating Co., 588 F.3d 1261, 1270 (9th Cir.2009) ("[T]he plain and unambiguous provisions of 42 U.S.C. § 1981a limit the availability of compensatory and punitive damages to those specific ADA claims listed. ADA retaliation is not on the list."). This Court finds the reasoning of the Seventh and Ninth Circuits and the Northern District of Georgia based on the plain language of the statute to be persuasive, and as such, it adopts their holdings that compensatory and punitive damages are not available for retaliation claims under the ADA. Thus, if Plaintiff is entitled to compensatory damages, it would only be for the surviving failure to accommodate claim. See 42 U.S.C. § 1981a (providing that plaintiffs [*58]  pursuing accommodation claims under the ADA "may recover compensatory and punitive damages").
Turning to Defendant's challenge to compensatory damages—that there is no evidence showing that Defendant was deliberately indifferent to Plaintiff—as with back pay and front pay damages, issues of fact prevent summary judgment on the issue of compensatory damages. As described above, material disputes of fact exist as to what transpired on April 12, 2016, in relation to Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim. Reading those facts in a light most favorable to Plaintiff, a reasonable jury could conclude that Degener knew a harm to Plaintiff's rights under the ADA were substantially likely and failed to act on that likelihood when he denied his request for a post without stairs, deciding instead to assign him to a post with stairs. Moreover, under Plaintiff's version of events, a reasonable jury could infer Degener's actual knowledge of the substantial risk of harm from his alleged comments about his own foot problems and the obvious foot swelling that Plaintiff showed him. As such, a genuine dispute of material fact exists as to whether Defendant was deliberately indifferent to Plaintiff, making [*59]  summary judgment on the issue of compensatory damages improper. Defendant's Motion with respect to this issue is GRANTED for any compensatory damages related to Plaintiff's retaliation claim but DENIED for any compensatory damages related to his failure to accommodate claim.16

C. Punitive Damages
42 U.S.C. § 1981a states that a plaintiff can recover punitive damages if he "demonstrates that the respondent engaged in a discriminatory practice or discriminatory practices with malice or with reckless indifference to the federally protected rights of an aggrieved individual." As explained above, punitive damages are not available for ADA retaliation claims, so the only issue here is whether Plaintiff is entitled to such damages for his failure to accommodate claim. For the same reasons outlined for compensatory damages above, the Court finds that, reading the facts in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, a reasonable jury could conclude based on Degener's comments that he acted with malice or at least reckless indifference to Plaintiff's rights under the ADA when he allegedly denied Plaintiff's requested accommodation on April 12, 2016. Indeed, because the Court found a genuine dispute of fact existed as [*60]  to whether Plaintiff was deliberately indifferent for compensatory damages purposes, a genuine dispute of fact would also exist as to whether he was recklessly indifferent for punitive damages. Therefore, summary judgment on the issue of punitive damages for Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim is improper. As such, Defendant's Motion with respect to punitive damages is GRANTED for Plaintiff's retaliation claim but DENIED for Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim.

CONCLUSION
For these reasons, Defendant's Motion to Dismiss, dkt. no. 58, is GRANTED in part and DENIED in part, and Plaintiff's Cross Motion for Partial Summary Judgment, dkt. no. 59, is DENIED. Specifically, Defendant's Motion is GRANTED with respect to Plaintiff's state law claims (Counts V and VI), to Plaintiff's ADA constructive discharge claim (Count IV), to all discrete acts other than those alleged to have occurred on April 12, 2016, for Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim (Count I), to all discrete acts other than those alleged to have occurred on April 12, 2016, for Plaintiff's retaliation claim (Count II), to Plaintiff's hostile work environment claim (Count III), and to Plaintiff's request for compensatory [*61]  and punitive damages for his ADA retaliation claim (Count VII). Defendant's Motion is DENIED with respect to Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim (Count I) and retaliation claim (Count II) as they relate to the alleged events of April 12, 2016, to Plaintiff's request for back pay and front pay, and to Plaintiff's request for compensatory and punitive damages for Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim (Count VII). Plaintiff's Motion is DENIED in full.
SO ORDERED, this 14th day of May, 2019.
/s/ Lisa Godbey Wood
HON. LISA GODBEY WOOD, JUDGE
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF GEORGIA


End of Document

