Blanchard v. Lahood
United States District Court for the Central District of California
March 8, 2010, Decided
Case No. CV 07-07921 DDP (FFMx)

Reporter
2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 166057 *; 2010 WL 11508016
BARBARA BLANCHARD, Plaintiff, v. RAY H. LAHOOD, SECRETARY OF THE UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION, FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION, FLOR RAMOS, Defendants.
Counsel:  [*1] For Barbara Blanchard, Plaintiff: Gloria Dredd Haney, LEAD ATTORNEY, Law Offices Gloria Dredd Haney, Orange, CA USA; Rochelle Evans Jackson, Rochelle Evans Jackson Law Office, Orange, CA USA.
For Mary E Peters, Secretary of the United States Department of Transportation, Flor Ramos, individual capacity, Defendants: Deborah E Yim, LEAD ATTORNEY, Jessica O Cheh, Office of US Attorney, Los Angeles, CA USA.
For Flor Ramos, his capacity as Director of a Division in the FAA, Defendant: Deborah E Yim, LEAD ATTORNEY, Office of US Attorney, Los Angeles, CA USA.
Judges: DEAN D. PREGERSON, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: DEAN D. PREGERSON
Opinion


NO JS-6

Order Granting Motion for Summary Judgment (Dkt. No. 57)
[Motion filed on December 30, 2009]
This matter comes before the Court on Defendant Ray H. LaHood, Secretary of the United States Department of Transportation, ("Defendant")'s motion for summary judgment, or in the alternative for summary adjudication of issues.1 Upon reviewing the parties' moving papers and hearing oral argument, the Court GRANTS the motion.

I. BACKGROUND
A. Factual Summary2
On September 15, 2005, Plaintiff Barbara Blanchard ("Blanchard") received a memorandum from Ramos, the Hazmat Division Branch [*2]  Manager at the Federal Aviation Administration's Regional Office in Los Angeles, California. The memorandum stated that as part of a general realignment, Blanchard would no longer be a Security Administrative Assistant to Security Field Office Supervisor Michael Givens ("Givens"), but would instead report directly to Ramos (her position would still be classified as Security Administrative Assistant). Her office space was "relocated to the front cubicle at the main entrance corridor" co-located with the secretary work area, allowing her to be "closer to [Ramos's] assigned office area." (Blanchard Decl. Ex. D.)
Blanchard experienced the reassignment as a drastic change in her work environment: prior to reassignment, Givens had allowed her to assist field agents in their activities and to attend on-the-job training with Special Agents. Further, prior to reassignment, Blanchard had been given opportunities to "improve or develop," and in her new assignment, she contends, she had no such opportunities. (Blanchard Depo. 92:1-22.) Post-reassignment, Blanchard "answered the telephones, and picked up [Ramos's] mail and opened his mail and did filing [and] that's it." (Id. at 46:12-16.)
In 2003, [*3]  Blanchard, who is African-American, filed an Equal Employment Opportunity ("EEO") complaint with the FAA Accountability Board alleging that two managers discriminated against her on the basis of race and gender.3 The complaint was settled in her favor on December 11, 2003, and resulted in a pay raise.
Ramos learned of Blanchard's complaints against management soon after his arrival at the FAA's Los Angeles Regional Office in November 2004.4 He also recalls that Givens told him there were some problems with Blanchard's performance and her daily attendance. According to Ramos, Givens described Blanchard's problems with proper data entry and filing, and other "routine work-environment issues." Ramos then told Givens he could "handle" Blanchard, and determined that Blanchard "should report to me and [that I] needed her to report to me."
Ramos also declined to renew the security badge that permitted Blanchard to access restricted areas. This amounted to a complete cessation of her on-the-job field training activities. Ramos wrote: "There is no need for Barbara Blanchard to participate in any of the [field] office activities because her main duty is just to be administrative support."
On September [*4]  20th, 2005, Blanchard initiated an Accountability Board complaint against Max Payne, Manager of the Security and Hazmat Division, for time and attendance fraud. Blanchard alleged that Payne had left work two hours early on August 11, 2005 without submitting a leave slip. FAA investigator Eddie Gibson investigated Blanchard, Payne and two other employees from October 14-17, 2005. Payne admitted to having forgotten to amend his time sheet, and to owing the government two hours of work time. He proposed working an extra 30 minutes each day from November 1st to Friday November 4th.
In November 2005, Blanchard's doctor diagnosed her with depressive disorders and authorized her to be off of work from October 29, 2005 through December 22, 2005. She informed Ramos of her illness, and he consulted with Human Resources ("HR") to determine if her condition was sufficient to justify approval of sick leave. Ramos spoke with Aletha Hicks-Moffatt in HR, who told him Blanchard's condition did not entitle her to receive sick leave. Ultimately, Ramos decided to approve Blanchard's request to be out of the office on "accrued sick leave" from October 30, 2005 to November 11, 2005. (Ramos Depo. 77:12-17.) [*5] 
Blanchard later sent a letter to Ramos from her home, which he received on November 14, 2005, requesting two more weeks of "Advanced Sick Leave." Advanced Sick Leave, listed as an option on SF-71 leave forms, consists of up to 240 hours of leave which an employee can request beyond their accrued balance, later to be paid back. Ramos sent a response letter denying the request to Blanchard's home address on November 15, 2005. In the letter, Ramos informed Blanchard that the medical documentation she submitted along with her leave request referred only to depressive disorders, not high blood pressure, as she stated on her leave form. He requested that Blanchard provide additional medical documentation immediately, if she had any, to support her request. Additionally, he stated that the general office policy was to deny Advanced Sick Leave requests.
In a second letter, dated November 17th, 2005, also sent to Blanchard's home, Ramos "disapproved" Blanchard's request for sick leave because Blanchard had not provided any additional medical documentation and she had "a pattern of leave abuse" which was "disruptive and adversely affect[ing] the operations of the office." (Blanchard Decl. Ex. [*6]  O.) Ramos attached an amended SF-71 form approving her leave from November 14th to November 25th as "accrued annual leave in lieu of sick leave." (Id.)
Ramos denied Blanchard any further sick leave. Blanchard contends that other employees within the division were granted Advanced Sick Leave. Charmaine Blanchard, another Security Assistant in the division, was given 240 hours of advanced leave under a previous division manager in 2003.
Ramos added at the end of each of his two letters that Blanchard could "apply for disability retirement" or resign at any time. (Blanchard Decl. Ex. T.) He also wrote that if Blanchard did not provide additional medical documentation, her leave would be converted to Absence Without Leave ("AWOL") status, and that if she had any AWOL, she would be subject to discipline "up to and including removal from federal service." (Id.)
Blanchard then remained out of the office until January 2006 on annual leave and approved leave without pay.
B. Procedural History
Blanchard filed an EEO complaint against Ramos on December 28th, 2005, alleging that he retaliated against her for engaging in protected activity. In her accompanying affidavit, she also alleged creation of [*7]  a hostile work environment, discrimination on the basis of race, gender, color, and disability. Her claims were approved for investigation on March 23, 2006.
An administrative law judge scheduled Blanchard's 2005 complaint for an administrative hearing on July 19-20, 2007. In a pre-hearing report, Blanchard elected not to raise a race discrimination claim at the administrative hearing, and to use the administrative law judge's outline as a guide to the issues. The remaining issues were gender discrimination, retaliation, and failure to accommodate her disability.
On December 5, 2007, Blanchard filed her initial complaint in federal court. She filed a First Amended Complaint ("FAC") on May 23, 2008.
Defendant filed a motion to dismiss on June 23, 2008, which the Court granted in part and denied in part. The Court ordered Plaintiff to amend the FAC's first cause of action (Title VII Based on Age, Race and Gender) because age is not a protected category under Title VII. Second, the Court ordered Plaintiff to amend the FAC's third cause of action to reflect that Plaintiff was suing under the Rehabilitation Act and not the Americans with Disabilities Act, because she was a federal employee at the time of the alleged discrimination. Third, [*8]  the Court dismissed Blanchard's claims against the FAA because the agency itself is not a proper defendant in a Title VII action. Blanchard then filed a Second Amended Complaint ("SAC") on August 29, 2008.
Plaintiff raised the following claims in the SAC:
(a) Discrimination on the basis of race and gender in violation of Title VII, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq;
(b) Retaliation for prior protected activity in violation of 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-3;
(c) Violation of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973;
(d) Violation of 42 U.S.C. § 1983 and § 1981 by Flor Ramos in creating a hostile work environment and engaging in acts of discrimination.
On December 25, 2009, Defendant moved for summary judgment, or in the alternative summary adjudication of issues. Plaintiff's opposition brief addresses only her retaliation and disability discrimination claims; her race and gender discrimination and hostile work environment claims are not addressed in any substantive way.5 Accordingly, the Court will address only the retaliation and disability discrimination claims below.

II. LEGAL STANDARD
Summary judgment is appropriate where "there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and . . . the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). A genuine issue exists if "the evidence is such [*9]  that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party," and material facts are those "that might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). Thus, the "mere existence of a scintilla of evidence" in support of the nonmoving party's claim is insufficient to defeat summary judgment. Id. at 252. In determining a motion for summary judgment, all reasonable inferences from the evidence must be drawn in favor of the nonmoving party. Id. at 242.

III. DISCUSSION
A. Retaliation Claim
The McDonnell-Douglas tripartite "evidentiary framework" governs Title VII claims premised on unlawful retaliation. Davis v. Team Elec. Co., 520 F.3d 1080, 1093-95 (9th Cir. 2008); see McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 802, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). A plaintiff must first make out a prima facie case of retaliation; that is, prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, 1)that she engaged in "protected activity"; 2) that she later suffered an adverse employment action; and 3) a causal link tying the protected conduct to the adverse action. Davis, 520 F.3d at 1093-94. If a plaintiff provides evidence to establish a prima facie case, the burden of production — not of persuasion — shifts to the defendant, who must "articulate a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason" for the adverse employment action at issue. Id. The plaintiff must then persuade the finder of [*10]  fact that the defendant's non-discriminatory reasons are pretextual. Id.
The Court is persuaded that no reasonable finder of fact could conclude that Blanchard has established a prima facie case of retaliation.
Blanchard's 2003 complaint qualifies as protected activity because she opposed discriminatory employment practices forbidden under Title VII. 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-3(a); Burlington Northern & Santa Fe Ry. v. White, 548 U.S. 53, 59, 126 S. Ct. 2405, 165 L. Ed. 2d 345 (2006).
Further, making all reasonable inferences in her favor, the Court is persuaded that Blanchard's reassignment was an adverse action because it denied her prestige, potential for advancement, and job satisfaction. Adverse action, in the context of a retaliation claim, does not have to be a "material change in terms or conditions of employment," but may include lesser conduct if it causes "injury or harm" significant enough to deter a reasonable employee from engaging in protected activity. Burlington, 548 U.S. at 68-69. If a reasonable employee in Blanchard's position would perceive her reassignment as a demotion, than the reassignment would qualify as an adverse action. See id. at 66-67 (concluding that changing an employee from a forklift position with more "prestige" to track laborer duties which were "more arduous and dirtier" amounted to adverse action in the retaliation [*11]  context).
Moreover, the cessation of Blanchard's on-the-job-training and cancellation of her security badge also point toward the conclusion that Blanchard suffered an adverse action. Even in discrimination cases, where adverse action must affect "terms, conditions, and privileges of employment," the denial of a workplace benefit constitutes adverse action if the benefit denied is "part and parcel of an employment relationship." Moran v. Selig, 447 F.3d 748, 754 (9th Cir. 2006) (quoting Hishon v. King & Spalding, 467 U.S. 69, 75, 104 S. Ct. 2229, 81 L. Ed. 2d 59 (1984)).
Givens enrolled Blanchard in on-the-job training "to allow FG-1802 series Security/Hazardous Materials Assistants to gain field experience," allowed her to assist his Special Agents in the field unit, and even arranged for her to have a security badge for access to restricted areas at the airport. (Blanchard Decl. Ex. B.) Accordingly, a reasonable jury could conclude that Blanchard suffered an adverse action when Ramos effectively forbade her from participating in such activities. C.f. Hishon, 467 U.S. at 75 (holding that regular consideration of apprentices for promotion at the end of apprenticeship was a privilege that could not be denied for discriminatory motive).
To establish a causal link, however, Blanchard must show "by a preponderance of the evidence that engaging [*12]  in the protected activity was one of the reasons for the [adverse action] and that but for such activity" the adverse action at issue would not have occurred. Kauffman v. Sidereal Corp., 695 F.2d 343, 345 (9th Cir. 1982). Where a plaintiff relies on temporal proximity to establish causation, she must establish that the adverse action followed "on the heels" of the protected activity at issue. See Villiarimo v. Aloha Island Air, Inc., 281 F.3d 1054, 1065 (9th Cir. 2002).
The lapse of time between Blanchard's 2003 complaint and the adverse actions at issue, as well as the change in parties involved (Ramos did not arrive on the scene until November 2004, long after Blanchard's EEO complaint had been resolved), makes the alleged causal connection too attenuated to support a prima facie case of retaliation. See Clark County Sch. Dist. v. Breeden, 532 U.S. 268, 273, 121 S. Ct. 1508, 149 L. Ed. 2d 509 (2001) (per curiam) (noting that a court may not infer causation from temporal proximity unless the time between an employer's knowledge of protected activity and an adverse employment action is "very close" and citing cases for the proposition that a three-month and four-month time lapse is insufficient to infer causation); Villiarimo, 281 F.3d at 1065 ("A nearly 18-month lapse between protected activity and an adverse employment action is simply too long, by itself, to give rise to an inference of causation.") Accordingly, the Court is persuaded [*13]  that no rational trier of fact could conclude that Blanchard's 2003 complaint provoked a retaliatory response from her employer.6
B. Disability Discrimination
The Court is persuaded that Blanchard has not established a prima facie case of disability discrimination.
Federal employees alleging disability discrimination in the workplace must bring their claims under the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq, not the ADA. See 42 U.S.C. § 12111(5)(B)(i) (defining "employer" to exclude the United States). The Rehabilitation Act incorporates the substantive standards of liability under the ADA. 29 U.S.C. § 791(g); see Walton v. United States Marshals Serv., 492 F.3d 998, 1005 (9th Cir. 2007).
Under the ADA, an employer "discriminates" against an employee by "not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who is an applicant or employee, unless such covered entity can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business of such covered entity." Zivkovic v. S. Cal. Edison Co., 302 F.3d 1080, 1089 (9th Cir. 2002) (quoting 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b) (5)(A)). Once an employee requests accommodation or the employer recognizes the employee needs accommodation, the employer must engage in an interactive process to find a reasonable accommodation. Id. The interactive process requires: 1) direct communication in good faith between [*14]  employer and employee; 2) consideration of an employee's request; and 3) offering a reasonable and effective accommodation. Id. "Liability for failure to provide reasonable accommodations only ensues where the employer bears responsibility for the breakdown in the interactive process." Id. (internal quotation marks omitted).
Thus, an employer is liable for failure to accommodate an employee under the ADA if the employee can show that 1) she was qualified for her employment; 2) she suffered from a disability; and 3) her employer failed to reasonably accommodate her disability. Nunes v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 164 F.3d 1243, 1246 (9th Cir. 1999). In the summary judgment context, the employee must make a sufficient showing of these elements for a reasonable trier of fact to find in her favor. Id. at 1247.
Even assuming Blanchard can establish that her depressive disorders amounted to a disability within the meaning of the Rehabilitation Act, and that she was otherwise qualified to perform her job, the Court is persuaded that she cannot prove that her employer failed to provide reasonable accommodation.
Blanchard contends that Ramos's refusal to grant her Advanced Sick Leave amounted to an actionable failure to accommodate her disability. Blanchard was out of the office through January [*15]  2006. Yet the only medical evidence of disability she provided to her employer was a doctor's note excusing her from work through December 22, 2005, on the basis of depressive disorders. Ramos sent Blanchard two letters in November 2005 asking her to provide additional documentation in support of her sick leave request. Blanchard did not respond. He approved Blanchard's leave through November 25, 2005 on accrued sick leave and accrued annual leave. After that period, Blanchard was on leave without pay.
Blanchard appears to contend that her employer was required to advance her two weeks of sick leave, even though she declined to respond to requests for additional information about her medical condition. The Court disagrees. Blanchard has not explained why the combination of accrued sick leave, annual leave, and unpaid leave the her employer provided was not a reasonable accommodation, given the nature of her disability. Accordingly, the Court is persuaded that no reasonable fact finder could conclude that Blanchard's employer discriminated against her on the basis of a disability.

IV. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, the Court GRANTS Defendant's motion for summary judgment.
IT IS SO [*16]  ORDERED.
Dated: March 8, 2010
/s/ Dean D. Pregerson
DEAN D. PREGERSON
United States District Judge


End of Document

