Bliss v. Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co.
United States District Court for the Western District of Texas, San Antonio Division
February 25, 2010, Decided; February 25, 2010, Filed
CIVIL ACTION NO. SA-08-CA-864-FB

Reporter
2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 49028 *; 2010 WL 11601326
MICHAEL BLISS, Plaintiff, vs. NATIONWIDE MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANY, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Michael Bliss, Plaintiff: Jeffrey R. Davis, R. Chris Pittard, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Davis Law Firm, San Antonio, TX.
For Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company, Defendant: Dawn M. Knepper, LEAD ATTORNEY, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart, P.C., San Antonio, TX; Donald E. Uloth, LEAD ATTORNEY, Ogletree, Deakins, Nash, Smoak & Stewart, P.C., Dallas, TX.
Judges: FRED BIERY, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: FRED BIERY
Opinion



ORDER GRANTING DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
Before the Court are Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment (docket no. 19), plaintiff's response (docket no. 24) in opposition thereto, and defendant's reply (docket no. 25). After careful consideration, the Court is of the opinion the motion should be granted.

BACKGROUND
Plaintiff Michael Bliss brings this discrimination and retaliation suit alleging his former employer, defendant Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company, violated the Americans with Disability Act ("ADA") and the Age in Employment Discrimination Act ("ADEA"). Plaintiff contends he was subjected to unlawful discrimination and retaliation based on his age, forty-five, and his known and perceived disabilities, depression and fear of flying, when defendant unlawfully terminated  [*2] him from his position as a computer consultant.
Defendant moves for summary judgment on all plaintiff's claims. Plaintiff filed a response, to which defendant filed a reply.

SUMMARY JUDGMENT STANDARD OF REVIEW
Summary judgment should be "rendered if the pleadings, the discovery and disclosure material on file, and any affidavits show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." FED. R. CIV. P. 56(c)(2). In determining whether summary judgment should be granted, the evidence and justifiable inferences therefrom are to viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986).

THE ARGUMENTS OF THE PARTIES
Defendant moved for summary judgment arguing that plaintiffs termination claims for several reasons, including the fact that plaintiff has been unable to work since July 2007 and continues to receive long term disability income benefits from defendant. Defendant argues plaintiffs accommodation claim fails because plaintiff did not timely file an EEOC charge, the record contains no evidence plaintiff was disabled at any time before his leave of absence in  [*3] July of 2007, and, even if plaintiff could establish a disability, defendant provided a reasonable accommodation in the form of days-off when requested. Defendant further argues no evidence supports the conclusory allegation that plaintiff was treated differently and paid differently than similarly situated younger associates because of his age. Likewise, defendant continues, "plaintiffs retaliation claim must be dismissed because he did not assert retaliation in his in his EEOC charge so, this claim is barred." Defendant further argues the mere mention of retaliation in plaintiffs complaint without more is insufficient to withstand summary judgment and, in any event, plaintiff cannot prove the prima facie elements of retaliation. Finally, defendant contends that, while plaintiff alleges "he was subjected to a hostile working environment because of his alleged disabilities and possibly due to age, . . . virtually all of the elements required to prove this claim are lacking in the present case, and plaintiff did not timely file a charge with the EEOC."
Plaintiff responds that he was a qualified individual with a disability under the ADA, he requested a reasonable accommodation, and he  [*4] was denied a reasonable accommodation. Plaintiff further asserts that defendant did not go through the "interactive process required for a reasonable accommodation request as required under the ADA." Plaintiff also maintains "he was subjected to a hostile work environment based on his disability, and this harassment worsened his depression and caused him to subsequently be taken off work by his physician." Plaintiff contends "as a result of defendant's negligence in allowing a hostile work environment based on plaintiff's disability that his disability worsened to the point he was unable to work." Finally, plaintiff argues that defendant paid him significantly less than his younger coworkers who performed the same duties as he and had the same position title of consultant; and that plaintiff was paid significantly less than the younger man who took his place as supervisor.
Defendant replies that plaintiff failed to set forth its own statement of facts and failed to address several arguments raised in the motion for summary judgment. Defendant further replies that those arguments which were addressed nonetheless fail. Accordingly, defendant contends it is entitled to summary judgment  [*5] notwithstanding plaintiff's response.

DISCUSSION

The Sufficiency of Plaintiff's Response
Defendant argues in its reply that it is entitled to summary judgment because plaintiff's response "does not dispute any facts relied upon in support of defendant's motion for summary judgment." Defendant also argues that plaintiff's failure to address several of the arguments which defendant made in its motion entitles defendant to summary judgment as matter of law on these claims. Defendant therefore implies that its motion for summary judgment should be granted, to this extent, as unopposed.
While plaintiff does not specifically identify any facts set forth in defendant's motion which he disputes, plaintiff did submit a factual basis with supporting evidentiary exhibits in response to those arguments which he addressed. Moreover, although plaintiff failed to address several arguments made in defendant's motion, Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56(c)(2) requires the Court to consider all competent summary judgment evidence when determining whether there is genuine issue of material fact or whether defendant is entitled to judgment as matter of law. See also Anderson, 477 U.S. at 255 (indicating that  [*6] all evidence must be construed in light most favorable to non-movant when considering motion for summary judgment). Accordingly, the Court declines to grant defendant's motion for summary judgment based on the insufficient factual and/or legal basis set forth in plaintiff's response.

Retaliation and Age-Based Hostile Work Environment Claims
Plaintiff's response does not address defendant's arguments on his retaliation claims or his age-based hostile work environment claims. With regard to plaintiff's retaliation claim, plaintiff does not dispute that he failed to allege retaliation in his EEOC complaint or that this failure bars his claim. See Perez v. MCI Worldwide Communications, 154 F.Supp.2d 932, 938 (N.D. Tex. 2001) (finding that retaliation claims may be raised in lawsuit only if they are raised in original EEOC charge).
With regard to plaintiff's age-based hostile work environment claim, the Court agrees with defendant that the summary judgment record reveals the only age-related comments plaintiff recalled in his deposition were made in group settings where someone might ask which person in the room was the oldest. Moreover, there is no evidence any age-related comments were directed  [*7] specifically at plaintiff, nor is there evidence that any age-related comments or questions were unwelcome, severe, pervasive, that it altered plaintiff's employment, or that supervisors knew about but failed to stop any age-related harassment. Defendant is therefore entitled to summary judgment on these claims.

Hostile Work Environment Based on a Disability
Plaintiff's response does address defendant's arguments regarding plaintiff's hostile work environment claim based on a disability. To prevail on a hostile environment claim based on disability, a plaintiff must prove that (1) he belonged to a protected group (i.e., had a disability); (2) he was subjected to unwelcome harassment; (3) the harassment was based on his status as a member in the protected class; (4) the harassment affected a term, condition, or privilege of employment, and (5) the employer knew or should have known of the harassment but failed to take prompt remedial action. Flowers v. Southern Regional Physician Servs., Inc., 247 F.3d 229, 235-36 (discussing elements of disability-based hostile work environment claim). To prove the fourth element, the harassment must "be sufficiently pervasive or severe to alter the  [*8] conditions of employment and create an abusive working environment." McConathy v. Dr. Pepper/Seven-Up Corp., 131 F.3d 558, 563 (5th Cir. 1998) (internal quotation omitted).
Plaintiff has failed to meet the first element of stating a prima facie case showing that he suffered from a disability. Plaintiff's deposition testimony shows that he was not substantially limited by his impairments before July of 2007. He stated that when he first experienced symptoms of depression, he began taking Zoloft which helped him cope and he was able to continue performing his job full time with occasional time off as needed. Because there is no evidence of any substantial impairment over the long term during his working career, plaintiff cannot show he was disabled. Ellison v. Software Spectrum, Inc., 85 F.3d 187, 191 (5th Cir. 1996) (holding that it takes "far more" to prove disability than just affected work).
Moreover, plaintiff does not dispute that an impairment such as depression is not a disability unless it substantially limits one or more major life activities. 42 U.S.C. § 12102(1)(A); EEOC v. Chevron Phillips Chem. Co., 570 F.3d 606, 614 (5th Cir. 2009). Conditions similar to those described  [*9] by plaintiff have failed to qualify as a as a depression disability under the ADA. See Curl v. United Supermarkets, Ltd., 179 Fed. Appx. 208 (5th Cir. 2006) (finding that depression was not substantially limiting); Lottinger v. Shell Oil Co., 143 F. Supp. 2d 743, 762-63 (S.D. Tex. 2001) (finding that depression did not qualify as disability under ADA because plaintiff failed to show it substantially limited one or more major life activity).
In response to defendant's motion for summary judgment, plaintiff argues his impairments substantially limited the major life activities of sleeping, concentrating, and thinking. 1 Although this argument reiterates the diagnoses of plaintiff's physicians, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit has held that diagnosis of an impairment is no substitute for the "individualized inquiry" the Court must make when determining whether an impairment is substantially limiting. Burch v. Coca-Cola Co., 119 F.3d 305, 316-16 (5th Cir. 1997) (determining that physician's testimony that plaintiff's alcoholism was substantially limiting "sheds no light on the individualized inquiry required by the ADA."), cert. denied, 522 U.S. 1084, 118 S. Ct. 871, 139 L. Ed. 2d 768 (1998). In other words,  [*10] without detailed proof of the limitations caused by the impairment, an ADA plaintiff cannot create a question of fact. See id. In this case, plaintiff cites no detailed proof that he was substantially limited by his depression. Instead, plaintiff relies on general statements regarding a lack of concentration, an overwhelming sense of hopelessness, and sleeplessness.
Plaintiff cites EEOC v. Chevron Phillips Chem. Co., 570 F.3d 606, 615 (5th Cir. 2009), and Head v. Glacier Northwest, Inc., 413 F.3d 1053, 1061 (9th Cir. 2005), as support for his argument that he has presented sufficient proof of a disability for purposes of the ADA. Plaintiff in the EEOC case, however, did not simply complain of sleeplessness, she submitted an affidavit stating the number of hours of sleep she was able to get per night and testified that she fell asleep while driving. 570 F.3d at 617-18. The plaintiff in the Head case did not simply claim he had difficulty concentrating, he  [*11] also testified he was unable to focus long enough to watch a television show and he had to quit school because of his inability to focus. 413 F.3d at 1061. Plaintiff provides no such details.
Plaintiff does state that he was referred to a sleep study on September 30, 2003. There is no evidence in the record, however, linking this referral to his depression. Instead, plaintiff testified that he went to this appointment in part because his wife complained about his snoring. The physician's notes from the session are silent about sleeplessness and instead mention snoring and state that plaintiff "falls asleep anywhere." Further, although plaintiff stated he had headaches and missed work, he also testified that he did not know whether his headaches had anything to do with his depression. In sum, the record fails to show that plaintiff's depression substantially limited any major life activity.
To the extent plaintiff alleges that his fear of flying qualifies as a disability for purposes of the ADA, flying is not a recognized major life activity. Cannizzaro v. Neiman Marcus, Inc., 979 F. Supp. 465, 476 (N.D. Tex. 1997). Additionally, an argument can be made that a phobia such as fear of flying  [*12] is a temporary limitation which does not rise to the level of a disability. See Anderson v. Dakota State Hospital, 232 F.3d 634, 636 (8th Cir. 2000) (holding that employee's fear of snakes was not ADA-protected "disability" because her condition did not substantially limit her in alleged major life activities of driving and working as any limitation on driving, caused by attack of hysteria on seeing snake, was merely temporary and fear of snakes did not prevent employee from working in broad class of jobs). In any event, the comments made in this case were clustered around the time of plaintiff's flights, so plaintiff cannot show they were pervasive.
Additionally, the summary judgment record shows that plaintiff checked the box on his employment application stating that he was willing to travel and took a promotion knowing it would require that he travel by air. The summary judgment record also shows that, although plaintiff told his supervisor he had a fear of flying before his first business trip, the supervisor explained that some travel was required and plaintiff agreed he would travel when necessary. Indeed, plaintiff does not dispute that he volunteered to travel by air to Las  [*13] Vegas for a business trip.
Finally, plaintiff has not identified any harassing comments made on or after May 17, 2007, 300 days before plaintiff filed his EEOC complaint, so he has not shown, nor has he argued, that the continuing violation doctrine applies. Although plaintiff alleges Salavador Fernandez, one of defendant's employees whom plaintiff supervised, made "scattered" harassing comments between 2003 and the end of plaintiff's employment in 2007, the evidence provided fails to convey a sense of how frequently harassing these comments were made. Without such proof, plaintiff has not shown the harassment was pervasive. Scott v. Potter, No. H-04-3573, 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 42841, 2006 WL 1663743, at *4 (S.D. Tex. June 13, 2006) (holding that plaintiffs claim he endured "a daily barrage of insults" was no substitute for specific factual allegations).
In sum, plaintiff's claim based on a hostile work environment fail under the ADA because plaintiff has not established a prima facie case. Alternatively, presuming plaintiff has established a prima facie case of a hostile work environment based on his impairments, this claim fails because plaintiff has not raised a question of fact. Defendant is therefore entitled  [*14] to summary judgment on plaintiff's hostile work environment claim.

Termination Based on Disability and Age Discrimination
In the absence of direct evidence, courts analyze disability and age discrimination claims using the modified McDonnell Douglas approach. 2 Burrell v. Dr. Pepper/Seven Up Bottling Group, Inc., 482 F.3d 408, 411-12 (5th Cir. 2007) (discussing disability discrimination claim); Rachid v. Jack in the Box, Inc., 376 F.3d 305, 312 (5th Cir. 2004) (discussing age discrimination claim). If a plaintiff establishes a prima facie case of discrimination, the burden of production shifts to the employer to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Burrell, 482 F.3d at 411; Rachid, 376 F.3d at 312. Presuming the employer does so, the plaintiff must then produce sufficient evidence to create a genuine issue of material fact that the employer's reason is a pretext for unlawful discrimination. Burrell, 482 F.3d at 412; Rachid, 376 F.3d at 312.
The prima facie case is the same for both disability and age discrimination. Plaintiff must show: (1) he was a member of a protected class at the time of the alleged discriminatory action; (2) he was qualified for the job; (3) he was subjected to an adverse employment action because of disability or age; and (4) he was replaced by or treated less favorably than similarly-situated employees outside the class, in this case non-disabled or younger employees. See Smith v. City of Jackson, 351 F.3d 183, 196 (5th Cir. 2003) (discussing ADEA); Gowesky v. Singing River Hosp. Sys., 321 F.3d 503, 511 (5th Cir. 2003) (discussing ADA).
With regard to showing a prima facie case under the ADA and ADEA, defendant notes that plaintiff alleges he was totally disabled at the time of his termination. Accordingly, plaintiff was not "qualified"  [*16] for the position as a matter of law. Holtzclaw v. DSC Communications Corp., 255 F.3d 254, 258-59 (5th Cir. 2001) (holding that "qualified individual" with "disability"for purposes of ADA is defined as someone who has disability, but who, "with or without reasonable accommodation can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds or desires."); Kebiro v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 568 F.Supp.2d 747, 752-53 (E.D. Tex. 2005) (discussing ADEA and noting that plaintiff must show he was qualified for position he sought to hold), aff'd 193 Fed. Appx. 365 (5th Cir. 2006) (unpublished decision). Additionally, plaintiff does not dispute that he has been unable to work since July of 2007, and continues to receive long term disability benefits from defendant. This further evidences that plaintiff is not qualified to hold the position he seeks. The summary judgment record additionally reveals that plaintiff was not meeting expectations when he started his leave. For these reasons, the Court finds that plaintiff was not qualified for the position which he seeks to hold.
Plaintiff also has not established that his employment was terminated because of his alleged  [*17] disability or age. Defendant concedes the termination was an adverse employment action, but argues plaintiff was terminated pursuant to the company's neutral Restaffing Policy after plaintiff had been absent for six months. See Rogers v. International Marine Terminals, Inc., 87 F.3d 755, 759-60 (5th Cir. 1996) (holding that ADA does not require employers to hold positions open indefinitely). Relevant case law holds that job elimination and adherence to company policies are both recognized as legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for termination of employment. Armendariz v. Pinkerton Tobacco Co., 58 F.3d 144, 150 (5th Cir. 1995); Rollins v. Clear Creek Ind. Sch. Dist., No. G-06-081, 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 82511, 2006 WL 3302538, at *3 (S.D. Tex. Nov. 13, 2006).
Plaintiff does not dispute that his employment was terminated pursuant to defendant's neutral Restaffing Policy or argue his termination was a pretext for disability or age discrimination. Additionally, plaintiff has provided no evidence of a link between his age and termination pursuant to the Restaffing Policy. Finally, plaintiff's ADA and ADEA claims must fail because he has not produced evidence that he was replaced by or treated less favorably than similarly  [*18] situated employees who were younger or who did not have disabilities. To prove this element, plaintiff would have to show younger or non-impaired employees were allowed to remain out of work on medical leave for six months without being replaced or terminated pursuant to the Restaffing Policy. Plaintiff offers no such evidence or argument.
In sum, plaintiff's claims based on termination of his employment fail under both the ADA and ADEA because he has not established a prima facie case. Alternatively, presuming plaintiff has established a prima facie case of disability and age discrimination, these claims fail because defendant has shown a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its decision and plaintiff has offered no evidence of pretext. Defendant is therefore entitled to summary judgment on plaintiff's termination claim based on disability and age discrimination.

Disparate Pay Based on Age
Citing Taylor v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 554 F.3d 510, 522 (5th Cir. 2008), plaintiff acknowledges he cannot establish a prima facie case of pay disparity without evidence comparing plaintiff to younger employees with substantially the same responsibilities. Plaintiff testified that his disparate  [*19] pay claim is based on pay decisions defendant made while he was a "Consultant, System Engineer/Administration." To support his claim, however, he responds to defendant's motion for summary judgment by comparing himself to three individuals who held "supervisor" positions. In the absence of evidence that these employees had similar responsibilities, plaintiff has not proven a prima facie case of pay disparity.
Plaintiff must also present evidence regarding the performance of the other employees. See Guerrero v. Preston, No. H-08-2412, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 72946, 2009 WL 2581568, at *6 (S.D. Tex. Aug. 18, 2009) (finding that, even assuming duties of alleged comparators were similar, plaintiff's claim failed because he presented no evidence regarding their performance). Thus, an employee's level of experience also factors into the pay disparity analysis. Ceasar v. Lamar Univ., 147 F. Supp. 2d 547, 553 (E.D. Tex. 2001) ("Employees with different levels of experience are not 'similarly situated' for purposes of Title VII salary compensation.") (internal quotation omitted). Plaintiff has provided no evidence regarding job performance or the level of experience of the other employees. Accordingly, plaintiff has not proven  [*20] a prima facie case of disparate pay based on his age. Defendant is therefore entitled to summary judgment on this claim.

Failure to Accommodate
Regarding plaintiff's failure to accommodate claims, his response does not dispute that all such claims are time barred. In response to an interrogatory, plaintiff identified the instances when he allegedly asked for an accommodation which was denied. All of these events listed took place more than 300 days before he filed his charge of discrimination with the EEOC. Claims based on these events are therefore barred due to plaintiff's failure to exhaust administrative remedies. See Taylor v. Books A Million, Inc., 296 F.3d 376, 378-79 (5th Cir. 2002) (holding that exhaustion requires timely filing of EEOC charge), cert. denied, 537 U.S. 1200, 123 S. Ct. 1287, 154 L. Ed. 2d 1041 (2003); Pasley v. City of Dallas, No. 3:01-CV-1194, 2004 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 10998, 2004 WL 1205184, at *7 (N.D. Tex. Jun. 1, 2004) (noting that plaintiff must file EEOC charge within 300 days of alleged accommodation denial).
Plaintiff also did not respond to defendant's arguments concerning the one request he may have made (for extra time off or to work from home) within the 300 days preceding the EEOC charge. In his deposition, plaintiff  [*21] stated that he had a conversation with his supervisor, Greg Peterson, about flying in April or May of 2007. Plaintiff testified that he approached Mr. Peterson and asked to either be taken off the project on which he was working--the Disaster Recovery Project--or allowed time-off to recover from travel. There is no evidence plaintiff put this in writing, and he stated he did not go to a doctor about this issue because he was afraid he might lose his job if he appeared to "wuss out." Plaintiff alleges his request was denied and he had to continue traveling. Even presuming this conversation took place within 300 days of the filing of plaintiff's EEOC charge, without further argument or summary judgment evidence from plaintiff, this Court declines to conclude that this conversation triggered a duty to extend an accommodation.
The ADA definition of "discrimination" includes denying reasonable accommodation for the "known physical or mental limitations" of a "qualified individual with a disability." As noted, plaintiff has not shown he had a disability before he went on medical leave in July of 2007. Therefore, even presuming plaintiff's claims are not time-barred, he has failed to demonstrate  [*22] a prima facie case in support of his failure to accommodate cause of action. Accordingly, defendant shall be granted summary judgment on this claim.
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED that Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment (docket no. 19) is GRANTED.
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the above-styled and numbered cause is DISMISSED. Motions pending with the Court, if any, are Dismissed as Moot.
It is so ORDERED.
SIGNED this 25 day of February, 2010.
/s/ Fred Biery
FRED BIERY
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

