Brown v. McHugh
United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division
August 31, 2011, Decided; August 31, 2011, Filed
Civil Action File No.: 1:09-CV-0214-RLV-SSC

Reporter
2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 163601 *; 2011 WL 13168836
YVONNE MARIA BROWN, Plaintiff, v. JOHN M. MCHUGH, Secretary of the Army, Defendant.
Subsequent History: Adopted by, Summary judgment granted by Brown v. McHugh, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 163600 (N.D. Ga., Sept. 28, 2011)
Prior History: Brown v. McHugh Secy. of the Army, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 135709 (N.D. Ga., Dec. 11, 2009)
Counsel:  [*1] Yvonne Maria Brown, Plaintiff, Pro se, Columbia, SC USA.
For Yvonne Maria Brown, Plaintiff: Sandra Jackson Sheppard, LEAD ATTORNEY, Sheppard & Associates Law Office, P.C., Atlanta, GA USA.
For John M Mchugh, Secretary of the Army, Defendant: Aileen Bell Hughes, LEAD ATTORNEY, Lisa D. Cooper, Office Of The United States Attorney-Atl600, Northern District Of Georgia, Atlanta, GA USA.
Judges: SUSAN S. COLE, United States Magistrate Judge.
Opinion by: SUSAN S. COLE
Opinion



MAGISTRATE JUDGE'S FINAL REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION
This case is before the court on Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment. [Doc. 53]. For the reasons discussed below, it is RECOMMENDED that Defendant's motion be GRANTED.

I. Procedural History
On January 26, 2009, Plaintiff Yvonne Brown, a woman previously employed by the Department of the Army, filed a complaint [Doc. 1] in which she alleged that Defendant discriminated against her because of her sex in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000e, et seq. ("Title VII") (Count I); failed to accommodate her disability in violation of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, 29 U.S.C. §§ 791, et seq. ("Rehabilitation Act") (Count II); and retaliated against her for engaging in statutorily protected activity in [*2]  violation of Title VII (Count III).1 Plaintiff originally named Pete Geren as Secretary of the Army, but John M. McHugh is now the Secretary of the Army and has been substituted for Pete Geren. (See Doc. 29). Plaintiff also named as a defendant the Department of the Army.
In lieu of an answer, Defendants Secretary of the Army and the Department of the Army filed a motion to dismiss, or in the alternative, motion for summary judgment. [Doc. 11]. By Report and Recommendation [Doc. 29], the undersigned recommended that Defendants' motion to dismiss Plaintiff's claims pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983, 20 U.S.C. §§ 1681-88 and 28 U.S.C. §§ 2201-02 (see Compl., ¶ 3) and Plaintiff's claims against the Department of the Army be granted and that those claims be dismissed. (Doc. 29 at 14). The undersigned further recommended that the Secretary of the Army's motion to dismiss and motion for summary judgment as to the remaining claims be denied. (Id. at 14-15). The District Judge adopted that Report and Recommendation [Doc. 30], and discovery proceeded.
Following discovery, Defendant filed the pending motion for summary judgment, with supporting brief, statement of undisputed material facts and exhibits. [Doc. 53]. Plaintiff filed a response to Defendant's motion, [*3]  including a brief, a response to Defendant's statement of material facts, a statement of additional disputed material facts, and exhibits. [Doc. 56]. Defendant filed a reply brief [Doc. 59] and a response to Plaintiff's statement of material facts [Doc. 60].

II. Facts

A. Standards for Determining Facts for Summary Judgment
The "facts," for summary judgment purposes only, are taken from the submissions of the parties, as set out in Defendant's statement of undisputed material facts (hereinafter referred to as "Def. SMF") [Doc. 53]; Plaintiff's response to Defendant's statement of material facts [Doc. 56]; Plaintiff's statement of disputed material facts (hereinafter referred to as "Pl. SMF") [Doc. 56]; Defendant's response to Plaintiff's statement of material facts [Doc. 60]; Plaintiff's deposition (hereinafter "Brown Dep."); the transcript of the administrative Fact Finding Conference (Def. Ex. 1, Attach. to Doc. 53);2 and uncontroverted record evidence.
The undersigned has not considered facts or arguments contained in the parties' statements of material fact or responses that do not comply with the requirements of LR 56.1, NDGa., including any fact that is not supported by citation to evidence [*4]  supporting that fact. Nor has the undersigned found a fact to be disputed if the response does not cite to evidence that shows the fact to be in dispute. The court has reviewed the record, including the parties' filings, to determine whether genuine issues of material fact exist to be tried. However, the court is not obligated to "scour the record" to make that determination. Tomasini v. Mt. Sinai Med. Ctr. of Fla., 315 F. Supp. 2d 1252, 1260 n.11 (S.D. Fla. 2004). The facts are construed in the light most favorable to Plaintiff as the non-movant. See Frederick v. Sprint/United Mgmt.Co., 246 F.3d 1305, 1309 (11th Cir. 2001).

B. The Facts Relevant to Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment3

1. The United States Army Reserve Command
The United States Army Reserve Command ("USARC") is responsible for staffing, preparing and deploying United States Army reserve units and is headquartered at Fort McPherson, Georgia. (Def. SMF ¶ 1). The Army Reserve Force Programs Directorate is one of eighteen Directorates of the USARC and is located in both Washington, D.C. ("Force Programs Directorate North") and Fort McPherson, Georgia ("Force Programs Directorate South"). (Def. SMF ¶ 2). The Force Programs Directorate South is headed by a deputy director and is comprised of approximately 55 employees who interact with subordinate regional commands throughout the [*5]  United States. (Def. SMF ¶ 4).
The Force Programs Directorate South is comprised of two divisions: the Force Management Division and the Force Support Division. (Def. SMF ¶ 5). The Force Support Division is comprised of three branches—the Force Design Branch, the Force Accounting/Analysis Branch, and the Force Modernization Branch. (Def. SMF ¶ 6). At all times relevant to Plaintiff's complaint, Plaintiff was employed with the Force Modernization Branch. (Def. SMF ¶ 7).

2. Plaintiff's Employment at USARC
Plaintiff was employed by the Army from 1979 until March 15, 2008. (Def. SMF ¶ 8). At all times relevant to Plaintiff's complaint, Plaintiff was a Management Analyst Systems Integrator. (See Def. SMF ¶ 9; Pl. Resp. to Def. SMF ¶ 9; FFC Tr: 8-9). Plaintiff described her "major duties and responsibilities":
We were responsible for the total package fielding of Force Modernization equipment. That included projecting requirements, setting up the training. If there were any budget issues, . . . we had to get involved with that. We had to insure that units were prioritized according to, like, first deployers get the newest equipment first.
(FFC Tr: 11). From April 2007 until her termination, she [*6]  was assigned to the Force Modernization Branch at Fort McPherson, Georgia. (Def. SMF ¶ 10). Plaintiff testified that she was the only female civilian employee on her "team." (FFC Tr: 82).
At all times relevant to the complaint, Plaintiff's first-line supervisor was Lieutenant Colonel ("LTC") Juan Guzman, Chief, Force Modernization Branch. (Def. SMF ¶ 13). Her second-level supervisor was Mr. Charles Daniel Blakeney, Chief, Force Support Division. (Def. SMF ¶ 14). Her third-level supervisor was Mr. Paul Vilcoq, Deputy Director of the Directorate of Army Reserve Force Programs South. (Def. SMF ¶ 15).
Between approximately 2005 and April 2007, the Force Modernization Branch was assigned to the G4, Logistics Directorate of the USARC, at Fort McPherson. (Def. SMF ¶ 11). In April 2007, the Force Modernization Branch was realigned under the Force Support Division of the Force Programs Directorate South. (Def. SMF ¶ 12).

3. Duty Day Policy for Force Support Division
Prior to that realignment, Plaintiff was permitted to work a flexible schedule and to accumulate credit time. (Def. SMF ¶ 16). A flexible schedule allows an employee to choose on a daily basis what time he or she will arrive at and [*7]  leave from work, and any hours worked "in excess of the employee's basic work requirement under a flexible work schedule," i.e., credit hours, can be used later instead of sick leave. (Def. Ex. 10, Attach. to Doc. 53; FFC Tr: 37, 41, 162, 168).
On May 11, 2007, Blakeney sent an E-mail to Force Support Division personnel, including Plaintiff, containing the Force Support Division Duty Day Policy that authorized supervisors to approve certain types of alternative work schedules. (Def. SMF ¶ 17; see also Def. Ex. 7, Attach. to Doc. 53).4 Under the written Duty Day Policy, Force Support Division employees were required to work the core hours of 8:30 a.m. until 11:30 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. until 3:00 p.m. (Def. SMF ¶ 18). The written policy further provided that the Force Support Division did not permit the accumulation of credit time. (Def. SMF ¶ 19). Instead, employees could earn compensatory time, but only if a supervisor had approved it in advance. (Def. SMF ¶ 20). The written Duty Day Policy did not permit supervisors to allow employees as a matter of routine to make up time for unplanned absences. (Def. SMF ¶ 21). The alternative work schedules are also referred to as "compressed schedules," [*8]  and they allow employees to work longer hours on some days so they can take one or two days off per pay period, so long as their schedules are approved by their supervisors, core hours are covered, and their supervisors, who can also work compressed schedules, are also present. (FFC Tr: 93-94, 127-28, 161-62; Def. Ex. 10, Attach. to Doc. 53). Employees can ask to change their day off for their compressed schedule, and they are sometimes required to do so depending on the needs of the agency. (FFC Tr: 127).
Prior to the institution of the written Duty Day Policy on May 11, 2007, Force Support Division had an unwritten policy of not allowing flexible schedules. (Def. SMF ¶ 22).5 The Force Support Division has never allowed anyone to work a flexible schedule. (Def. SMF ¶ 23). The Division requires core work hours to ensure that Army Reserve commands located in different time zones across the country will have access to information in a timely manner. (Def. SMF ¶ 24). In addition, the Division does not want non-supervisory personnel working when supervisors are not present. (Def. SMF ¶ 25).

4. Plaintiff's Requests for a Flexible Schedule with Force Support Division
Following the realignment [*9]  of the Force Modernization Branch to the Force Programs Directorate South in April 2007, Plaintiff requested that she be permitted to keep the flexible work schedule she had worked while assigned to the Logistics Directorate. (Def. SMF ¶ 29). Plaintiff made requests for a flexible schedule several times between June 2007 and August 2007. (Def. SMF ¶ 30). In August 2007, Plaintiff's supervisor, LTC Guzman, agreed to let Plaintiff try a flexible schedule between August 2, 2007 and August 10, 2007 and report to work between 6:30 and 8:30 a.m. (Def. SMF ¶¶ 31-32; see also Def. Ex. 8, Attach. to Doc. 53). Guzman wrote in an E-mail to Plaintiff on August 1, 2007:
Ms. Brown review and provide me with your comments.
Based on our conversation we agree to the following:
That in order to improve[ ] your attendance, and report to work in a timely manner you will:
1. Report to work everyday from 0630-0830 in the morning, from 2-10 Aug[ust] to improvement [sic] working hours and according to you, to motivate, and make it less stressful.
2. Will provide status of medical evaluation.
3. Will contact me, the undersigned, if not in by 0830, and will email as soon as you report to work.
Acknowledge that on [*10]  22 July you failed to report to your place of duty . . . and to contact me the undersigned. Like you stated you had no excuse.
For your information:
USARC normal operating hours: 0730-1730
Civilians may work normal work schedule of 0730-1630
Alternate work schedule for civilians only, must be submitted in writing; it must include core hours of 0830-1130 and 1300-1500.
(Def. Ex. 8, Attach. to Doc. 53). Plaintiff responded, "Just one comment on Item 2: I had no written excuse. Failure to report was due to illness." (Id.). Because Plaintiff was absent the first week she was to try out the flexible schedule, LTC Guzman revoked his approval for a flexible schedule. (Def. SMF ¶ 34).
In a letter dated August 21, 2007, Vilcoq responded to Plaintiff's request to work a flexible schedule and earn credit time with the explanation that civilian employees are allowed to work "Compressed Work Schedules," but they are not allowed to work flexible work schedules or earn credit hours (which are earned by working hours in excess of the "basic work requirement under a flexible work schedule"). (Def. Ex. 10, Attach. to Doc. 53). Vilcoq wrote that flexible schedules are not allowed because "[a]ny program where [*11]  an employee daily work schedule can vary each day is not considered conducive to the operation we are trying to perform." (Id.).
Plaintiff made another request for a flexible work schedule in November 2007, but it was denied. (Def. SMF ¶ 35).

5. Plaintiff's Alleged Disabilities
Plaintiff claims she is disabled due to asthma and depression. (FFC Tr: 14-15).6 Plaintiff has recurrent major depression and asthma. (FFC Tr: 15; Brown Dep. at 37). Her arthritis and asthma cause her pain while standing, and she walks with a cane. (FFC Tr: 16-17). Her asthma worsens in the summer and when the air quality is bad, and she cannot walk more than a block when that happens. (Brown Dep. at 39-40; FFC Tr: 19). The asthma has affected her ability to work because of medications that "would keep [her] up all night long," making it difficult for her to drive or think when she had "maybe one hour, two hours of sleep at night max." (Brown Dep. at 39; see also FFC Tr: 268). Her asthma affects her like this "from time to time." (Brown Dep. at 41).
Plaintiff also has "bouts" of depression. (Brown Dep. at 37). When she is "suffering with depression, [she] tend[s] to have chronic insomnia, severe insomnia, and there [*12]  are many nights when [she] just [doesn't] sleep." (FFC Tr: 16). She was not on any medications in April 2007 (when she began working in the Force Support Division), or at the time of the Fact Finding Conference on August 21, 2008, but there were times when she took anti-depressants. (Brown Dep. at 41-42; FFC Tr: 3, 17). By June 2007, Plaintiff "was at a point where [she] didn't want to face the world," had "zero energy," "started having nightmares," and had "sleep problems." (Brown Dep. at 42). Because of her lack of sleep, "there were days when [she] was literally so dogged out that just getting up and facing the world became an issue." (Brown Dep. at 90). When she took Prozac, it would "make [her] hyper," and Wellbutrin made her "a little" dizzy. (FFC Tr: 22, 24).
Plaintiff submitted medical documentation to Guzman and Blakeney indicating that she had been treated for various medical conditions, including asthma and depression. (Def. SMF ¶ 50; see also Ex. 4 to Brown Dep.; Brown Dep. at 88-89). She also told Guzman that "there could be occasions when [her] asthma was really, really bad or if [her] depression flared up, you know, [she] would have to go into treatment and be absent, [*13]  you know here and there." (Brown Dep. at 39). Plaintiff admitted that the medical documents she provided neither identified nor recommended any accommodation for her alleged disabilities, such as a flexible schedule. (Def. SMF ¶ 58; see also Brown Dep. at 105, 148-49).

6. Management's Requests for Additional Medical Information
In August and September 2007, Guzman made written requests for additional medical support for Plaintiff's claimed disability. (Def. SMF ¶ 67; see also Def. Exs. 12, 14, Attach. to Doc. 53). Guzman wrote an E-mail to Plaintiff on August 29, 2007:
As per our conv[ersation] this morning you stated that you will come to work Monday thru Friday from 0630-1500hrs. You also made a comment ref the American with Disability act [sic], if you have any medical documentation that states that you have any disability provide it to me ASAP, in order to accommodate your schedule as per the American with Disability act if required.
(Def. Ex. 12, Attach. to Doc. 53). In response, Plaintiff wrote:
You have a statement from my psychiatrist's Physician's Assistant, that I am being treated and will continue to be treated at the Tyrone Family Counseling Center. The Privacy Act prevents [*14]  them from giving more information. When I told you that, you asked me, "What Privacy Act?" All the same, you also have a June 22nd diagnosis from when I was treated for depression and severe insomnia in an Urgent Care clinic in Peachtree City.7
LEAVE ME ALONE. I do my best to comply, and the only thing that happens is that I get called a liar, nit-picked about my work, and constantly called into your office for a verbal battle. You didn't even look at my e-mail this morning before you called me in and demanded documentation. And you accused me of not providing MSPs to SSOs "in a timely manner"--never mind that it is NOT, and never has been, standard practice to send MSPs to anyone but the PM.
You're interfering with my ability to think clearly and do my job. The only other documentation I care to provide, is the Riot Act—through my legally-appointed representative. Thank you, and have a nice afternoon!
(Id. (emphases in original)).
Guzman included another request for additional medical documentation in the September 2007 Notice of Proposed Suspension directed to Plaintiff. (Def. SMF ¶ 69; see also Def. Ex. 14, Attach. to Doc. 53). Paragraph 5 of that Notice of Proposed Suspension stated: [*15] 
In your communications with various members of the chain of command, you have alleged a condition covered by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). If you have such a condition, this office will make every effort to accommodate your situation. However, in order to be afforded consideration for such accommodation, you must first provide medical documentation which supports and explains that condition. To date, all you have provided is vague medical documentation indicating that you are being treated and are on medication. In your 29 August email and in conversations with you, you have made it clear that you do not want to provide specific medical information on your condition and further that you do not have to do so as such information is protected by the Privacy Act. In this respect, you are correct. We cannot force you to provide it. However, in order to establish the fact that you have a disability protected by the ADA and to support a request for reasonable accommodation, you must provide supporting medical documentation. Given those conditions, the choice to provide specific medical documentation remains yours. You are again cautioned that failure to provide acceptable medical [*16]  documentation for any absence may result in the absence being considered AWOL.
(Def. Ex. 14, Attach. to Doc. 53; Def. SMF ¶ 70).
There is no evidence in the record that Plaintiff submitted any documentation in response to Guzman's August and September 2007 requests.

7. Plaintiff's Disciplinary History

a. August 2007 Counseling
In a letter dated August 21, 2007, Vilcoq noted that there was "confusion" about Plaintiff's absence on August 16, 2007—Plaintiff had called in around 9:00 a.m. and stated she would come to work, but then did not report, and even though she later stated that she called again, he found no record of her call. (Def. Ex. 10, Attach. to Doc. 53). He also noted that on August 17, 2007, Plaintiff called at 9:00 a.m. to report that she was coming to work, then she called about 11:00 a.m. to report that she was "not able to make the drive and would not report for work." (Id.). Vilcoq notified Plaintiff that her absences would be recorded as LWOP (leave without pay), as opposed to AWOL (absent without leave). (Id.). Vilcoq wrote, in response to Plaintiff's request that she be transferred, "You know how to do your job and are capable of performing your duties at an acceptable [*17]  level. It is your attendance that needs to improve." (Id.). In summary, he wrote:
[Y]ou need to make every effort to be at work on a regular basis according to the work hours approved by your Division Chief. Routinely calling one or more hours after the start of the duty day to report that you will be late or absent is not an acceptable practice. Calling to report that you will report late for work and then never reporting for work is totally unacceptable. That behavior in the future will result in an AWOL report for you on that day. Today, you reported that you feel you now have the new medicine prescribed for you under control and that you expect your absences to stop or diminish. I except [sic] your word and expect your attendance to improve substantially starting today.
(Id.).
On August 22, 2007, Guzman informed Plaintiff in writing that she was being placed on leave restrictions because of multiple absences and because her supervisors believed she was abusing her sick leave. (Def. SMF ¶ 74; see also Def. Ex. 11, Attach. to Doc. 53). Guzman wrote:
I hereby notify you that you are suspected of abusing your leave privileges and therefore find it necessary to implement the restrictions [*18]  outlined below. A review of your attendance record reveals that you have both an annual leave and sick leave balance of zero hours and have resorted to Leave Without Pay to cover some of your more recent absences. I am sympathetic to any legitimate medical issues that you may be experiencing and have no intention of denying legitimate requests for leave. However, you have failed to provide sufficient medical documentation to support some of your recent absences and despite having more than 25 years of Federal government service you have the aforementioned zero leave balance. Your abuse of your leave privileges warrants correction and forms the basis for this action.
(Def. Ex. 11, Attach. to Doc. 53). Under the leave restrictions imposed by Guzman, Plaintiff was required to make voice contact with her supervisors in order to request sick leave "within two hours of the start of the workday and each subsequent duty day on which [she was] absent." (Def. Ex. 11, Attach. to Doc. 53; see also Def. SMF ¶ 75). She was also required to provide medical documentation supporting her sick leave request within 15 days of her return to duty. (Def. Ex. 11, Attach. to Doc. 53).

b. September 2007 Notice [*19]  of Proposed Suspension / November 2007 Suspension
On September 12, 2007, Plaintiff acknowledged receipt of a written Notice of Proposed Suspension. (Def. SMF ¶ 77; see also Def. Ex. 14, Attach. to Doc. 53). The stated reasons for the suspension were being absent without leave September 4 to 6, 2007; failure to follow proper leave procedure by not calling in to report her absences on September 5 and 6, 2007; and "[d]iscourtesy" to LTC Guzman. (Def. Ex. 14, Attach. to Doc. 53; see also Def. SMF ¶ 78). The "discourtesy" involved the August 29, 2007 E-mail Plaintiff sent to Guzman in response to his request for additional medical documentation. (Def. SMF ¶ 80; see also Def. Exs. 12 & 14, Attach. to Doc. 53). Plaintiff characterized her August 29, 2007 E-mail as follows: "Basically, I was telling him off, okay, but it was tactful." (Def. SMF ¶ 81).
On October 24, 2007, Blakeney issued Plaintiff a Notice of Decision on Proposed Suspension. (Def. Ex. 15, Attach. to Doc. 53; see also Def. SMF ¶ 82). Blakeney sustained the charges of failure to follow proper leave procedures and discourtesy, but he vacated the AWOL charge because Plaintiff provided medical documentation about those absences. [*20]  (Def. Ex. 15, Attach. to Doc. 53). Plaintiff was suspended for two days, November 6-7, 2007. (Def. SMF ¶ 83).

c. October 2007 Written Counseling
On October 29, 2007, Plaintiff received a "written counseling statement regarding [her] absence, Monday, 15 Oct 07," signed by Blakeney and stating that Plaintiff "left a voice message for LTC Guzman" and did not call Blakeney or Vilcoq "and physically speak to either of [them] as required in the [Notice of Leave Restriction] letter." (Def. Ex. 13, Attach. to Doc. 53). Blakeney "re-enforce[d] the requirement for [her] to follow" the leave restriction instructions when she was absent, and warned her that "[f]ailure to do so may result in a charge of AWOL and appropriate disciplinary action." (Id.).

d. January 2008 Written Counseling
On January 10, 2008, Plaintiff acknowledged receipt of a written counseling statement. (Def. SMF ¶ 87; see also Def. Ex. 17, Attach. to Doc. 53). Blakeney counseled Plaintiff for arriving late to work on that date and not following the policy for requesting leave. (Def. Ex. 17, Attach. to Doc. 53). He also wrote that he had received a telephone call from LTC Guzman that morning "stating that [Plaintiff was] confrontational [*21]  and disrespectful to him on the telephone to wit, referring to him as 'Bubba' and when he corrected [her] regarding [her] disrespect [she] chose to call him LTC Bubba." (Id.). Blakeney also wrote about complaints he had received that morning from other personnel about Plaintiff's "profane language and confrontational behavior":
I immediately went to your work station to advise you that this type of behavior was not acceptable and that if you could not control yourself you would have to leave the workplace. You stated that you don't work for me. I am advising you that as your supervisor you do indeed work for me, I have certain supervisory responsibilities that I will continue to carry out. If you have issues with my conduct of those responsibilities you may take them to my superiors. I am also advising you that disruptive, profane, or threatening behavior i[s] not acceptable in the workplace and that the next instance of this will result in my contacting security and having you escorted from the workplace and recommending administrative actions be taken.
(Id.). Blakeney wrote further that he had received a note from Plaintiff that day stating that she had "reported" Blakeney "for inquiring [*22]  as to [her] condition, if [she was] well, or under the influence of some chemical substance that may be causing [her] agitated state and confrontational behavior during [their] conversation [that day]." (Id.). Blakeney explained:
Based on your previous stated desire to commit suicide8 and your documented medical conditions it is not only appropriate but required that I ensure you are not at risk of harming yourself or others. I made the inquiry and any time in the future that I am worried about your mental or physical state I will continue to express concern for your condition and offer any professional assistance that is available to you as a government employee.
(Id.). Finally, Blakeney advised Plaintiff that if she "still desire[d] to see the Chief of Staff, by-passing the chain of command [he would] make every effort to schedule time on her calendar for [Plaintiff] at the soonest available date." (Id.).

e. February 2008 Discipline
On February 11, 2008, Plaintiff received a written counseling statement concerning her absences from work on January 28, 2008 through February 1, 2008 and February 4 through 8, 2008, and her failure to comply with her leave restrictions. (Def. Ex. 18, Attach. [*23]  to Doc. 53; see also Def. SMF ¶ 103).
On the same day, Plaintiff acknowledged receipt of a Notice of Proposed Removal prepared by Blakeney. (Def. Ex. 19, Attach. to Doc. 53; see also Def. SMF ¶ 104). The stated reasons for her proposed removal included: (1) "[c]reating a disturbance" in the workplace on January 10, 2008 by calling Guzman "bubba" and "LTC Bubba," being loud and disruptive, and being argumentative with Blakeney; (2) using inappropriate language in the workplace on January 10, 2008 including profanity and "reporting this 'Nazi like' work environment"; (3) making false claims involving her time sheets; and (4) being absent without leave (AWOL) on December 31, 2007 and January 2, 2008 and on January 10, 2008 for 1.5 hours and on January 11, 2008 for 30 minutes. (Def. Ex. 19, Attach. to Doc. 53; see also Def. SMF ¶ 105).
On February 15, 2008, Plaintiff was counseled concerning her time sheet submitted for February 3 to February 16, 2008. (Def. SMF ¶¶ 107-08; see also Def. Ex. 21, Attach. to Doc. 53).
On February 16, 2008, Plaintiff responded in writing to the Notice of Proposed Removal. (Def. SMF ¶ 106; see also Def. Ex. 20, Attach. to Doc. 53). With respect to the charges [*24]  of creating a disturbance and using inappropriate language, Plaintiff admitted she called Guzman "Bubba" but explained that she mistook him for her friend, and when he told her who he was, she "jokingly replied, 'Okay, LTC Bubba. What do you need, boss?'" (Def. Ex. 20, Attach. to Doc. 53). Plaintiff denied that she disrupted other employees' work, but she admitted that after talking to Guzman, she said, "The man says I don't even do my own work, and now he's handing me someone else's." (Id.). She also admitted that she "may very well have used the Anglo-Saxon carnal verb to which your accusation refers," because she was frustrated about her computer. (Id.). She denied that she "report[ed] this 'Nazi like' work environment," but she admitted that she told Blakeney, "The last time I looked, I was living in the United States of America, not Nazi Germany. What happened to my right to freedom of speech? Other people say far worse things than I do." (Id.). She also admitted that her "voice probably did rise an octave[.]" (Id.).
Plaintiff responded to the false claim charge, i.e., the charge that she recorded on her time sheet that she worked hours she did not work on January 10, 2008 and [*25]  January 11, 2008, by pointing out that she came in early on other days, that "[m]ost supervisors overlook" employees coming in late "and it's standard practice to let the time cards stand because of the way the timekeeping software functions," and that other employees have submitted false time cards. (Id.). Plaintiff did not dispute the AWOL charges, but she pointed out that she was "a civilian employee" without "the option of reporting for Sick Call." (Id.).

f. Plaintiff's March 2008 Removal from Federal Service
On March 7, 2008, Vilcoq issued Plaintiff a Notice of Decision on Proposed Removal. (Def. Ex. B, Attach. to Doc. 11).9 Vilcoq wrote that he had considered "the reasons for [her] proposed removal as set forth in the Notice of Proposed Removal," as well as her reply, and he decided to sustain her removal and terminate her employment effective March 21, 2008 "for creating a disturbance, using inappropriate language, false claims and absence without leave (AWOL)." (Id.). Vilcoq also wrote that he considered other factors, including Plaintiff's employment record and performance; he noted her 28 years of service, the fact that "she ha[d] previously been disciplined for inappropriate [*26]  behavior," and "the seriousness of the offenses." (Id.). He explained:
Your false claims of time and attendance records and absence without leave (AWOL) is totally unacceptable and demonstrates your lack of trustworthiness and integrity. Your use of inappropriate language and creating a disturbance has resulted in a significant loss of confidence and trust on the part of management in your ability to carry out your duties in a responsible manner and has directly impacted the efficient accomplishment of our mission. I have therefore determined that your continued employment in this organization can only be detrimental to the accomplishment of our mission. This action is consistent with Army Regulation 690-700, Chapter 751, and is being taken to promote the efficiency of the service.
(Id.).
Plaintiff was removed from federal service on March 21, 2008. (Def. Ex. 23, Attach. to Doc. 53). Plaintiff was replaced by a male employee. (FFC Tr: 115).

8. Plaintiff's EEO Activity
Plaintiff first contacted the Fort McPherson Equal Employment Opportunity ("EEO") Office about the claims giving rise to this lawsuit on February 18 or 19, 2008. (Def. Exs. 27 & 28, Attach. Doc. 53). Plaintiff received a Notice [*27]  of Right to File Formal Complaint on March 21, 2008. (Def. SMF ¶ 115; see also Def. Ex. 29, Attach. to Doc. 53, at 12d.). Plaintiff filed a formal EEO complaint on April 5, 2008. (Def. SMF ¶ 116; see also Def. Exs. 29, 30, Attach. to Doc. 53).
In her formal complaint, Plaintiff alleged that she had been discriminated against because of her sex and her disabilities, and in reprisal for prior EEO activity in 2001. (Def. Ex. 29, Attach. to Doc. 53). She alleged the following acts of discrimination or reprisal: she was no longer allowed to work a flexible schedule, and she was denied requested accommodation for her disability—specifically, the opportunity to work flexible hours and to earn credit time; she was charged AWOL even though she submitted medical documentation; she was given extra assignments "increasing her work load and responsibility without the benefit of extra time or pay"; Guzman and Blakeney were "micromanaging [her] work," which "may have been a form of retaliation by Mr. Blakeney"; she was put on leave restrictions in August 2007, which "may have been a form of retaliation" by Blakeney and Vilcoq; she was suspended November 5 and 6, 2007; shortly after the incident when [*28]  Plaintiff called Guzman "Bubba," Guzman and Blakeney accused her of "being on a chemical substance and proposed she go home"; she was given a proposed notice of removal and terminated; and Guzman and Blakeney refused to disclose to Plaintiff "negative items and witness statements in her record." (Id.).
By letter dated May 6, 2008, the EEO notified Plaintiff that the following claims were accepted for investigation: the March 7, 2008 Notice of Decision on Proposed Removal; management's February 2008 refusal to disclose to Plaintiff negative information and witness statements from her records; Blakeney's January 2008 accusation that Plaintiff was on a "chemical substance" and proposal that she go home; and the denials since April 2007 of Plaintiff's requests for accommodation for her disabilities and the alleged assignment to her of extra work. (Def. Ex. 32, Attach. to Doc. 53, at 1-2). The following claims were dismissed as untimely, i.e., Plaintiff did not initiate contact with an EEO counselor regarding these claims within 45 days of their occurrence: the October 2007 Notice of Decision on Proposed Suspension; the September 2007 AWOL charge; Plaintiff's placement on leave restrictions [*29]  in August 2007; and the April 2007 change no longer allowing Plaintiff to work a flexible schedule or receive credit time. (Id. at 2). The EEO also acknowledged Plaintiff's complaint that Guzman and Blakeney "micromanaged" her work and that she does not have any negative job performance references in her record, but explained that these were not "viewed as separate cognizable claims," and that "absent any specific incidents, this [micromanagement] issue was considered to be background information to support [Plaintiff's] allegation of discrimination, and will be treated as such." (Id. at 3).
In the Department of the Army's final decision dated December 17, 2008 (see Ex. E, Attach. to Doc. 11), the EEO considered the claims not previously dismissed by the EEO office and found that, with respect to the claims accepted for investigation, Plaintiff "was not the victim of discrimination based upon sex (female), disability (mental and physical), and/or reprisal for engaging in protected Title VII activity." (Id. at 1-2, 9).

III. Summary Judgment Standard
Summary judgment is proper "if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). "A [*30]  party asserting that a fact cannot be or is genuinely disputed must support that assertion by[] . . . citing to particular parts of materials in the record, including depositions, documents, electronically stored information, affidavits or declarations, stipulations (including those made for purposes of the motion only), admissions, interrogatory answers, or other materials." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(1). The moving party has an initial burden of informing the court of the basis for the motion and showing that there is no genuine issue of material fact. Celotex Corp v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986); see also SEC v. Morgan Keegan & Co., 806 F. Supp. 2d 1253, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 71481, at *13 (N.D. Ga. 2011) ("The party seeking summary judgment bears the burden of demonstrating the absence of a genuine dispute as to any material fact." (citing Herzog v. Castle Rock Entm't, 193 F.3d 1241, 1246 (11th Cir. 1999))). If the non-moving party will bear the burden of proving the material issue at trial, then in order to defeat summary judgment, he must respond by going beyond the pleadings, and by his own affidavits, or by the discovery on file, identify facts sufficient to establish the existence of a genuine issue for trial. See Celotex, 477 U.S. at 322, 324. "No genuine issue of material fact exists if a party has failed to 'make a showing sufficient to establish the existence of an element . . . on which that [*31]  party will bear the burden of proof at trial.'" AFL-CIO v. City of Miami, 637 F.3d 1178, 1186-87 (11th Cir. 2011) (quoting Celotex, 477 U.S. at 322).
Furthermore, "[a] nonmoving party, opposing a motion for summary judgment supported by affidavits[,] cannot meet the burden of coming forth with relevant competent evidence by simply relying on legal conclusions or evidence which would be inadmissible at trial." Avirgan v. Hull, 932 F.2d 1572, 1577 (11th Cir. 1991), cert. denied, 506 U.S. 952, 113 S. Ct. 405, 121 L. Ed. 2d 330 (1992); see also Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(1)(B) & (c)(4). The evidence "cannot consist of conclusory allegations or legal conclusions." Avirgan, 932 F.2d at 1577. Unsupported self-serving statements by the party opposing summary judgment are insufficient to avoid summary judgment. See Midwestern Waffles, Inc. v. Waffle House, Inc., 734 F.2d 705, 714 (11th Cir. 1984).
A dispute about a material fact is "genuine" "if the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). "If the evidence is merely colorable, or is not significantly probative, summary judgment may be granted." Id. at 249-50 (internal citations omitted). It is not the court's function at the summary judgment stage to determine credibility or decide the truth of the matter. Id. at 249, 255. Rather, "[t]he evidence of the nonmovant is to be believed, and all justifiable inferences are to be drawn in [her] favor." Id. at 255.

IV. Discussion
In her brief in response to Defendant's motion for summary judgment, Plaintiff writes that she "asserts [*32]  claims of sexual discrimination and harassment under Title VII, disability discrimination and denial of reasonable accommodation under the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the Americans With Disabilities Act,10 and retaliation under Title VII[.]" (Doc. 56, Pl. Br. at 2).

A. Plaintiff's Title VII Sex Discrimination Claims
Plaintiff alleges that Defendant discriminated against her because of her sex in violation of Title VII. Title VII provides, "It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employer . . . to fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any individual, or otherwise to discriminate against any individual with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, because of such individual's race, color, religion, sex, or national origin[.]" 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(a)(1).
Plaintiff "asserts her sex discrimination claims based on two theories: (1) disparate treatment and (2) harassment." (Doc. 56, Pl. Br. at 2). Apparently in support of both theories, Plaintiff contends the following occurred because of her sex: she was denied a flexible work schedule and credit hours; her supervisors required more medical information from her [*33]  than was necessary to determine whether she had a disability and needed accommodation for that disability; she was treated as absent without leave; she was given extra work assignments; her supervisors refused to assign one of her male coworkers to cover for her when she was out; Blakeney questioned whether she was on a "chemical substance"; she received counseling statements; she was suspended; and she was terminated. (See Doc. 56, Pl. Br. at 2-3, 11-12).11

1. Plaintiff's Disparate Treatment Claims

a. Analytical Framework for Disparate Treatment Claims
A plaintiff may establish a prima facie case of discrimination through circumstantial evidence under the framework set forth in McDonnell Douglas Corporation v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973) and Texas Department of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 101 S. Ct. 1089, 67 L. Ed. 2d 207 (1981).12 A plaintiff establishes a prima facie case of discrimination by showing that (1) she is a member of a protected group, (2) she was subjected to an adverse employment action, (3) she was qualified to perform her job, and (4) she was replaced by a person outside her protected group or treated less favorably than a similarly situated employee outside her protected classification. See Curtis v. Broward Cnty., 292 F. App'x 882, 883 (11th Cir. 2008) (unpublished decision) (citing Maynard v. Bd. of Regents of Div. of Univs. of Fla. Dep't of Educ., 342 F.3d 1281, 1289 (11th Cir. 2003)).13
If a plaintiff presents [*34]  a prima facie case through circumstantial evidence, "the defendant must 'articulate some legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the [adverse employment action].'" Jones v. Bessemer Carraway Med. Ctr., 137 F.3d 1306, 1310 (11th Cir.) (quoting McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802), modified, 151 F.3d 1321 (11th Cir. 1998). If the defendant satisfies this rebuttal burden by producing evidence of a legitimate rationale for its decision, "the plaintiff may attempt to show that the proffered reason was merely a pretext for the defendant's acts." Bessemer, 137 F.3d at 1310 (citing Burdine, 450 U.S. at 253). In Burdine, the Court explained the next step, once the defendant employer articulates a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the employment decision:
[The plaintiff] now must have the opportunity to demonstrate that the proffered reason was not the true reason for the employment decision. This burden now merges with the ultimate burden of persuading the [factfinder] that she has been the victim of intentional discrimination. She may succeed in this either directly by persuading the [factfinder] that a discriminatory reason more likely motivated the employer or indirectly by showing that the employer's proffered explanation is unworthy of credence.
Burdine, 450 U.S. at 256. The Supreme Court explained further in St. Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 508-09, 511, 113 S. Ct. 2742, 125 L. Ed. 2d 407 (1993), that the jury's disbelief of the employer's proffered explanation does not [*35]  mandate a finding of intentional discrimination but rather permits the jury to make that finding. The Court elaborated:
The factfinder's disbelief of the reasons put forward by the defendant (particularly if disbelief is accompanied by a suspicion of mendacity) may, together with the elements of the prima facie case, suffice to show intentional discrimination. Thus, rejection of the defendant's proffered reasons will permit the trier of fact to infer the ultimate fact of intentional discrimination[.]
Id. at 511 (footnote omitted) (emphasis in original).
In this case, Plaintiff does not assert that she has presented direct evidence of sex discrimination; she contends that she "can establish a prima facie claim of gender discrimination." (Doc. 56, Pl. Br. at 9-13 (original formatting removed)). Therefore, the undersigned analyzes Plaintiff's claim under the McDonnell Douglas/Burdine burden shifting framework for proving a circumstantial case of discrimination.

b. Denial of Flexible Schedule and Credit Time
Plaintiff argues that Defendant discriminated against her by refusing to allow her to work on a flexible schedule and earn credit time. (See Doc. 56, Pl. Br. at 2-3, 11-12). Essentially, Plaintiff [*36]  sought permission to work a flexible schedule that would allow her to determine, on a day-by-day basis, what time she would arrive and leave from work, and she wanted to be able to earn "credit hours" that she could use later instead of sick leave.

(i) Plaintiff's Prima Facie Case
The undersigned finds that Plaintiff has failed to create an issue of fact on each element of her prima facie case with respect to the denial of a flexible schedule and credit time. First, she has failed to show that such actions are adverse employment actions for purposes of Title VII. See Fitzhugh v. Topetzes, No. 1:04-CV-3258-RWS, 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 62630, at *21-22 (N.D. Ga. Sept. 1, 2006) (holding that "the denial of Plaintiff's request for 'flex time' does not constitute an adverse employment action" and noting that "[a] considerable number of courts have also considered, and rejected, the argument that . . . being denied a 'flex schedule' . . . constitutes an 'adverse employment action'" (listing cases)).
Furthermore, Plaintiff has not pointed to evidence that similarly situated male employees were allowed to work a flexible schedule, or evidence that raises an inference of discrimination. Although there is evidence that other employees were allowed to work an alternative [*37]  work schedule known as a "compressed work schedule," the Duty Day Policy provided that employees could request such a schedule. There is no evidence that Plaintiff sought and was refused permission to work a compressed work schedule. Instead, she wanted a flexible schedule, and she has not pointed to evidence that her supervisors authorized a male employee to work a flexible schedule.
Even assuming Plaintiff can make out a prima facie case, her claim fails because she has not made a showing that Defendant's articulated legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons for denying her requests to work a flexible schedule and use credit time were pretextual.

(ii) Defendant's Articulated Legitimate, Non-Discriminatory Reason for Employment Decision
The employer's burden to articulate a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for its employment decisions is one of production, not persuasion. Standard v. A.B.E.L Servs., 161 F.3d 1318, 1331 (11th Cir. 1999). This burden is "exceedingly light." Turnes v. Amsouth Bank, N.A., 36 F.3d 1057, 1060-61 (11th Cir. 1994) (internal quotation omitted).
Defendant has presented evidence that it was the policy of the Force Support Division not to allow its employees to work flexible schedules and earn credit time (1) because the Division requires employees' scheduled work days to include the "core [*38]  hours" of 8:30 to 11:30 a.m. and 1:00 to 3:00 p.m. so they can be available to respond to agencies and Army Reserve units throughout the United States and Puerto Rico, and (2) because the Division does not want non-supervisory employees working when supervisory employees are not present. (See FFC Tr: 93, 124-25, 161-62, 168-69, 175-76; Def. Ex. 7, Attach. to Doc. 53). Vilcoq testified,
[B]ecause of the work we do and the customers that we service, we can't have an employee coming in at 8:00 . . . today, 9:30 tomorrow, 7:00 . . . the day after that at their own call. . . . [W]e need to know when an individual is going to be present for duty, and we need that on a . . . continuing basis because--well, it just goes back to order and discipline and what we do and how we do it.
(FFC Tr: 168-69).
The undersigned finds that Defendant has met its "exceedingly light" burden of articulating a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for denying Plaintiff's requests to work a flexible schedule, i.e., a schedule that would allow her to determine on a day-to-day basis when she would arrive and leave, and to earn credit hours.

(iii) Pretext
Because Defendant has articulated a legitimate, non-discriminatory [*39]  reason for denying Plaintiff's request to work a flexible schedule, Plaintiff must "come forward with evidence, including the previously produced evidence establishing the prima facie case, sufficient to permit a reasonable factfinder to conclude that the reasons given by the employer were not the real reasons for the adverse employment decision" in order to survive summary judgment. Chapman v. AI Transp., 229 F.3d 1012, 1024 (11th Cir. 2000) (en banc) (quoting Combs v. Plantation Patterns, Meadowcraft, Inc., 106 F.3d 1519, 1528 (11th Cir. 1997), cert. denied, 522 U.S. 1045, 118 S. Ct. 685, 139 L. Ed. 2d 632 (1998)). The court's role at this juncture is to "evaluate whether [Plaintiff] has demonstrated such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, incoherencies, or contradictions in [Defendant's] proffered legitimate reasons for its action that a reasonable factfinder could find them unworthy of credence." Combs, 106 F.3d at 1538 (internal quotation omitted). "A plaintiff is not allowed to recast an employer's proffered nondiscriminatory reasons or substitute his business judgment for that of the employer. Provided that the proffered reason is one that might motivate a reasonable employer, an employee must meet that reason head on and rebut it, and the employee cannot succeed by simply quarreling with the wisdom of that reason." Chapman, 229 F.3d at 1030.
Plaintiff has not pointed to evidence that creates a jury issue on [*40]  pretext, i.e., that puts at issue whether Defendant maintained a policy of not allowing employees to work flexible schedules, whether Defendant maintained such a policy for the reasons given by Vilcoq, or whether Defendant denied Plaintiff's requests based on that policy. Instead, Plaintiff attempts to demonstrate pretext by "quarreling with the wisdom" of allowing a compressed schedule but not allowing an employee to work a flexible schedule. She contends that Defendant was authorized to allow employees to work a flexible schedule and argues that "Defendant presents no sound reason or substantiated evidence that allowing Plaintiff to work a flexible work schedule would be an undue hardship on Defendant." (Doc. 56, Pl. Br. at 10).
In the first place, although the Force Support Division may have been allowed to establish policies for its employees to work flexible schedules, Plaintiff has not pointed to authority, under Title VII, that it was required to do so, or that it was discriminatory not to do so.14 Furthermore, Defendant is not required to show, for purposes of Title VII, that it would not be an "undue hardship" to allow Plaintiff to work a flexible schedule. Instead, the burden [*41]  on Defendant is to articulate a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for his decision, which Defendant has done. While Plaintiff may disagree with the reasons for the Force Support Division's policies, a plaintiff cannot show that an employer's reasons for its decisions were pretextual by arguing that the decisions were unwise or unfair. See Nix v. WLCY Radio/Rahall Commc'ns, 738 F.2d 1181, 1187 (11th Cir. 1984) ("Title VII addresses discrimination. Title VII is not a shield against harsh treatment at the workplace. Nor does the statute require the employer to have good cause for its decisions. The employer may fire an employee for a good reason, a bad reason, a reason based on erroneous facts, or for no reason at all, as long as its action is not for a discriminatory reason. While an employer's judgment or course of action may seem poor or erroneous to outsiders, the relevant question is simply whether the given reason was a pretext for illegal discrimination. The employer's stated legitimate reason . . . does not have to be a reason that the judge or jurors would act on or approve." (internal quotations omitted) (emphasis in original)).
It is not the court's role to question whether it is reasonable or correct for an employer to determine that its [*42]  employees cannot have flexible schedules that allow the employees to determine on a daily basis what time they will arrive and leave. See Smith v. Sunbelt Rentals, Inc., 356 F. App'x 272, 278-79 (11th Cir. 2009) (unpublished decision) ("We do 'not sit as a super-personnel department that reexamines an entity's business decisions,' but the 'inquiry is limited to whether the employer gave an honest explanation of its behavior.'" (quoting Chapman, 229 F.3d at 1030)). Defendant's reasons for not allowing such a schedule are certainly reasons "that might motivate a reasonable employer," and Plaintiff's disagreement with that policy or its underlying rationale is insufficient to demonstrate pretext. Chapman, 229 F.3d at 1030.
Plaintiff also takes issue with Defendant's claim that Plaintiff's absences impose a hardship, referring to it as a "self-impose[d] hardship at best," apparently because Defendant should, according to Plaintiff, "properly train[ ] others to handle her desk in her absence." (Doc. 56, Pl. Br. at 10). The fact that an employer expects that an employee will perform her own job without having others to "handle her desk in her absence," does not demonstrate that Defendant's articulated reasons for denying Plaintiff's requests to work a flexible schedule and earn credit time are pretextual.
Plaintiff [*43]  has not created a prima facie case of sex discrimination with respect to Defendant's denials of her requests to work a flexible schedule and to earn credit time, and she has failed to create an issue of fact on whether Defendant's reasons for denying Plaintiff's requests are pretextual. Therefore, the undersigned RECOMMENDS that Defendant's motion for summary judgment be GRANTED on Plaintiff's Title VII sex discrimination claim based on Defendant's denials of Plaintiff's requests to work a flexible schedule and earn credit time.

c. Requirement to Produce Medical Documentation
Plaintiff contends that Defendant discriminated against her because of her sex "by requiring more medical information than was needed to determine whether Plaintiff had an ADA disability" and "by requiring more medical information than was needed to determine whether Plaintiff made a proper request for a reasonable accommodation of use of flexible schedule and credit time[.]" (Doc. 56, Pl. Br. at 3). Plaintiff does not cite to evidence in support of these contentions, and her conclusory assertions are insufficient to put at issue whether Defendant "requir[ed] more medical information than was needed," whether such [*44]  a requirement would constitute adverse employment actions for purposes of Title VII, or whether these actions were taken because of Plaintiff's sex.
The undersigned finds that Plaintiff has not created an issue of fact on each element of her prima facie case. First, even if Plaintiff subjectively believed that Defendant's demands for additional medical documentation were unnecessary, she has not pointed to evidence that the demands themselves constituted "serious and material" changes in the terms and conditions of her employment. See Rainey v. Holder, 412 F. App'x 235, 238 (11th Cir. Feb. 2, 2011) (unpublished decision) ("As to the element of adverse employment action [for Title VII discrimination claim], the plaintiff must show a 'serious and material change in the terms, conditions, or privileges of employment.'" (quoting Davis v. Town of Lake Park, 245 F.3d 1232, 1238-39 (11th Cir. 2001))).
Furthermore, she has not pointed to evidence that a similarly situated male employee was not required to produce medical documentation to support requests for sick leave or to support a request for a disability-related accommodation. Nor has she pointed to evidence that "raises a reasonable inference" that her supervisors required additional medical documentation because of her sex. Smith, 644 F.3d 1321, 2011 U.S. App. LEXIS 13363, at *20. Moreover, Plaintiff's subjective belief [*45]  that Defendant did not need additional medical documentation does not create an issue of fact as to what her supervisors believed, that is, whether her supervisors believed that medical documentation was needed to excuse her absences, as required by the leave restrictions she was placed on for excessive absenteeism, or whether they believed they needed additional medical documentation to support her request for an accommodation, as discussed infra in the analysis of Plaintiff's Rehabilitation Act failure to accommodate claim.
The undersigned finds that Plaintiff has failed to create an issue of fact on whether her supervisors requested additional medical documentation because of her sex in violation of Title VII. Therefore, the undersigned RECOMMENDS that Defendant's motion for summary judgment be GRANTED on Plaintiff's Title VII sex discrimination claim based on her supervisors' requests for additional medical documentation.

d. Absent Without Leave (AWOL) Designation
The record shows that Plaintiff was placed on leave restrictions due to her abuse of the leave policy, and that she was required to comply with those restrictions in order to take leave. It appears that there were occasions [*46]  thereafter when Plaintiff was deemed to be AWOL for failing to meet those requirements. (See, e.g., Def. Ex. 19, Attach. to Doc. 53).
Plaintiff asserts that Defendant discriminated against her "by declaring her AWOL and docking her pay when she was ill and could not call in immediately or when she did call in, left messages and management claimed they did not get the messages." (Doc. 56, Pl. Br. at 3-4). Plaintiff does not cite to any record evidence to support that assertion, and she does not identify the dates on which she was declared AWOL or any circumstances surrounding those incidents. Her conclusory assertions are insufficient to create jury questions on whether Defendant's designation of Plaintiff as AWOL was an adverse employment action, or whether Defendant designated her as AWOL because of her sex. See Evers v. Gen. Motors Corp., 770 F.2d 984, 986 (11th Cir. 1985) ("This court has consistently held that conclusory allegations without specific supporting facts have no probative value."); see also Hansen v. Perry Techs., 206 F. Supp. 2d 1223, 1225 (S.D. Fla. 2002) ("Further, and significantly, mere conclusory, uncorroborated allegations by a plaintiff in an affidavit or deposition will not create an issue of fact for trial sufficient to defeat a well-supported motion for summary judgment."). Thus, Plaintiff [*47]  has not created an issue of fact on each element of her prima facie case.
Furthermore, even assuming that being designated AWOL was an adverse employment action for purposes of Title VII,15 Plaintiff has not shown that Defendant treated male employees more favorably by not designating them AWOL if they failed to follow Defendant's procedures for obtaining leave to be absent. The undersigned notes that Plaintiff testified she was the only employee placed on leave restrictions (Brown Dep. at 164), which resulted in her having to meet additional requirements for obtaining leave to be absent. However, even if that allegation is true, Plaintiff has not shown that her supervisors suspected that any male employees had abused the sick leave policy, such that the male employee should also have been placed on a leave restriction. Nor has she pointed to any evidence from which it could reasonably be inferred that she was placed on leave restrictions because of her sex.
Moreover, Plaintiff has not pointed to evidence that Defendant's articulated reasons for placing her on the leave restrictions and then considering her AWOL when she did not comply with the leave restrictions were pretextual. She [*48]  has not shown that she was not chronically absent to the extent that she had no leave accrued even though she had 25 years of service when the leave restriction was issued. (See Def. Ex. 11, Attach. to Doc. 53). See, e.g., Joseph v. New York City Dep't of Corr., No. 10-cv-1265(NGG)(LB), 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 51690, at *14 (E.D.N.Y. May 12, 2011) (finding that "Defendants' designation of Joseph as chronically absent following his return to work after medical leave was well within NYCDOC's rights to take corrective action against an absentee employee"). Furthermore, Plaintiff has not presented evidence to show that her supervisors did not believe she was late or absent after she was placed on leave restrictions and that she therefore failed to comply with the leave restriction requirements. Therefore, the undersigned RECOMMENDS that Defendant's motion for summary judgment be GRANTED on Plaintiff's Title VII sex discrimination claim based on Defendant's designation of Plaintiff as AWOL.

e. Assignment of Extra Work
Plaintiff asserts that Defendant "place[d] additional workload on Plaintiff that w[as] the responsibility of male coworkers who were present at work[.]" (Doc. 56, Pl. Br. at 3). Plaintiff does not cite to any evidence to support that allegation, [*49]  however. Plaintiff's allegation that she was given additional work is insufficient to demonstrate that she was subjected to an adverse employment action because it is conclusory and because she has not shown that the additional work resulted in a serious and material change in the terms and conditions of her employment. Rainey, 412 F. App'x at 238. Plaintiff testified that she was given extra work on a "sporadic and intermittent" basis, and although she complained that the extra work was not in her "area," she admitted it was in her "position description," and she was able to complete her work. (Brown Dep. at 170-71; FFC Tr: 43).
Plaintiff has failed to point to evidence that raises an inference that she was given extra assignments because of her sex. Blakeney testified that everybody was given extra assignments (FFC Tr: 94-95), and Guzman testified that, although he may have given Plaintiff an additional assignment to help a new employee, he tried to balance the work load among his employees. (FFC Tr: 194-95). He also testified that Plaintiff was "very capable" and "she [knew] the people[ and ] . . . the telephone numbers of people that she needed to call and the process." (Id. at 194). Plaintiff herself testified to [*50]  several non-discriminatory reasons why she was given extra work: Guzman gave her a project because "other than Bob Wood, [she] was the single longest-tenured systems integrator"; she was given "anything to do with managing the database and pulling information out of the database" because she "knew which databases to get into to find a point of contact"; she was given work because the employee who was assigned to the work was new; and she "was somebody they knew they could come to if they needed information." (Brown Dep. at 168, 173-74, 177).16
The undersigned finds that Plaintiff has failed to create an issue of fact on whether her supervisors assigned her extra work because of her sex in violation of Title VII. Therefore, the undersigned RECOMMENDS that Defendant's motion for summary judgment be GRANTED on Plaintiff's Title VII sex discrimination claim based on the assignment of extra work.

f. Failure to "Cover" for Plaintiff
Plaintiff argues that Defendant discriminated against her "by refusing to assign one of her male coworkers to cover her desk when she was out ill[.]" (Doc. 56, Pl. Br. at 30). Plaintiff does not cite to record evidence to support this assertion, and her conclusory [*51]  allegation is insufficient to show that she was subjected to an adverse employment because of her sex in violation of Title VII. In the first place, Plaintiff has not shown that an employer's failure to "cover" an employee who is absent is an adverse employment action under Title VII, or that Title VII imposes such a duty on an employer.17 Furthermore, Plaintiff has not pointed to evidence that Defendant assigned employees to perform work for male employees who were out sick. Because Plaintiff has failed to create an issue of fact on each element of her prima facie case of sex discrimination based on Defendant's alleged failure to assign an employee "to cover her desk when she was out ill," the undersigned RECOMMENDS that Defendant's motion for summary judgment be GRANTED on Plaintiff's Title VII sex discrimination claim based on the failure to cover for Plaintiff.18

g. Questioning Whether Plaintiff Was on "Chemical Substance"
Plaintiff contends that Defendant discriminated against her "by subjecting [her] to unfounded accusations of chemical abuse[.]" (Doc. 56, Pl. Br. at 3). Plaintiff does not cite to record evidence in support of that allegation, but the undersigned notes Plaintiff's [*52]  testimony that on January 10, 2008, Blakeney accused her of being on a "chemical substance." (FFC Tr: 52, 55). Even if Blakeney did ask her whether she was on a "chemical substance," Plaintiff has not shown that she was subjected to an adverse employment action. She was not disciplined as a result of Blakeney's question, nor did she suffer any serious and material change in the terms and conditions of her employment. While the question might have "totally rattled" her (FFC Tr: 58), "'the protections of Title VII simply do not extend to everything that makes an employee unhappy.'" Butler v. Ala. DOT, 536 F.3d 1209, 1216 (11th Cir. 2008) (quoting Davis, 245 F.3d at 1242); see also Bozeman v. Per-Se Techs., Inc., 456 F. Supp. 2d 1282, 1343 (N.D. Ga. 2006) ("'Not everything that makes an employee unhappy is actionable adverse action under Title VII.'" (quoting Doe v. DeKalb County Sch. Dist., 145 F.3d 1441, 1449 (11th Cir. 1998))), adopted by 456 F. Supp. 2d 1282 (N.D. Ga. 2006).
Furthermore, Plaintiff has not pointed to evidence from which it could reasonably be inferred that Blakeney questioned whether she was on a "chemical substance" because of her sex. When asked why she believed Blakeney's question was based on her sex, Plaintiff testified, "Because I don't believe a male would have been treated that way." (FFC Tr: 58). Her subjective belief is insufficient to show that she was discriminated [*53]  against because of her sex.
Moreover, Plaintiff has not disputed Blakeney's explanation for questioning Plaintiff about being under the influence of a "chemical substance" or argued that his explanation did not provide a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason. Blakeney testified that he asked Plaintiff "if she was under the influence of something that might be affecting her behavior or her ability to deal with me and the work environment" after he received reports that Plaintiff was "creating a disturbance"; she was "very agitated" when he confronted her about those reports and made a comment "about the Nazi environment"; he was aware of a prior incident when Plaintiff "mention[ed] consideration of suicide"; and he was aware that "she does take some kinds of drugs that, you know, help her condition." (FFC Tr: 101-03). Blakeney also explained his concerns to Plaintiff in a counseling statement:
Based on your previous stated desire to commit suicide and your documented medical conditions it is not only appropriate but required that I ensure you are not at risk of harming yourself or others. I made the inquiry and any time in the future that I am worried about your mental and physical state [*54]  I will continue to express concern for your condition and offer any professional assistance that is available to you as a government employee.
(Def. Ex. 17, Attach. to Doc. 53).
Plaintiff has not controverted the fact that she had previously made a statement "along the lines of, [m]aybe I should just off myself and they'll be happy and leave me alone" (Brown Dep. at 137); that her co-workers reported to Blakeney that she was being loud and disruptive (regardless of whether she agrees with that assessment); that she had medical conditions for which she took medications; and that when Blakeney confronted her, she raised her voice and said, "The last time I looked, I was living in the United States of America, not Nazi Germany." (Def. Ex. 20, Attach. to Doc. 53). She has not presented evidence to show that Blakeney was not concerned that she was under the influence of a "chemical substance," or something that could interfere with her ability to deal with Blakeney or her work environment, or to show his belief did not motivate his statement to her.
The undersigned finds that Plaintiff has failed to create an issue of fact on whether Blakeney questioned Plaintiff about being on a "chemical [*55]  substance" because of her sex in violation of Title VII. Therefore, the undersigned RECOMMENDS that Defendant's motion for summary judgment be GRANTED on Plaintiff's Title VII sex discrimination claim based on Blakeney's questioning.

h. Issuance of Counseling Statements
Plaintiff contends that the counseling statements were adverse employment actions (see Doc. 56, Pl. Br. at 12), and presumably she alleges they were issued because of her sex. Plaintiff received a "written counseling statement" on October 29, 2007 for leaving a voice message announcing her absence rather than making voice contact with her supervisors as required by her leave restrictions (Def. Ex. 13, Attach. to Doc. 53); she received a "written counseling statement" on January 10, 2008 for arriving late to work on that day without calling in and without submitting a request for a leave of absence, for calling LTC Guzman "Bubba" and "LTC Bubba," for using "profane language" and engaging in "confrontational behavior" as reported by other employees, and for telling Blakeney that she did not work for him (Def. Ex. 17, Attach. to Doc. 53); she received a written counseling statement on February 11, 2008 concerning her absences [*56]  from work from January 28, 2008 to February 1, 2008 and from February 4 to February 8, 2008 and for her failure to comply with the leave restrictions by not calling in and speaking personally with one of her supervisors on all of the days she was absent (Def. Ex. 18, Attach. to Doc. 53); and she received a written counseling statement on February 15, 2008 about entries on her time sheet for the February 3 to February 16, 2008 pay period. (Def. Ex. 21, Attach. to Doc. 53).
Even assuming that these counseling statements were adverse employment actions, Plaintiff has not pointed to evidence raising a reasonable inference that her supervisors issued them because of her sex. She has not shown that similarly situated male employees were not issued counseling statements for misconduct similar to that outlined in these counseling statements; nor has she identified other evidence that raises an inference of discriminatory intent. She argues that Defendant discriminated against her "by subjecting her to different discipline for one occasion of use of profanity at her computer and for one occasion of the use of the word 'bubba' when she mistook her immediate supervisor, LTC Guzman, for one of [*57]  her personal friends." (Doc. 56, Pl. Br. at 3). That assertion fails to address the counseling statements she received for failing to follow the leave restriction requirements. Furthermore, to the extent Plaintiff contends that Defendant disciplined her differently from male employees who also used profanity (see Doc. 56, Pl. Br. at 13), Plaintiff has not shown that those employees also engaged in the other conduct that was discussed in the counseling statement addressing Plaintiff's use of profanity, namely, violating a leave restriction, calling their supervisor "Bubba" and "LTC Bubba,"19 and behaving in a disruptive and confrontational manner. (Def. Ex. 17, Attach. to Doc. 53).20 Accordingly, Plaintiff has failed to create an issue of fact on each element of her prima facie case.
Furthermore, Plaintiff has not pointed to evidence that calls into question whether her supervisors issued the counseling statements for the reasons given in the counseling statements. Therefore, she has not created an issue of fact on whether Defendant's articulated legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons for issuing the counseling statements are pretextual, and the undersigned RECOMMENDS that Defendant's [*58]  motion for summary judgment be GRANTED on Plaintiff's Title VII sex discrimination claim based on the issuance of counseling statements to Plaintiff.

i. Plaintiff's Suspension
Plaintiff apparently argues that she was subjected to an adverse employment action because of her sex when she was suspended. (Doc. 56, Pl. Br. at 11; see also Def. Ex. 15, Attach. to Doc. 53).
The undersigned finds that Plaintiff's November 2007 two-day suspension constituted an adverse employment action. The Notice of Decision on Proposed Suspension (Def. Ex. 15, Attach. to Doc. 53) states that Plaintiff was suspended for two days, November 6 and 7, 2007, for showing discourtesy toward her supervisor and for failure to follow leave request procedures. (Id.). The "discourtesy" involved the August 29, 2007 E-mail Plaintiff sent to Guzman in response to his request for additional medical documentation in which Plaintiff wrote, among other things "LEAVE ME ALONE," and "[t]he only other documentation I care to provide is the Riot Act." (See Def. Exs. 12, 14, Attach. to Doc. 53). Plaintiff has not pointed to evidence that a similarly situated male employee was similarly discourteous to his supervisor and also failed [*59]  to follow the requirements of a leave restriction but was not suspended. Nor has she pointed to other evidence creating an inference that this action occurred because of her sex.
Moreover, Plaintiff has not created an issue of fact on whether Defendant's articulated reasons for the suspension were pretextual. She has not shown that Blakeney, who issued the suspension, did not believe that Plaintiff was discourteous to LTC Guzman in her August 29, 2007 E-mail. In fact, Plaintiff admitted that she "was telling [Guzman] off," though she asserted that "it was tactful." (Brown Dep. at 74). Her opinion that her statements to Guzman were "tactful" do not controvert Blakeney's belief that they were discourteous. Furthermore, she has not controverted her supervisors' belief that she had not followed the leave request procedures.
The undersigned finds that Plaintiff has failed to create an issue of fact on whether Defendant suspended her in November 2007 because of her sex in violation of Title VII. Therefore, the undersigned RECOMMENDS that Defendant's motion for summary judgment be GRANTED on Plaintiff's Title VII sex discrimination claim based on her November 2007 suspension.

j. Plaintiff's [*60]  Termination
Plaintiff contends that Defendant terminated her because of her sex. (See Doc. 56, Pl. Br. at 11).
The undersigned will assume for the sake of discussion that Plaintiff has demonstrated a prima facie case of discrimination with respect to her termination: she is a woman, she was arguably qualified to perform her job,21 she was terminated and she was replaced by a man (see FFC Tr: 115). However, Plaintiff has failed to present evidence from which a reasonable jury could find that each of Defendant's articulated legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons for terminating her was a pretext for discrimination.
In a February 11, 2008 Notice of Proposed Removal (Def. Ex. 19, Attach. to Doc. 53), Blakeney wrote that the reasons for Plaintiff's proposed removal included creating a disturbance in the workplace on January 10, 2008; using inappropriate language in the workplace on January 10, 2008, including the use of the "F" word and comparing the workplace to Nazi Germany; making false claims involving her time sheets; and being AWOL on December 31, 2007 and January 2, 2008, and on January 10, 2008 for 1.5 hours and on January 11, 2008 for 30 minutes. (Def. SMF ¶ 105; see also Def. [*61]  Ex. 19, Attach. to Doc. 53).
Vilcoq wrote in the March 7, 2008 Notice of Decision on Proposed Removal (Def. Ex. B, Attach. to Doc. 11) that he decided to sustain Plaintiff's removal and terminate her employment effective March 21, 2008 "for creating a disturbance, using inappropriate language, false claims and absence without leave (AWOL)." (Id.). Vilcoq also wrote that he considered that Plaintiff had previously been disciplined for inappropriate behavior. (Id.).
The undersigned finds that Defendant has met its "exceedingly light" burden of articulating a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for terminating Plaintiff.
The undersigned also finds that Plaintiff has failed to show there is an issue of fact as to whether each of Defendant's articulated reasons for terminating her is a pretext for discrimination. She has not shown that Vilcoq did not believe she created a disturbance and used inappropriate language on January 10, 2010. She has not shown that Plaintiff's co-workers did not report to Blakeney that she was creating a disturbance, or that Blakeney did not believe and report that she had done so. She admits that she "used the f-word a couple of times," but explains that she "was [*62]  swearing at the computer" (FFC Tr: 53), and she admits that she "flat told [Blakeney] off" (id. at 55). In her response to the proposed termination, she admits that she called Guzman "Bubba" and "LTC Bubba," that she raised her voice "an octave" to Blakeney, and that she made a comment about being in Nazi Germany as discussed supra (Def. Ex. 20, Attach. to Doc. 53).22
Furthermore, Plaintiff has not shown that Vilcoq did not believe that she falsely stated on her time sheet that she had been at work at times on January 10, 2008 and January 11, 2008 when she was not at work. Nor has she shown that Vilcoq did not believe that she was AWOL on December 31, 2007 and January 2, 2008 and for parts of January 10 and 11, 2008.
Because Plaintiff has failed to create an issue of fact on whether Defendant's articulated, legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons for terminating her are pretextual, it is RECOMMENDED that Defendant's motion for summary judgment be GRANTED on Plaintiff's claims that she was terminated based on her sex in violation of Title VII.

2. Plaintiff's Title VII Sexual Harassment Claim
Although "sexual harassment" is not explicitly mentioned in Title VII, "it has long been settled that the statutory [*63]  phrase 'terms, conditions, or privileges of employment' includes within its scope a discriminatorily hostile or abusive environment." Hulsey v. Pride Rests., LLC, 367 F.3d 1238, 1244 (11th Cir. 2004); Mendoza v. Borden, Inc., 195 F.3d 1238, 1244 (11th Cir. 1999) (en banc) ("Title VII does not mention sexual harassment. Nevertheless, the Supreme Court and this Court long have recognized that 'the phrase "terms, conditions, or privileges of employment" evinces a congressional intent to strike at the entire spectrum of disparate treatment of men and women in employment, which includes requiring people to work in a discriminatorily hostile or abusive environment.'" (quoting Harris v. Forklift Sys., Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21, 114 S. Ct. 367, 126 L. Ed. 2d 295 (1993))), cert. denied, 529 U.S. 1068, 120 S. Ct. 1674, 146 L. Ed. 2d 483 (2000).

a. Exhaustion of Administrative Remedies
Defendant argues that Plaintiff has failed to exhaust her administrative remedies with respect to her claim of sexual harassment because she did not allege such a claim in the administrative proceedings below. (Doc. 53, Def. Br. at 2-3). Federal employees must exhaust available administrative remedies before instituting civil action in the United States District Courts. See 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-16(c). Pursuant to its statutory authority, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC") has established guidelines governing the processing of federal employees' discrimination claims at the administrative stage. [*64]  See 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-16(b). In Gregory v. Georgia Department of Human Resources, 355 F.3d 1277 (11th Cir. 2004), the Eleventh Circuit discussed Title VII's exhaustion requirement:
The purpose of this exhaustion requirement "is that the [EEOC] should have the first opportunity to investigate the alleged discriminatory practices to permit it to perform its role in obtaining voluntary compliance and promoting conciliation efforts." Evans v. U.S. Pipe & Foundry Co., 696 F.2d 925, 929 (11th Cir. 1983); see also Wu v. Thomas, 863 F.2d 1543, 1548 (11th Cir. 1989) ("The purpose of the filing requirement is to insure that the settlement of grievances be first attempted through the office of the EEOC.") (internal quotation and citation omitted). This Court further has noted that judicial claims are allowed if they 'amplify, clarify, or more clearly focus' the allegations in the EEOC complaint, but has cautioned that allegations of new acts of discrimination are inappropriate. Wu, 863 F.2d at 1547 (citation omitted).
In light of the purpose of the EEOC exhaustion requirement, we have held that a "plaintiff's judicial complaint is limited by the scope of the EEOC investigation which can reasonably be expected to grow out of the charge of discrimination." Alexander v. Fulton County, Ga., 207 F.3d 1303, 1332 (11th Cir. 2000) (internal quotation and citation omitted); Sanchez [v. Standard Brands, Inc.], 431 F.2d [455] at 466 [(5th Cir. 1970)] (noting that the allegations in a judicial complaint filed pursuant to Title VII may encompass any kind of discrimination [*65]  like or related to the allegations contained in the charge). Courts are nonetheless "extremely reluctant to allow procedural technicalities to bar claims brought under [Title VII]." Sanchez, 431 F.2d at 460-61. As such, this Court has noted that "'the scope of an EEOC complaint should not be strictly interpreted'" Id. at 465 (citation omitted).
Id. at 1279-80.
In this case, Plaintiff did not allege in her April 2008 EEO complaint that she had been sexually harassed or subjected to a hostile work environment because of her sex. (See Def. Ex. 29, Attach. to Doc. 53). Nor did the EEO office accept such a claim for investigation (see Def. Ex. 32, Attach. to Doc. 53; see also FFC Tr: 4-5), and the final agency decision does not reflect that such a claim was considered (see Ex. E to Doc. 11).
Plaintiff argues, however, that "[d]uring the EEO[ ] Fact Finding Conference, [she] testified about being harassed." (Doc. 56, Pl. Br. at 7). Rather than providing a citation to the Fact Finding Conference transcript showing that Plaintiff complained about sexual harassment or a hostile work environment based on her sex during that hearing, Plaintiff cites generally to pages 5 through 11 of her statement of material facts. (See id.). Those pages contain [*66]  a number of assertions and citations to exhibits, including, but not limited to, the FFC transcript. Even if they show that Plaintiff testified to acts of discrimination during the hearing, Plaintiff has not shown that she testified that she was being sexually harassed or subjected to a hostile work environment based on her sex by her supervisors, or that the EEO investigated such a claim. Therefore, the undersigned finds that Plaintiff failed to exhaust her administrative remedies with respect to her sexual harassment claim.

b. Prima Facie Case
Even if it is assumed that Plaintiff exhausted her administrative remedies, Plaintiff's claim fails. To establish a hostile work environment sexual harassment claim under Title VII, a plaintiff must show:
(1) that he or she belongs to a protected group; (2) that the employee has been subject to unwelcome sexual harassment, such as sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other conduct of a sexual nature; (3) that the harassment must have been based on the sex of the employee; (4) that the harassment was sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the terms and conditions of employment and create a discriminatorily abusive working environment; [*67]  and (5) a basis for holding the employer liable.
Mendoza, 195 F.3d at 1245 (emphasis added). Plaintiff has not complained that she was subjected to conduct of a sexual nature and, as discussed supra, she has not created an issue of fact on whether any of the challenged actions was taken because of her sex. Therefore, even if she exhausted her administrative remedies, her sexual harassment claim fails because she has not pointed to evidence from which a reasonable jury could find that she was subjected to harassment because of her sex.
Accordingly, the undersigned RECOMMENDS that Defendant's motion for summary judgment be GRANTED on Plaintiff's Title VII sexual harassment claim.

B. Plaintiff's Title VII Retaliation Claim
Plaintiff alleges that Defendant retaliated against her for "prior EEO activity." (Doc. 1, Compl. ¶¶ 2, 50; see also FFC Tr: 4).23 Plaintiff filed an EEO complaint in 1999, and it was settled in 2003 with her promotion. (Brown Dep. at 13, 19).

1. Analytical Framework for Title VII Retaliation Claims
Under 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-3(a), it is "an unlawful employment practice for an employer to discriminate against any . . . employee[ ] . . . because he has opposed any practice made an unlawful employment practice by this subchapter, [*68]  or because he has made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this subchapter." The participation clause of the statute "protects proceedings and activities which occur in conjunction with or after the filing of a formal charge with the EEOC[.]" EEOC v. Total Sys. Servs., Inc., 221 F.3d 1171, 1174 (11th Cir. 2000); see also Booker v. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Co., 879 F.2d 1304, 1313 (6th Cir. 1989) (stating that instigation of statutory proceedings is prerequisite to protection under participation clause). The opposition clause protects activity that occurs prior to the filing of a formal charge with the EEOC, such as submitting an internal complaint of discrimination to the employer or informally complaining of discrimination to one's supervisors. See Rollins v. Fla. Dep't of Law Enforcement, 868 F.2d 397, 400 (11th Cir. 1989) ("[T]he protection afforded by the statute is not limited to individuals who have filed formal complaints, but extends as well to those, like Rollins, who informally voice complaints to their superiors or who use their employers' internal grievance procedures."); see also Holifield v. Reno, 115 F.3d 1555, 1566 (11th Cir. 1997) (citing Rollins, 868 F.2d at 400).
To establish a prima facie case of retaliation under Title VII, in the absence of direct evidence, the plaintiff must show that "(1) [she] engaged in a statutorily protected activity; (2) the employer took an adverse employment [*69]  action against [her]; and (3) there is a causal connection between the protected activity and the adverse action." Berman v. Orkin Exterminating Co., 160 F.3d 697, 701 (11th Cir. 1998). The third prong is satisfied by evidence that the protected action and the adverse employment action are not totally unrelated. Id.
If the plaintiff establishes a prima facie case, the burden shifts to the defendant to articulate a legitimate, non-discriminatory basis for the action. Meeks v. Computer Assocs. Int'l, 15 F.3d 1013, 1021 (11th Cir. 1994). If the defendant does so, then in order to avoid summary judgment, "[t]he plaintiff must . . . demonstrate that the employer's proffered explanations are a pretext for retaliation[.]" Id.24

2. Plaintiff's Claim
Defendant argues that Plaintiff cannot establish a prima facie case of retaliation because she cannot establish a causal connection between her prior EEO activity, which occurred in 1999 (see Brown Dep. at 13, 19), and the alleged retaliatory activity, which Plaintiff alleges began in April 2007 when Defendant began denying her requests to work a flexible schedule (see FFC Tr: 4). (Doc. 53, Def. Br. at 19-20).
"To establish a causal connection, a plaintiff must show that the decision-makers were aware of the protected conduct, and that the protected activity [*70]  and the adverse actions were not wholly unrelated." Shannon v. BellSouth Telecomms., Inc., 292 F.3d 712, 716 (11th Cir. 2002) (internal quotation omitted). "Close temporal proximity between the protected activity and the adverse action may be sufficient to show that the two were not wholly unrelated." Id. at 716-17 (internal quotation omitted).
It is undisputed that Plaintiff engaged in statutorily protected activity in 1999 when she filed an EEO complaint, and it is undisputed that Blakeney, Vilcoq and Guzman were aware of that prior complaint. (See FFC Tr: 12-14, 89, 150, 183). Defendant argues that even if the court considers the 2003 settlement of Plaintiff's prior EEO complaint (see Brown Dep. at 13, 19) as the date of her protected activity, the four-year gap between that activity and the commencement of the challenged actions severs any causal connection. (Doc. 53, Def. Br. at 20). Defendant further argues that there is no other evidence of a causal connection between these events because the prior EEO activity was unrelated to Plaintiff's current complaints, and because Plaintiff's "evidence" of a nexus—the decisionmakers' knowledge of her prior activity and her speculation that the Director of Force Programs Directorate North "held a grudge because she had named [*71]  him in her 1999 EEO matter"—is insufficient to establish a causal connection. (Id. at 20-22).
In response to Defendant's motion for summary judgment, Plaintiff's entire discussion of her retaliation claim is as follows: she "asserts claims of . . . retaliation under Title VII"; "after she made repeated requests for a reasonable accommodation of her disabilities, rather than provide the use of flexible schedule and credit time, Defendant retaliated against Plaintiff by terminating her from her employment with the federal government"; and "Defendant's version of the facts does not show an absence of disputed fact on the issue of retaliation when after coming back under the command of former supervisors who were participants in prior EEO activity wasted no time targeting Plaintiff for matters that male employees were not bothered about at all." (Doc. 56, Pl. Br. at 2, 4-5, 25).
Plaintiff did not address Defendant's lack of temporal proximity argument or relevant case authority indicating that a gap of several years between the alleged protected activity and the challenged action shows there was no causal connection between the events. The undersigned agrees that Plaintiff has not created an issue of [*72]  fact with respect to whether her prior EEO activity was causally connected to the actions challenged in this case because the EEO activity was too remote in time to establish a causal connection. See, e.g., Cain v. Geren, 261 F. App'x 215, 218 (11th Cir. 2008) (unpublished decision) (finding that "the district court did not err in concluding that Cain failed to satisfy the causal connection prima facie element" because "[t]he record shows there was a six-year period between the protected activity, the filing of the EEO complaint in 1995, and the alleged adverse employment action."); DaCosta v. Birmingham Water Works & Sewer Bd., 256 F. App'x 283, 288 (11th Cir. 2007) (unpublished decision) (finding that the challenged actions were not "causally connected to DaCosta's 1999, 2002, or 2003 protected activities" because "[t]he lower evaluations occurred in 2004 and 2005, more than a year after the latest EEOC charge").
Furthermore, Plaintiff has not pointed to evidence that she engaged in other statutorily protected activity within close temporal proximity to the allegedly retaliatory acts. She appears to contend in her brief that she engaged in protected activity for purposes of her retaliation claim when she requested an accommodation for her disabilities, but that activity would at most support a claim for retaliation [*73]  under the Rehabilitation Act, which she has not alleged. (See Doc. 1; see also Doc. 56, Pl. Br. at 2 (discussing claims for discrimination and failure to accommodate under the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act)). It does not constitute statutorily protected activity for purposes of her Title VII claim. See, e.g., Rahmaan v. Walmart, No. 2:08-2909-DCN-BM, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 125635, at *26 (D.S.C. Oct. 2, 2009) (finding that the plaintiff's "request for an accommodation based on her impairments" was "not protected activity under Title VII" because it "dealt with Plaintiff's alleged or perceived disability" and citing cases), adopted by 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 21020 (D.S.C. Mar. 8, 2010).
Moreover, the undersigned's pretext analysis for Plaintiff's sex discrimination claims also applies to her retaliation claims, and for the reasons discussed supra in the analysis of Plaintiff's sex discrimination claims, the undersigned also finds that Plaintiff failed to show Defendant's articulated legitimate, non-retaliatory reasons for the challenged decisions were pretextual. See, e.g., Dillahay v. City of Eastpoint, No. 1:04-cv-0063-WSD, 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 9533, at *30 (N.D. Ga. Feb. 22, 2006), aff'd, 251 Fed. Appx. 656 (11th Cir. 2007) (finding that "[f]or the same reasons [the plaintiff] fails to establish a causal connection between her complaints and the alleged retaliatory conduct, and for the same [*74]  reasons she fails to establish pretext of employment discrimination, she fails to establish that Defendants' reorganization and establishment of hiring requirements are pretext for unlawful conduct" (emphasis added)).
Accordingly, the undersigned RECOMMENDS that Defendant's motion for summary judgment be GRANTED on Plaintiff's Title VII retaliation claim.

C. Plaintiff's Rehabilitation Act Claim
"The Rehabilitation Act prohibits federal agencies from discriminating against any otherwise qualified individual with a disability solely by reason of his or her disability." Nadler v. Harvey, No. 06-12692, 2007 U.S. App. LEXIS 20272, at *10 (11th Cir. 2007) (unpublished decision) (citing 29 U.S.C. § 794(a)).25 "To make out a claim under the Rehabilitation Act, a plaintiff must generally show (1) [she] was disabled at the time of the discrimination; (2) [she] was otherwise qualified; and (3) [she] was a victim of discrimination solely because of [her] disability." Nadler, 2007 U.S. App. LEXIS 20272, at *13-14 (citing Sutton v. Lader, 185 F.3d 1203, 1207 (11th Cir. 1999)). "A plaintiff may prove discrimination in two ways, disparate treatment and a failure to make a reasonable accommodation." Nadler, 2007 U.S. App. LEXIS 20272, at *10.
Plaintiff "asserts her disability claims based on three theories: (1) disparate treatment, (2) harassment, and (3) reasonable accommodation." (Doc. 56, Pl. Br. at 3). In her discussion of her disability discrimination claims, she essentially relies on the challenged actions previously discussed in the analysis of her sex discrimination claims, i.e.:
[S]he was treated differently than her male coworkers in the terms and conditions on the use of alternative work schedules. Plaintiff claims that after she requested the use of the alternative work schedule known as the flexible schedule and use of credit times as a reasonable accommodation, Defendant, through its agents, began a pattern of conduct of harassment, which by way of example only, included repeated rejection of her request for the reasonable accommodation of flexible schedule and credit time; unjustified disciplinary actions such as placing her on a leave restriction policy not applied to her male coworkers; punishing Plaintiff [*76]  by declaring her AWOL and docking her pay when she was ill and could not call in immediately or when she did call in, left messages and management claimed they did not get the messages; by making false accusations that Plaintiff was under the influence of chemicals; by refusing to accept Plaintiff's medical documentation as sufficient to make her reasonable accommodation requests; by failing to engage in a good faith interactive process to understand why Plaintiff requested flexible schedule and credit time as reasonable accommodation; and ultimately, by terminating Plaintiff from her position because of disability and repeated requests for reasonable accommodation of flexible schedule and credit time.
(Doc. 56, Pl. Br. at 3-4).

1. Disparate Treatment Claim
"Disparate treatment involves discriminatory animus or intent and occurs when a disabled individual is treated differently than a non-disabled or less disabled individual because of his disability." Nadler, 2007 U.S. App. LEXIS 20272, at *10 (citing 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)). The courts "allow plaintiffs to prove disparate treatment in disability cases 'through circumstantial evidence using the familiar burden-shifting analysis employed in Title VII employment discrimination cases.'" Id. at *11 (quoting Wascura v. City of S. Miami, 257 F.3d 1238, 1242 (11th Cir. 2001)). [*77]  Thus, if a plaintiff establishes a prima facie case of disability discrimination, the burden shifts to the defendant to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions, and if the defendant satisfies that burden, the plaintiff must proffer "'sufficient evidence to create a genuine issue of material fact as to whether each of the defendant's proffered reasons is pretextual.'" Nadler, 2007 U.S. App. LEXIS 20272, at *11-12 (quoting Wascura, 257 F.3d at 1243). The undersigned finds that Plaintiff has failed to identify facts from which a reasonable jury could find that she was subjected to an adverse employment action because of a disability.
In the first place, the undersigned finds that Plaintiff has failed to create an issue of fact on each element of her prima facie case of disability discrimination with respect to each of the challenged actions. "If establishing [disability] discrimination by disparate treatment, a plaintiff must show (1) that [she] was subject to an adverse employment action, (2) that [she] was qualified for the job at the time, (3) that [her] employer knew at the time of the action that the plaintiff had a disability, and (4) that the adverse action took place in circumstances raising a reasonable inference that the [*78]  plaintiff's disability was a determining factor in the decision." Nadler, 2007 U.S. App. LEXIS 20272, at *14 (citing Wascura, 257 F.3d at 1242).
Even if the undersigned assumes that Plaintiff has created an issue of fact as to whether each of the challenged actions was an adverse employment action, and has created an issue of fact as to whether Defendant knew she was disabled, Plaintiff has not pointed to evidence that each of the challenged "adverse action[s] took place in circumstances raising an inference that the plaintiff's disability was a determining factor in the decision." She has not identified evidence that nondisabled employees were treated more favorably, or other evidence that raises an inference that her disability "was a determining factor in the [challenged] decision."
Furthermore, even if Plaintiff could make out a prima facie case with respect to each of the challenged decisions, she has not created an issue of fact on whether Defendant's articulated legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons for those actions were pretextual, as discussed supra.
Accordingly, the undersigned RECOMMENDS that Defendant's motion for summary judgment be GRANTED on Plaintiff's Rehabilitation Act disparate treatment claim.

2. "Harassment" Claim
For the reasons [*79]  discussed above concerning Plaintiff's sexual harassment claim, the undersigned finds that Plaintiff has failed to exhaust her administrative remedies with respect to her disability "harassment" claim, i.e., her claim that she was subjected to a discriminatory hostile work environment because of an alleged disability. See, e.g., Ingalsbe v. Chertoff, No. 1:05-1465, 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 22628, at *39 n.10 (N.D. Ga. Mar. 8, 2006) (explaining that exhaustion requirement also applies to claims under the Rehabilitation Act), adopted by 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 22629 (N.D. Ga. Apr. 6, 2006).
Furthermore, Plaintiff has failed to create an issue of fact on whether Defendant took the challenged actions, which she alleges in support of both her disparate treatment and harassment claims, solely because of her disability. See Ellis v. England, 432 F.3d 1321, 1326 (11th Cir. 2005) ("It is not enough for a plaintiff to demonstrate that an adverse action was based partly on his disability. Rather, under the Rehabilitation Act, a plaintiff must prove that he suffered an adverse employment action 'solely by reason of his handicap.'" (internal citations omitted)). Accordingly, the undersigned RECOMMENDS that Defendant's motion for summary judgment be GRANTED on Plaintiff's disability "harassment" claim.

3. Failure to Accommodate Claim
"[A] failure to make reasonable accommodation [*80]  claim requires no animus and occurs when a covered entity fails to fulfill its affirmative duty to 'make reasonable accommodation to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified applicant or employee with a disability' without demonstrating that 'the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business.'" Nadler, 2007 U.S. App. LEXIS 20272, at *10 (quoting 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A)). "If establishing discrimination by failure to make reasonable accommodation, a plaintiff must merely show that (1) [she] was disabled, (2) [she] was otherwise qualified, and (3) a reasonable accommodation was not provided." Nadler, 2007 U.S. App. LEXIS 20272, at *14 (citing Lucas v. W.W. Grainger, Inc., 257 F.3d 1249, 1255 (11th Cir. 2001)).
The undersigned will assume without deciding that Plaintiff can at least create an issue of fact on whether she was disabled26 and "otherwise qualified"27 for purposes of her Rehabilitation Act claim but finds that Plaintiff has not created an issue of fact on whether she was denied a reasonable accommodation for her alleged disability.

1. Applicable Standards
"Reasonable accommodation means '[m]odifications or adjustments to the work environment, or to the manner or circumstances under which the position held or desired is customarily performed, [*81]  that enable a qualified individual with a disability to perform the essential functions of that position.'" Webb v. Donley, 347 F. App'x 443, 445-46 (11th Cir. 2009) (unpublished decision) (quoting 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(1)(ii)). "Accommodations are 'reasonable' if they will allow the employee to perform the essential functions of his job." Shannon v. Potter, 335 Fed. Appx. 21, 25 (11th Cir. 2009) (unpublished decision). "'An accommodation is not reasonable if it either [1] imposes undue financial and administrative burdens on a grantee or [2] requires a fundamental alteration in the nature of the program.'" Id. (quoting Schwarz v. City of Treasure Island, 544 F.3d 1201, 1220 (11th Cir. 2008)). Furthermore, "a qualified individual with a disability is 'not entitled to the accommodation of her choice, but only to a reasonable accommodation.'" Stewart v. Happy Herman's Cheshire Bridge, Inc., 117 F.3d 1278, 1286 (11th Cir. 1997) (quoting Lewis v. Zilog, Inc., 908 F. Supp. 931, 948 (N.D. Ga. 1995)). "A plaintiff bears the burden of identifying [her] accommodation, and of demonstrating that the accommodation allows [her] to perform the essential functions of the job." Nadler, 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 20272, at *23; see also Stewart, 117 F.3d at 1286 (stating that the plaintiff has "the ultimate burden of persuasion with respect to demonstrating that . . . an accommodation is reasonable.").
"[A] plaintiff cannot establish a claim under the Rehabilitation Act alleging that the defendant discriminated against [her] by failing to provide a reasonable accommodation unless [she] demanded such an accommodation." Gaston v. Bellingrath Gardens & Home, Inc., 167 F.3d 1361, 1363 (11th Cir. 1999) (citing [*82]  Wood v. President & Trustees of Spring Hill College in the City of Mobile, 978 F.2d 1214, 1222 (11th Cir. 1992)). "[T]he duty to provide a reasonable accommodation is not triggered unless a specific demand for an accommodation has been made[.]" Gaston, 167 F.3d at 1363.
"In order to determine an appropriate reasonable accommodation, an informal, interactive process with the disabled individual may be necessary." Webb, 347 F. App'x at 446 (citing 29 C. F. R. § 1630.2(o)(3)) (emphasis in original); accord Stewart, 117 F.3d at 1286-87; Willis v. Conopco, Inc., 108 F.3d 282, 284-85 (11th Cir. 1997). Section 1630.2(o)(3) of 29 C.F.R. provides, "To determine the appropriate reasonable accommodation it may be necessary for the covered entity to initiate an informal, interactive process with the individual with a disability in need of the accommodation. This process should identify the precise limitations resulting from the disability and potential reasonable accommodations that could overcome those limitations."

2. Plaintiff's Requested Accommodation
Although it is undisputed that Plaintiff repeatedly asked to be placed on a flexible schedule, the evidence appears to be in conflict on whether she requested that schedule as an accommodation for her disability and, if so, when. However, it is clear that as of August 29, 2007, Plaintiff had placed her supervisor, LTC Guzman, on notice that she claimed she was disabled under the ADA and that she had requested a schedule adjustment in order to accommodate [*83]  her alleged disability. (See Def. Ex. 9, Attach. to Doc. 53). LTC Guzman then requested that Plaintiff provide to him "ASAP," "any medical documentation that states you have any disability . . . in order to accommodate your schedule as per the American with Disability act [sic] if required." (Id.).
Instead of providing the requested documentation, however, Plaintiff referred Guzman to statements she had already provided, including a statement from her psychiatrist's physician's assistant indicating that she was being treated at a counseling center, and a June 22 diagnosis from an Urgent Care Clinic of "depression and severe insomnia." (Def. Ex. 9, Attach. to Doc. 53). She further responded, "LEAVE ME ALONE," and "[t]he only other documentation I care to provide, is the Riot Act--through my legally-appointed representative." (Id.). Plaintiff argues that her "medical documentation [was] sufficient to establish disability," and because her supervisors "were aware of Plaintiff['s] various medical conditions" and "health problems," "[t]here was nothing for Defendants to figure out," i.e., they had enough information "to make a decision about what type of reasonable accommodation would be [*84]  best for Plaintiff"—"the flexible work schedule." (Doc. 56, Pl. Br. at 22).
The undersigned finds that Guzman's request was reasonable and evidences Defendant's engagement in an "interactive process" to "identify the precise limitations resulting from the disability and potential reasonable accommodations that could overcome those limitations." 29 C. F. R. § 1630.2(o)(3). The records referenced by Plaintiff in her response to Guzman's request simply show that she was being treated and had been diagnosed with depression and insomnia. (Def. Ex. 9, Attach. to Doc. 53). Other records she submitted also show treatment for asthma, but there is no indication in the record that Plaintiff provided documentation to show what accommodation she needed for her alleged disability or to support her claim that she needed to be accommodated by working a flexible schedule. See, e.g., Satchel v. Sch. Bd., 251 F. App'x 626, 629 (11th Cir. 2007) (finding that plaintiff "failed to establish that her subjective belief that she was entitled to accommodations because of her PTSD and depression was objectively reasonable" where her psychiatrist provided a letter containing diagnoses of chronic PTSD and depression, but "there [was] no evidence in either the letter, or the remainder of the record, [*85]  to indicate that Satchel's psychiatrist or others determined that those conditions would substantially limit Satchel's ability to work either long term or permanently"). Plaintiff admitted that none of the medical documents she provided either identified or recommended any accommodation, including a flexible schedule, for her alleged disabilities. (Def. SMF ¶ 58; see also Brown Dep. at 105, 148-49).
On Sept 12, 2007, Guzman again requested "medical documentation which support[ed] and explain[ed]" Plaintiff's allegation of "a condition covered by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)." (Def. Ex. 14, Attach. to Doc. 53). He informed her that the documentation received to date was "vague medical documentation indicating that [she was] being treated and [was] on medication," and that "in order to establish the fact that [she had] a disability protected by the ADA and to support a request for reasonable accommodation, [she] must provide supporting medical documentation." (Id.). There is no evidence in the record that Plaintiff provided additional documentation in response to Guzman's August or September requests.28
Accordingly, the undersigned finds that Plaintiff failed to engage in an [*86]  interactive process with her employer to determine what reasonable accommodation existed that would allow her to perform her job. Therefore, Defendant is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim. See, e.g., Stewart, 117 F.3d at 1287 (finding that summary judgment was appropriate on plaintiff's ADA failure to accommodate claim because "[l]iability simply cannot arise under the ADA when an employer does not obstruct an informal interactive process; makes reasonable efforts to communicate with the employee and provide accommodations based on the information it possesses; and the employee's actions cause a breakdown in the interactive process").
Furthermore, the undersigned finds that Plaintiff has failed to create an issue of fact on whether her requested accommodation, i.e., a flexible schedule that would allow her to determine on a daily basis what time she would arrive at work and what time she would leave, was reasonable. That is, she has not identified an accommodation that would allow her "to perform the essential functions of the job." Nadler, 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 20272, at *23.
In her account of her medical conditions, including asthma, depression and the side effects of her medications, Plaintiff described limiting [*87]  symptoms that occurred intermittently and unpredictably, i.e., they "flared," depending on environmental factors or other stressors. These "flares," and the treatment for her conditions, resulted in sleep disturbances affecting Plaintiff's ability to get to work and function. (See Brown Dep. 39-40, 42, 90). In fact, Plaintiff told Guzman "there could be occasions when [her] asthma was really, really bad or if [her] depression flared up, you know, [she] would have to go into treatment and be absent, you know here and there." (Brown Dep. at 39). The record is uncontroverted that, apparently as a result of her medical conditions, Plaintiff was frequently tardy or absent from work, to the point where in August 2007, despite the fact that she had over 25 years of federal service, she had a zero leave balance. (Def. Ex. 11, Attach. to Doc. 53).29 Even after being placed on leave restrictions in August 2007, she continued to be absent from work, or to come in late, on several occasions.30
The accommodation sought by Plaintiff, i.e., the ability to determine on a daily basis what time she would arrive at, and leave from, work, would not reasonably accommodate Plaintiff's alleged disability and [*88]  allow her to perform the essential functions of her job. See Jackson v. Veterans Admin., 22 F.3d 277, 279-80 (11th Cir. 1994). In Jackson, the plaintiff requested accommodations allowing him to "swap off days with other employees, delay his shift start time, or defer more physically demanding and less time sensitive job duties until the next day" in order to accommodate his treatment for arthritis and "flare-up[s] due to his condition[.]" Id. at 279. The court found, however, that "[s]uch accommodations do not address the heart of the problem: the unpredictable nature of Jackson's absences. There is no way to accommodate this aspect of his absences." Id. The court found further that "[r]equiring the VA to accommodate such absences would place upon the agency the burden of making last-minute provisions for Jackson's work to be done by someone else. Such a requirement would place an undue hardship on the agency." Id. The court found that "there was no reasonable accommodation for Jackson's numerous unpredictable absences in the first few months of work as a temporary employee," and held that "[t]he VA [was] entitled to prevail on summary judgment where the employee is not otherwise qualified and there exists no genuine issue of fact as to the availability [*89]  of a reasonable accommodation." Id. at 279-80; see also Webb, 347 F. App'x at 446 (finding that "a request to arrive at work at any time, without reprimand, is not a reasonable accommodation because it would change the essential functions of a job that requires punctual attendance" and noting that "the Air Force presented evidence that a modified schedule was unreasonable because presence at the work site was an essential function of Webb's position and allowing her to work a modified schedule would have changed the essential functions of the job").31
Furthermore, the facts of this case illustrate why Plaintiff's requested accommodation would not reasonably accommodate her alleged disability, which resulted in numerous, sporadic and unpredictable absences. Even though LTC Guzman agreed to allow Plaintiff a flexible schedule for a two-week period in August 2007, whereby she was required to report between 6:30 a.m. and 8:30 a.m., she then was absent several times to the point where he decided not to allow her to pursue the flexible schedule. (FFC Tr: 186-87, 199). Plaintiff's request that, as an accommodation, she be allowed to work a flexible schedule and decide on a daily basis what time to arrive at work "does not address [*90]  the unpredictable nature of [her] absences[; t]here is no way to accommodate this aspect of [her] absences and the burden that such accommodation would place on Defendant is certainly an 'undue hardship.'" Thomas v. Trane, A Bus. of Am. Std., Inc., No. 5:05-CV-440(CAR), 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 72044, at *21-22 (M.D. Ga. Sept. 27, 2007). As Blakeney testified, "it's extended periods of absence without us knowing why Ms. Brown wasn't at work. And I don't know how a flexible schedule would have addressed that." (FFC Tr: 125-26).
Accordingly, the undersigned RECOMMENDS that Defendant's motion for summary judgment be GRANTED on Plaintiff's Rehabilitation Act failure to accommodate claim.

V. Summary
It is RECOMMENDED that Defendant's motion for summary judgment [Doc. 53] be GRANTED and that Plaintiff's claims be DISMISSED.
IT IS SO REPORTED AND RECOMMENDED this 31st day of August, 2011.
Susan S. Cole
SUSAN S. COLE
United States Magistrate Judge

ORDER FOR SERVICE OF REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE
Attached is the Report and Recommendation of the United States Magistrate Judge made in accordance with 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1) and this court's Local Civil Rule 72.1. Let the same be filed and a copy, with a copy of this order, be served upon counsel for the parties.
Each party may file written [*91]  objections, if any, to the attached Report and Recommendation within fourteen (14) days after being served with a copy of it. 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1). Should objections be filed, they shall specify with particularity the alleged error(s) made (including reference by page number to the transcript if applicable) and shall be served upon the opposing party. The party filing objections will be responsible for obtaining and filing the transcript of any evidentiary hearing for review by the District Court. If no objections are filed, the Report and Recommendation may be adopted as the opinion and order of the District Court and any appeal of factual findings will be limited to a review for plain error or manifest injustice. United States v. Slay, 714 F.2d 1093 (11th Cir. 1983), cert. denied, 464 U.S. 1050, 104 S. Ct. 729, 79 L. Ed. 2d 189 (1984).
The Clerk is DIRECTED to submit the Report and Recommendation with objections, if any, to the District Court after expiration of the above time period.
SO ORDERED this 31st day of August, 2011.
Susan S. Cole
SUSAN S. COLE
United States Magistrate Judge


End of Document

