Brown v. K&G Men's Ctr., Inc.
United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division
April 28, 2009, Decided; April 28, 2009, Filed
CIVIL ACTION FILE NO. 1:07-cv-2355-TCB

Reporter
2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 139940 *
DARREN O. BROWN, Plaintiff, v. K&G MEN'S CENTER, INC., Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Darren O. Brown, Plaintiff: Curtis Brandon Williams, LEAD ATTORNEY, C. Brandon Williams & Associates, Atlanta, GA USA; Latif Oduola-Owoo, LEAD ATTORNEY, Arrington|Owoo P.C. Atlanta, GA USA; Robert Louis Arrington, Jr., LEAD ATTORNEY, Law Office of Arrington, Oduola-Owo & Mason, P.C., Atlanta, GA USA.
For K&G Men's Center, Inc., Defendant: Brendalyn L. Burrell, Brent L. Wilson, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Elarbee, Thompson, Sapp & Wilson, LLP, Atlanta, GA USA.
Judges: Timothy C. Batten, Sr., United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Timothy C. Batten, Sr.
Opinion



ORDER
In this action, Plaintiff Darren Brown alleges that Defendant K&G Men's Center, Inc. ("K&G") unlawfully discriminated against him on the basis of his disability and retaliated against him in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. §§ 12132 et seq. Brown also asserts a claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress.
Now before the Court is Defendant's motion for summary judgment [60].

I. Background
In 1993, while serving in the United States Navy, Plaintiff Darren Brown received a heart transplant and was later medically discharged from the Navy. Around that same time, Brown was diagnosed with muscular dystrophy. As a result of his medical conditions, he [*2]  experiences decreased motor skills, muscular strength, and stamina, along with difficulty with his breathing and other cardiac complications. Additionally, Brown takes several dozen pills each day in relation to his heart transplant and muscular dystrophy.
K&G is an Atlanta-based business that operates over one hundred discount career apparel stores in over twenty-five states, including a store in Stone Mountain, Georgia. On or about April 9, 2001, Brown was hired as a part-time sales consultant at the Stone Mountain store. He was recruited to work at K&G by Franklin Jenkins who, at the time, was the store manager. Jenkins had previously worked with Brown for another employer. Although in the "additional comments" portion of his employee application Brown wrote "Had Heart transplant 3/93," at the time he was hired Brown did not provide K&G with any documentation regarding his medical conditions or any resulting work restrictions. However, Brown asserts that at the time of his recruitment and hiring, Jenkins was aware of his medical conditions and as a result afforded to Brown certain accommodations in his work schedule. These accommodations included working no more than four to five [*3]  hours a day, working no more than three days a week, and not working evening shifts.
Brown continued to work with K&G as a part-time sales consultant through 2004. During this time period, he would generally work no more than five hours a shift. Brown asserts that one to two days a year, he would feel healthy enough to work an evening shift.
In or around May 2004, Brown was promoted to the position of senior customer service representative ("Senior CSR") (a position Brown refers to as customer service supervisor). The job description for Brown's new position provided that the work schedule involved "[v]aried hours, including weekends."1 The store manager of the Stone Mountain store at the time of Brown's promotion was Tina Brown.2 Brown asserts that before he accepted the promotion, he informed Tina Brown that he would not do so if he had to work more than five hours per day or had to work evening shifts. Tina Brown discussed Brown's requested work schedule with Lisa Cebula, who at the time was employed as K&G's regional manager for the region including the Stone Mountain store. Cebula agreed to the promotion and Brown's requested work schedule. However, even as of the time of his promotion, [*4]  Brown had not provided K&G with any documentation regarding his medical conditions.
In his position as Senior CSR, Brown was responsible for supervising cashiers, troubleshooting customer complaints, supervising the front end of the store, processing refunds and exchanges, and voiding sales. While in this position, Brown would occasionally work evenings, weekends, and/or more than five hours a day. Brown asserts that he would only work evening shifts as a Senior CSR on the one to two days a year that he felt healthy enough to do so.
In or about July 2006, James Draper became the store manager at K&G's Stone Mountain store. Draper's duties included overseeing the day-to-day operations of the store and supervising approximately twenty-five to thirty-five associates. Also at this time, Shefon Harris-Love was K&G's regional manager and was responsible for overseeing seven K&G stores in Birmingham, Alabama and the metropolitan Atlanta area. Harris-Love had been in this position since May or June 2006.
In or about August 2006, a posted work schedule showed that Brown was scheduled to work an evening shift. Draper and one of the assistant store managers drafted the work schedule without consulting [*5]  Brown's previous work schedules or employee file. Upon review of the posted work schedule, Brown advised Draper that he was unable to work evenings due to his muscular dystrophy and that previous store managers had not scheduled him to work evenings for this reason. Draper informed Plaintiff that he would continue to be scheduled to work evenings until he brought in a doctor's note explaining the need for his requested work schedule. Draper testified that he informed Brown that once he received the necessary medical documentation, he would provide Brown with the requested accommodation. Draper further testified that he did not initially inform anyone about the requested accommodation because he was waiting for Brown to bring in the necessary medical documentation.
On or about August 8, 2006, Brown provided Draper with a note from Dr. Paula Pollard-Thomas. Draper forwarded the note to K&G's human resources department. This note stated that "Mr. Brown has a past medical history significant for spinal muscular dystrophy. His symptoms are significantly worse in the evenings and for this reason he is unable to work in the evenings. We would appreciate your understanding in this matter." [*6]  The note did not address any additional accommodations that Brown required related to the number of hours per day, hours per week, or days per week that Brown could work. This was the first instance in which Brown provided K&G with documentation related to his medical conditions and any resulting limitations.
At some point after Brown's request to Draper to not be scheduled to work evenings, Brown asserts that he had a discussion with Harris-Love and Draper behind the Stone Mountain store during which the three discussed Brown's medical conditions and his ability to work evenings. Brown asserts that during the conversation, Harris-Love informed him that if he could not work evenings as was expected of other Senior CSRs, he would need to "find a job more suitable for [his] disability."3
Brown asserts that on the two instances in which he remained scheduled to work evenings, he would call in and inform Draper that he could not work due to his medical restrictions. Brown testified that Draper informed him he would be written up each time he did not show up and would be subject to discipline. Despite this testimony, there were no write-ups ever placed in Brown's employee file for these absences. [*7]  Brown asserts that as a result of the conversation with Draper and Harris-Love and Draper's comments regarding his absences from evening work assignments, Brown began to worry that he would soon be terminated from his job with K&G.
On August 11, 2006, Brown sent a letter to Chuck Wright, employee relations coordinator for K&G. In this letter, Brown complained about the change in his work schedule and about Draper and Harris-Love's request for official documentation. He also requested that Wright provide him with an explanation of his rights under the ADA and the Family Medical Leave Act.
Three days later, Brown sent another letter to Wright in which he stated that he qualified as a disabled person under the ADA and was officially requesting accommodations for his medical conditions. He also stated that during the period of time that he was supervised by Jenkins and Tina Brown his work schedule was from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. and that he only worked three to four days a week.
Brown asserts that he sent both letters via certified mail. However, Wright testified that he did not receive either letter.
Later that day, Brown received a telephone call from Wright. Brown asserts that during this call [*8]  Wright commented that Brown was "causing undue stress on the company."4 Additionally, Brown asserts that Wright informed him that he needed to provide his store manager with documentation regarding his medical condition in order to receive the requested accommodations.
Brown also asserts that at approximately 5:30 p.m. that day, Draper called him at his home and requested that he report to work at 9:45 the following morning. Draper also informed Brown that when he arrived at work that following morning he would need to provide Draper with a note from his physician concerning any medical restrictions that would prohibit him from working limited daytime hours. Brown asserts that he perceived Draper's request to be retaliation for Brown's previous letters to Wright regarding the requested accommodations.
On August 15, 2006, Brown reported to work and delivered the requested medical documentation to Draper. The note was from Dr. Pollard-Thomas and stated that Brown could "only work a 3 day work week, only 5 hours per day."
Also on August 15, Brown sent a letter to Wright explaining his frustration with Wright's comments during their phone conversation and K&G's position that Brown had to provide [*9]  medical documentation in order for him to receive accommodations that he believed he had been afforded during his previous years of employment with K&G. In this letter, Brown also asserted that he felt he was being subjected to a hostile work environment and that MEG and Draper were causing him undue stress. Brown further stated that he felt he had provided all of the requested medical information and wanted to know whether K&G would be providing him with the requested accommodations. Again, even though Brown asserts that he sent the letter via certified mail, Wright testified that he did not receive it.
On August 16, 2006, Jodi Mai with K&G's human resources department sent a letter to Brown acknowledging that K&G had received Dr. Pollard-Thomas's August 8 letter. In the letter, Mai stated that while K&G would honor Brown's accommodation request to not work evenings, K&G found the August 8 letter to be vague. Mai requested additional medical documentation from Brown's physician regarding how long Brown would able to work each shift and if there were any physical restrictions on his activities. Mai also requested information regarding how long the requested accommodation would be necessary. [*10] 
Brown asserts that in response to Mai's letter he collected additional documentation from his physicians regarding his medical conditions, which he forwarded to Mai. This documentation included a letter from Dr. A. Mazair Zafari stating that Brown's medical conditions had "significantly reduced his ability to perform strenuous physical activities or moderate activity for longer durations." Mai testified that she never received this documentation. Nonetheless, after August i6, Brown did not work evenings. However, Brown asserts that he began to be scheduled to work more than four to five hours per day and more than three days per week.
On August 21, 2006, Mai sent Brown a second letter acknowledging receipt of the August 8 letter. Along with the letter, Mai sent Brown an authorization form and health care provider certification to be completed by Brown's physician "indicating any possible work restrictions and the duration of those restrictions." In the letter, Mai requested that the two forms be returned no later than August 29, 2006. Mai concluded her letter by advising Brown that if K&G did not receive the forms by August 29, Brown would be scheduled as determined by business needs [*11]  and would be held responsible for meeting all requirements of the position.
On August 27, Brown sent a letter to Mai primarily complaining about the lack of time allowed for him to gather the necessary medical documentation. The letter also asserted that on the instances in which Brown had called in to say that he could not work the evening shifts due to his medical condition, Draper's conduct had been unprofessional. Further, Brown said that he was confused as to why Draper had "stated that he never called in and . . . was a no show." Brown also stated in the letter that he felt he had provided K&G with ample medical documentation, but that he had been scheduled to work five days during the week of August 28 through September 1, 2006 in direct conflict with his physician's orders. Brown also complained about the human resources department's dissemination of information to store management and about what he perceived to be an increasingly hostile work environment due to the company's repeated requests for medical documentation. Brown concluded the letter by asking for further clarification about his rights under the ADA.
On September 6, 2006, Mai sent a letter to Brown. In this letter, [*12]  she advised Brown that she had not received the requested medical certification forms. She reiterated that the forms were necessary to determine Brown's ability to work evenings. The letter also stated that K&G would continue to honor Brown's request to not work evenings, but that if K&G did not receive the necessary certification on or before September 16, 2006, Brown would be scheduled to work as determined by business needs, which would likely mean that he would be scheduled to work evenings.
Later that day, K&G received the requested medical documentation. The health care provider certification form had been completed by Dale C. Strasser, M.D. on August 25, 2006. On the health care provider certification form, Dr. Strasser stated that due to Brown's medical condition he was limited in the major life activities of mobility, standing, and walking on uneven surfaces. When asked to discuss what accommodations were necessary for Brown to be able to work at K&G, Dr. Strasser indicated that Brown's "[a]ctivity should be paced" and that Brown was "[c]urrently able to work 5 hours [per] day/7 days a week." Dr. Strasser further stated that these accommodations should be permanent. On the [*13]  health care provider certification form, he did not discuss any limitations regarding Browns' ability to work evenings. However, in a letter attached to the health care provider certification, Dr. Strasser provided a more detailed account of Brown's medical condition and stated that Brown was able to work part-time and that "[h]is best time appears to be during the day, and he is able to work up to approximately five hours a day, three days a week, at this time."
On October 6, 2006, Brown was diagnosed with and hospitalized for severe high blood pressure. On October 20, he sent a letter to his store manager discussing his hospitalization and requesting a medical leave of absence through October 31. Along with this letter, Brown submitted medical documentation indicating that he was unable to work from October 18 to 31. Brown asserts that in the time since he had the heart transplant and had been diagnosed with muscular dystrophy, he had never before had any issue with controlling his blood pressure.5
On October 30, 2006, Mai sent Brown a letter, via overnight delivery, acknowledging receipt of his medical documentation regarding his leave of absence. The letter stated that K&G would allow [*14]  Brown to return to work on October 31. The letter further stated that if Brown did not return on October 31, K&G would assume that Brown had voluntarily resigned from his position and that K&G would terminate his employment on that date. Brown has testified that he received this letter on October 31 and that he had to leave a wedding anniversary celebration with his wife to go to work at K&G that evening.
During Brown's medical leave of absence, Draper voluntarily resigned as store manager at K&G's Stone Mountain store and transferred to another location as an assistant manager. As a result, Brown reported to a new store manager upon his return. Brown testified that he did not experience any issues with his new store manager.
After Brown's return to work from his medical leave of absence, he did not work evenings, more than five hours a day, or more than three days a week. However, he asserts that he was "effectively demoted" because he was scheduled to work fewer total weekly hours than before and had certain responsibilities taken away. Specifically, he asserts that instead of working the day shift alone, he was scheduled to work with another Senior CSR more than half of the hours [*15]  that he was scheduled to work, even though the store did not experience any increased business during the weekday daytime shifts that he worked. Brown complains that when he was scheduled to work with another Senior CSR, the other Senior CSR would handle all supervisory duties such as handling customer complaints and completing lunch schedules for cashiers while Brown would be relegated to working as a cashier. Brown further testified that he was only scheduled to work approximately two days a week. Finally, Brown asserts that Harris-Love still played a part in the scheduling of employees at the Stone Mountain store and that she would occasionally visit the store while he was working there. Brown testified that Harris-Love never approached him regarding his requested accommodation, never spoke with him about write-ups that Draper had previously stated would be added to his file, and generally avoided contact with him. He asserts that Harris-Love would speak with the other Senior CSRs regarding any questions or concerns she had regarding any refunds, exchanges, or customer complaints. Nonetheless, Brown admits that he did not receive any notification, verbal or written, from K&G that [*16]  his job title or position had been changed. Additionally, Brown admits that at no time was his hourly wage reduced.
Brown asserts that due to the changes in his work environment after his return from medical leave, he was unable to regain control of his blood pressure and that it remained dangerously high. On or about January 3, 2007, he provided K&G with a letter from his physician informing K&G that due to Brown's poorly controlled blood pressure, Brown was to rest at home until January 15, 2007. During that medical leave of absence, Brown's doctors advised him that due to his other medical conditions, if he remained under the stress of his job at K&G, it could prove fatal.
Consequently, on January 25, 2007, Brown sent a letter to K&G advising that his health had not recovered as a result of the stress that he experienced during the month of September. The letter further stated that as a result, he had decided to resign from his position effective February 3, 2007. Brown continued to work with K&G through February 3. He asserts that by March 2007 he began to have more success in controlling his blood pressure with the assistance of prescribed medication.
On March 21, 2007, Brown filed [*17]  a charge of discrimination against K&G with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. On September 26, 2007, he filed this action.
On September 18, 2008, K&G filed its motion for summary judgment [60]. On October 10, 2008, Brown filed a motion for extension of time to file his response in opposition to K&G's motion [68]. On October 29, 2008, the Court granted the motion for extension of time, allowing Brown up to an including November 14, 2008 to file his response [72]. On November 14, Brown filed his response in opposition to K&G's motion for summary judgment [74]. On December 4, K&G filed its reply brief in support of its motion [82].6

II. Discussion

A. Legal Standard
Summary judgment is proper when no genuine issue as to any material fact is present and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). The movant carries the initial burden and must show that there is "an absence of evidence to support the nonmoving party's case." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 325, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). "Only when that burden has been met does the burden shift to the non-moving party to demonstrate that there is indeed a material issue of fact that precludes summary judgment" Clark v. Coats & Clark, Inc., 929 F.2d 604, 608 (11th Cir. 1991). The nonmovant is then required to [*18]  "go beyond the pleadings" and present competent evidence in the form of affidavits, depositions, admissions and the like, designating "specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." Celotex, 477 U.S. at 324-"The mere existence of a scintilla of evidence" supporting the nonmovant's case is insufficient to defeat a motion for summary judgment. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 252, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). Resolving all doubts in favor of the nonmoving party, the Court must determine "whether a fair-minded jury could return a verdict for the [nonmoving party] on the evidence presented." Id.

B. Analysis

1. Discrimination Under the Americans with Disabilities Act
K&G's primary argument in its motion for summary judgment is that Brown has failed to establish a prima facie case of discrimination under the ADA. In his response, Brown asserts that (1) he has produced direct evidence of disability discrimination, and (2) he has established a prima facie case.
In an employment discrimination case, a plaintiff has two main frameworks within which he can establish that he was impermissibly discriminated against. In the traditional framework, referred to as the "direct evidence" method of demonstrating employment discrimination, "a plaintiff [has] the burden of presenting [*19]  evidence from which the trier of fact could conclude, more probably than not, that the defendant-employer took an adverse employment action against the plaintiff on the basis of a protected personal characteristic." Wright v. Southland Corp., 187 F.3d 1287, 1289 (11th Cir. 1999). If a plaintiff successfully carries this burden of producing direct evidence of discrimination, then the burden shifts to the employer to prove that it would have made the same employment decision even if discrimination had not played a role. Haynes v. W.C. Cage & Co., 52 F.3d 928, 931 (11th Cir. 1995).
After realizing that this traditional framework presented plaintiffs with the extremely difficult task of finding direct evidence of their employers' discriminatory intent, the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973), established a presumption to supplement the traditional framework. Under the McDonnell Douglas framework, a plaintiff need not present direct evidence of discrimination. Instead, a plaintiff asserting discrimination under this framework bears the initial burden of proving a prima facie case of discrimination by a preponderance of the evidence. Wright, 187 F.3d at 1290. In the ADA context, to establish a prima facie case a plaintiff must show that he (1) is disabled, (2) is an otherwise qualified individual, and (3) was subjected to unlawful discrimination because [*20]  of his disability. Hilburn v. Murata Elecs. N. Am., Inc., 181 F.3d 1220, 1226 (11th Cir. 1999). If the plaintiff satisfies his burden, then the Court presumes that there was unlawful discrimination. Wright, 187 F.3d at 1291.
The employer may rebut the McDonnell Douglas presumption only by articulating a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the adverse employment action. Wascura v. City of S. Miami, 257 F.3d 1238, 1242 (11th Cir. 2001). "However, the employer's burden is merely one of production; it 'need not persuade the court that it was actually motivated by the proffered reasons. It is sufficient if the defendant's evidence raises a genuine issue of fact as to whether it discriminated against the plaintiff.'" Chapman v. Al Transport, 229 F.3d 1012, 1024 (11th Cir. 2000) (en bane) (quoting Texas Dep't of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 254-55, 101 S. Ct. 1089, 67 L. Ed. 2d 207 (1981)). After the employer's articulated reason is given, the inferential presumption of discrimination is eliminated, and the plaintiff carries the ultimate burden of proving that the employer intentionally discriminated against him because of his disability. Cleveland v. Home Shopping Network, Inc., 369 F.3d 1189, 1193 (11th Cir. 2004).
While the two frameworks provide different methods for a plaintiff to establish an employment discrimination claim, one feature that they share in common is that the employee must show that he suffered an adverse employment action as a result of the employer's unlawful discrimination. In the present action, Brown asserts that as a direct consequence of K&G's discriminatory [*21]  actions, he was constructively discharged from his employment with K&G.
The Eleventh Circuit has long recognized that constructive discharge can qualify as an adverse employment decision. Hipp v. Liberty Nat'l Life Ins. Co., 252 F.3d 1208, 1230 (11th Cir. 2001) (applying constructive discharge to an Age Discrimination Employment Act claim). In assessing a constructive discharge claim, courts do not consider the plaintiff's subjective feelings, but instead apply an objective standard. Pa. State Police v. Suders, 542 U.S. 129, 141, 124 S. Ct. 2342, 159 L. Ed. 2d 204 (2004); Hipp, 252 F.3d at 1231. Under this objective standard, "a plaintiff must demonstrate that the working conditions were 'so intolerable that a reasonable person in [his] position would have been compelled to resign.'" Poole v. Country Club of Columbus, Inc., 129 F.3d 551, 553 (11th Cir. 1997) (quoting Thomas v. Dillard Dep't Stores, Inc., 116 F.3d 1432, 1434 (11th Cir. 1997)). This standard for proving constructive discharge is higher than the standard for proving a hostile work environment. Hipp, 252 F.3d at 1231.
In this case, Brown asserts that the following factual allegations support his claim for constructive discharge: (1) after providing Brown with reasonable accommodations for his medical condition for nearly five years, K&G "suddenly decided to diminish, if not altogether terminate, the accommodation"; (2) Draper continued to have Brown scheduled to work evenings even after Brown disclosed his medical conditions to K&G; (3) Draper failed to convey Brown's [*22]  request for a reasonable accommodation to K&G's human resources department, in violation of K&G's policy; (4) Harris-Love informed Brown that he would need to find a job better suited for his disability; (5) Wright told Brown that he was causing undue stress on the company; (6) K&G repeatedly asked Brown to provide medical records regarding his medical condition and related work restrictions; (7) K&G did not engage in an interactive process to facilitate the reasonable accommodation that Brown had requested; (8) K&G reduced Brown's hours to working only an average of two days per week; and (9) K&G removed some of Brown's supervisory duties by staffing him with another Senior CSR approximately half of the time that he was scheduled to work. Additionally, Brown asserts, without citation to any legal authority, that his medical condition, specifically his susceptibility to stress, should be considered in assessing his claim for constructive discharge.
After careful consideration, the Court concludes that none of the numerous facts set forth above and cited by Brown, considered separately or as a whole, support a finding of constructive discharge. Even when construed in a light most favorable [*23]  to Brown, the facts do not demonstrate that K&G intentionally subjected Brown to a work environment so intolerable that a reasonable person would have resigned. Instead, the facts show that Brown's schedule was changed, he requested a different schedule as an accommodation for his medical conditions and, after a lengthy and somewhat sloppy process, he received the requested accommodation. While K&G's conduct might cause a reasonable person to become frustrated and agitated, the company's conduct was not so egregious that it would cause a reasonable person to resign.
The Court's conclusion is bolstered by the fact that the very "worst" of K&G's conduct occurred during the months of August and September 2006, yet Brown did not resign until late January 2007.
Courts in this circuit and others have recognized that a significant delay between the cessation of hostile working conditions and the employee's decision to resign can preclude a finding of constructive discharge. See Steele v. Offshore Shipbuilding, Inc., 867 F.2d 1311, 1317 (11th Cir. 1989) (finding that there was no constructive discharge under Title VII where the employees quit eleven days after harassing behavior stopped); see also Steiner v. Showboat Operating Co., 25 F.3d 1459, 1465 (9th Cir. 1994) (finding that the fact that the plaintiff retired two and a half months [*24]  after the supervisor causing the adverse employment action was discharged indicated that the plaintiff did not resign due to constructive discharge); Smith v. Bath Iron Works Corp., 943 F.2d 164, 167 (1st Cir. 1991) (finding no constructive discharge where employee resigned six months after harassing behavior stopped); Jett v. Dallas Indep. Sch. Dist., 798 F.2d 748, 759 (5th Cir. 1986) (finding no constructive discharge where the discriminatory conduct took place in March 1983, but employee did not resign until August 1983), reh'g denied en banc, 837 F.2d 1244 (1988), modified on other grounds, 491 U.S. 701, 109 S. Ct. 2702, 105 L. Ed. 2d 598 (1989).
During the months of October and September 2006, the following occurred: (1) Draper changed Brown's work schedule; (2) Brown requested the accommodations; (3) K&G repeatedly asked Brown for medical documentation; and (4) Harris-Love and Wright allegedly made their remarks to Brown regarding his request for accommodations. While the Court does not believe that these factual allegations, alone or in total, are sufficient to state a claim for constructive discharge, this is arguably the time period in which Brown was placed under work conditions that would be most offensive to a reasonable person.
However, at this time, Brown did not resign. Instead, after a medical leave of absence, he returned to work on October 31, 2006 and continued his employment [*25]  with K&G for nearly three months with the requested accommodations and without incident. While Brown contends that the work environment after his return from medical leave of absence remained stressful, the facts demonstrate otherwise. Brown admits that he did not have any issues with his new manager upon his return from his leave of absence. He also admits that he had relatively limited interaction with Harris-Love during this time period and that in none of these interactions did Harris-Love approach him about his requested accommodation. Further, Brown admits that he did not work outside of his requested schedule.7 Finally, Brown admits that his job title or position with K&G did not change and at no time was his hourly wage reduced.
The only complaint that Brown alleges about the time between his return to work and the submission of his letter of resignation is that he worked an average of only two days per week and was assigned to work with another person in his same position. Brown cannot request that he work no more than three days a week and then complain when he is scheduled to work two days a week. The purpose of reasonable accommodations under the ADA is to provide those accommodations [*26]  that are necessary to provide a disabled individual with meaningful access to job opportunities, not to provide individuals with their exact choice of work schedule. See Stewart v. Happy Herman's Cheshire Bridge, Inc., 117 F.3d 1278 (11th Cir. 1997) ("[U]nder the ADA a qualified individual with a disability is 'not entitled to the accommodation of her choice, but only to a reasonable accommodation.'") (quoting Lewis v. Zilog, Inc., 908 F. Supp. 931, 948 (N.D. Ga. 1995)). K&G provided Brown with accommodations consistent with the documentation provided by his physicians, and he cannot complain that the provision of these accommodations amounts to discriminatory behavior. Further, nothing in the record indicates that K&G's decision to staff Brown with another Senior CSR during parts of his shift was the result of K&G's deliberate efforts to make his working conditions so intolerable that a reasonable person in his shoes would have been forced to resign.
Brown may have been subjectively displeased with his working environment upon return from his medical leave of absence, but constructive discharge is not evaluated based on the subjective feelings of the plaintiff. Further, the fact that Brown's physician suggested he consider resigning from his employment with K&G due to his issues controlling his blood pressure, standing [*27]  on its own, cannot satisfy the high burden placed on Brown's constructive discharge claim.
When viewed under the proper objective standard, the facts do not demonstrate that Brown's working conditions upon his return from his medical leave of absence in October 2006 were so intolerable that a reasonable person in his position would have been compelled to resign. Further, the fact that Brown resigned nearly three months after K&G's allegedly objectionable activities ceased precludes Brown from being able to rely on those activities for his constructive discharge claim.
Consequently, the Court concludes that as a matter of law Brown has not demonstrated that K&G subjected him to an adverse employment action, and therefore he has failed to prove that K&G impermissibly discriminated against him in violation of the ADA. The Court will grant K&G's motion for summary judgment with respect to Brown's discrimination claim.
Because the Court concludes that Brown has failed to demonstrate that he was subjected to an adverse employment action, the Court need not address K&G's remaining arguments regarding whether (1) Brown filed his EEOC charge of discrimination in a timely manner, (2) Brown is disabled [*28]  under the ADA, (3) K&G has stated legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons for its actions sufficient to rebut Brown's prima facie case, and (4) Brown has demonstrated that K&G's legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons are pretextual.

2. Retaliation Under the Americans with Disabilities Act
In order to establish a prima facie case of retaliation under the ADA, Brown must show "(1) that he engaged in statutorily protected activity; (2) that he suffered an adverse employment action; and (3) a causal link between the protected activity and the adverse action." Standard v. A.B.E.L. Servs., 161 F.3d 1318, 1328 (nth Cir. 1998). Art employment action is considered "adverse" only if it results in some tangible, negative effect on plaintiffs employment. Lucas v. W.W. Grainger, Inc., 257 F.3d 1249, 1261 (11th Cir. 2001).
K&G asserts that Brown cannot establish a prima facie case of retaliation because (1) he did not suffer an adverse employment action and (2) he cannot demonstrate that a causal link exists between the alleged adverse employment action and his complaints. In his response brief, Brown asserts that after he complained to K&G about his request for an accommodation and what he perceived to be a hostile working environment, "[a]s previously established, [he] continued to experience a hostile working [*29]  environment with deleterious effects on his health." Brown provides no explanation regarding what evidence supports this contention.
Without any guidance from Brown, the Court assumes that Brown relies upon the same evidence as relied upon for his claim of discrimination under the ADA. Again, the Court concludes that as a matter of law none of the facts relied upon by Brown, taken individually or collectively, demonstrate that Brown suffered an adverse employment action in retaliation for his complaints about alleged unlawful treatment. Thus, the Court will also grant summary judgment to K&G with respect to Brown's retaliation claim.

3. Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress
Brown also asserts a state-law claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress.
In order for a plaintiff to establish a claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress, he must show that (1) the conduct was intentional or reckless; (2) the conduct was extreme and outrageous; (3) there is a causal connection between the wrongful conduct and the emotional distress; and (4) his emotional distress was severe. See Bridges v. Winn-Dixie Atlanta, Inc., 176 Ga. App. 227, 230, 335 S.E.2d 445, 447-48 (1985). Conduct can be considered extreme and outrageous "only where the conduct has been so [*30]  outrageous in character, and so extreme in degree, as to go beyond all possible bounds of decency, and to be regarded as atrocious, and utterly intolerable in a civilized community." Phinazee v. Interstate Nationalease, 237 Ga. APP. 39, 40, 514 S.E.2d 843, 845 (1999) (citations omitted).
"The extreme and outrageous character of the conduct 'may arise from the actor's knowledge that the other is peculiarly susceptible to emotional distress by reason of some physical or mental condition or peculiarity." Bridges, 176 Ga. App. at 230, 335 S.E.2d at 448 (quoting Restatement (Second) of Torts § 46(1) cmt. f (1965)). Thus, "the conduct may become heartless, flagrant, and outrageous when the actor proceeds in the face of such knowledge, where it would not be so if he did not know.'" Id.
K&G asserts that none of the alleged conduct by its employees towards Brown rises to the level of "extreme and outrageous." Brown asserts that because K&G had knowledge of his medical condition, a fact-finder could find that K&G's treatment of Brown was outrageous in light of his medical condition.
The Court concludes that as a matter of law the conduct alleged by Brown does not rise to the level of "extreme and outrageous" as required under Georgia law. At the very worst, K&G's conduct may demonstrate a lack of consideration and/or poor communication between K&G's in-store [*31]  management and its human resources department. However, it is not conduct that goes beyond all possible bounds of decency. The Court's conclusion is unaffected by K&G's knowledge of Brown's medical condition. Nothing in the record indicates that K&G's conduct was so outrageous that it should be regarded as utterly intolerable in a civilized society even if it is directed to a person with Brown's medical conditions. "The burden which the plaintiff must meet in order to prevail [on a claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress] is a stringent one." Ingram v. JIK Realty Co., 199 Ga. App. 335, 336, 404 S.E.2d 802, 804 (1991). Brown has failed to meet this burden.
Thus, the Court will grant summary judgment to K&G with respect to Brown's intentional infliction of emotional distress claim.

III. Conclusion
For the foregoing reasons, the Court hereby DENIES Defendant's motion to strike Brown's sur-reply [86]. The Court hereby GRANTS Plaintiffs motion for leave to file sur-reply [88] and Defendant's motion for summary judgment [60]. The Clerk is DIRECTED to close this case.
IT IS SO ORDERED this 28th day of April 2009.
/s/ Timothy C. Batten
Timothy C. Batten, Sr.
United States District Judge


End of Document

