Bunch v. Univ. of Ark. Bd. of Trs.
United States District Court for the Eastern District of Arkansas, Western Division
March 17, 2016, Decided; March 17, 2016, Filed
Case No. 4:11-cv-00869-KGB

Reporter
2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 194958 *
GLORIA A. BUNCH, PLAINTIFF v. UNIVERSITY OF ARKANSAS BOARD OF TRUSTEES, DEFENDANT
Subsequent History: Affirmed by Bunch v. Univ. of Ark. Bd. of Trs., 863 F.3d 1062, 2017 U.S. App. LEXIS 13257 (8th Cir. Ark., July 24, 2017)
Prior History: Bunch v. Univ. of Ark. Bd. of Trs., 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 192362 (E.D. Ark., Mar. 31, 2015)
Counsel:  [*1] Gloria A Bunch, Plaintiff, Pro se, Little Rock, AR USA.
For Gloria A Bunch, Plaintiff: Julius D. Kearney, Kearney Law Offices, Pine Bluff, AR USA.
For University of Arkansas Board of Trustees, A Body Politic and Corporate, Defendant: Joann C. Maxey, University of Arkansas - Office of the General Counsel, Little Rock, AR USA.
Judges: Kristine G. Baker, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Kristine G. Baker
Opinion



OPINION AND ORDER
Before this Court is a motion for summary judgment filed by defendant the University of Arkansas Board of Trustees (the "University") (Dkt. No. 149). Plaintiff Gloria Bunch has responded (Dkt. No. 157), and the University has replied (Dkt. No. 159). Ms. Bunch alleges that, as a result of termination from her job at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences ("UAMS"), the University violated 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. ("Title VII"); 42 U.S.C. §§1981 and 1983; the Americans with Disability Act, 42 U.S.C. § 12132 ("ADA"); section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. § 794 ("Rehabilitation Act"); the Age Discrimination in Employment Act, 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq. ("ADEA"); and the Family and Medical Leave Act, 29 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq. ("FMLA"). The University contends that it is entitled to summary judgment because the undisputed record facts show that the University is entitled to sovereign immunity under [*2]  the Eleventh Amendment and that Ms. Bunch was discharged for legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons and was unable to perform the essential functions of her job, with or without reasonable accommodation. This Court grants the motion (Dkt. No. 149).

I. Procedural Background
On December 7, 2011, Ms. Bunch filed her complaint (Dkt. No. 2). She named only the University of Arkansas Board of Trustees as a defendant, which was served and answered (Dkt. Nos. 12, 13).
On September 11, 2012, Ms. Bunch was granted leave to amend her complaint (Dkt. No. 25). She filed her amended complaint on September 17, 2012, identifying the University of Arkansas Board of Trustees as the defendant in the style of her case but identifying the Arkansas Department of Human Services ("ADHS"), John Hadley, and Krista Hughes as defendants in paragraph one of the amended complaint (Dkt. No. 27). Mr. Hadley and Ms. Hughes may be employed by ADHS but are not employed by UAMS or with the STRIVE program for which Ms. Bunch worked. Moreover, in her response, Ms. Bunch contends that Mr. Hadley and Ms. Hughes are improperly named as defendants in this action (Dkt. Nos. 151, ¶ 20; 157, at 2 (stating the "Amended Complaint of record improperly [*3]  names the Defendants as John Hadley and Krista Hughes alleging Plaintiff formerly worked for a Division of Arkansas Department of Human Services")). Given Ms. Bunch's representation in her response, it is unclear whether ADHS, Mr. Hadley, or Ms. Hughes is intended to be a defendant in this action. Regardless, there is no evidence in the record before the Court that ADHS, Mr. Hadley, or Ms. Hughes was served with the amended complaint. ADHS, Mr. Hadley, and Ms. Hughes have not appeared or answered the amended complaint.

II. Factual Background1
Ms. Bunch began her employment with UAMS working for the STRIVE program as a Program Eligibility Specialist on June 1, 2010. STRIVE stands for Seeking to Reinforce My Values Everyday. STRIVE is a school-based community outreach program that provides intensive outpatient therapy for students who are at high risk for out-of-home placement due to emotional and behavioral problems. Ms. Bunch worked for UAMS for approximately three months before her termination. As a Program Eligibility Specialist, Ms. Bunch was assigned to work in two schools in the North Little Rock School District, and her duties included making home visits, conducting interventions [*4]  in the school, coordinating patient appointments when needed, meeting with teachers and other school staff, and billing and preparing progress notes. When hired, Ms. Bunch was on a 90-day probationary period as a new employee. Ms. Bunch's probationary period was extended because her immediate supervisor, Albert Dobbins, rated her as "unsatisfactory" in the area of cooperation on her 90-day evaluation.
After receiving that evaluation, Ms. Bunch complained to Charles White, then Assistant Vice Chancellor for Employee Relations, and to Paula McCarther, STRIVE Director, about her evaluation and her probation extension. Ms. McCarther informed Ms. Bunch that protocol required Ms. Bunch to discuss her concerns with her immediate supervisor first. Ms. McCarther advised Ms. Bunch that UAMS's policy did not permit probationary employees to file formal grievances. Ms. McCarther advised Ms. Bunch that she could discuss her concerns with Human Resources.
The parties do not dispute that, during Ms. Bunch's discussion with Ms. McCarther, Ms. Bunch discussed her need to attend doctors' appointments (Dkt. No. 151, ¶ 7). The parties dispute whether any STRIVE employee had knowledge of Ms. Bunch's disability [*5]  prior to or at the time of the meeting between Ms. Bunch and Ms. McCarther. Ms. Carther stated in her affidavit that, until that meeting, Ms. Bunch had not informed anyone that she had a disability or required any kind of accommodation, although she requested and was granted leave to attend medical appointments (Dkt. No. 151, Ex. 2, Decl. of McCarther, ¶ 7). Ms. Bunch appears to contend that any STRIVE employee had access to her medical records because she was a patient in UAMS's Psychiatric Department and, therefore, knew about her disability (Dkt. No. 157, ¶ 10).
The parties do not dispute that Ms. McCarther explained UAMS's leave policy to Ms. Bunch and explained that, under the policy, an employee was required to request leave two weeks in advance of a doctor's appointment or, if calling in sick, to call the employee's supervisor by 7:00 a.m. on the day of the absence.
In her meeting with Mr. White, Ms. Bunch attempted to file a grievance regarding her evaluation, reported that she had been discriminated against, and claimed that she had not been given accommodations with regard to sick leave. In her deposition, Ms. Bunch stated:
I told him that I wanted to file a grievance because [*6]  I felt like I was being discriminated against. I told him about the harassment and the taunting on a daily basis that I had to endure from the managers and the co-workers. I told him about Mr. Dobbins telling me that I had caused the hospital money, to lose money because I failed to do a rehab on a patient. And it was not me, it was the therapist, Ms. Bailey, who failed to do that date rehab note. I told him about how Mr. Dobbins abruptly talked to me. He would see me in the hallway. And everybody was snickering and laughing. He would make it appear that I was in trouble. And then I get in his office, he said, Shut the door. I close the door. And then I sat down. And he stands up and extends his hand, saying, Congratulations. And I'm like, does that sound like he was going to give me praises in front of everybody, no. It was very intimidating. And it was wrong for him to address me like that.
And I told him about how he accused me saying that -- he told me that I had to -- all that week it went from one thing to the other. He was telling me that my probation was going to have to be extended, for bogus reasons. So we had the whole discussion.
Charles White knew that it was because -- [*7]  it was because of my feelings of being intimidated and harassed and discriminated against, that I was in his office. He told me that I couldn't file a grievance. And that I should be thankful that they hadn't fired me.
(Dkt. No. 149, Ex. 1, Bunch Depo., 141:4-25, 142:1-7).
Mr. White referred Ms. Bunch to Audrey Bradley, the Human Resources Director for Employee Relations. Mr. White gave Ms. Bunch a complaint form to fill out and give to Ms. Bradley. In her affidavit, Ms. Bradley stated that her initial contact with Ms. Bunch was by telephone and that Ms. Bunch did not provide any details concerning problems she was experiencing (Dkt. No. 151, Ex. 3, Bradley Decl., ¶ 9 ). Ms. Bradley stated she asked Ms. Bunch to submit her complaint on the form that had been provided to her by Mr. White and invited her to set up an appointment to meet and discuss her situation. According to Ms. Bradley, Ms. Bunch never completed the form or set up an appointment.
Ms. Bradley acknowledged that she provided assistance to Ms. McCarther and others in the STRIVE department during the period of time that Ms. Bunch was sending her requests for leave and her supervisors were responding. Ms. Bradley stated that [*8]  she assisted in helping those people determine whether Ms. Bunch's requests for leave could be granted. Ms. Bradley opined that the only factors considered in making all decisions were the information submitted by Ms. Bunch's physician on her FMLA form, the length of her employment, and the needs of the department. Ms. Bradley stated that, "[a]t the time we made our decisions concerning Ms. Bunch's requests, I was unaware of the fact that she had filed a charge with the EEOC." (Dkt. No. 149, Ex. 3, Bradley Decl., ¶ 7).
On August 30, 2010, Ms. Bunch submitted a letter to Ms. McCarther stating, "This is a formal request for the Reasonable Accommodation to attend medical appointments. Thank you in advance for your understanding in helping to meet my needs." (Dkt. No. 149, Ex. 2, McCarther Decl., at 11). The following day, Ms. Bunch emailed Ms. McCarther to report that she was "calling in sick." (Id. at 13). Although UAMS policy requires that contact be made by phone, Ms. Bunch's only notification was by email. On that same day, Ms. Bunch emailed Ms. McCarther a message stating: "My doctor is requesting for me to be off work for the next two weeks as a Reasonable Accommodation request and is completing [*9]  the FMLA Paperwork. I will submit the form upon his completion ASAP. Thank you in advance for your assistance." (Id. at 12). According to Ms. McCarther, on September 1, 2010, she received a copy of the FMLA paperwork from Ms. Bunch's physician, which stated: "She has fibromyalgia syndrome which can cause intermittent moderate to severe diffuse muscle/joint pains and fatigue." (Id. at 14-15). The FMLA paperwork also noted that Ms. Bunch's condition was lifelong, that her current flare-up could last two to three weeks, that over the next six months the doctor expected she would have flare-ups twice a month with each flare-up lasting two days, and that during flare-ups Ms. Bunch would not be able to perform any kind of work. Ms. Bunch does not dispute this characterization of her medical conditions.
Ms. McCarther emailed Ms. Bunch on September 2, 2010, and stated: "This email is a follow up to the voice message I left you this morning. Your request for FMLA time is denied due to the fact that you do not qualify. To be eligible for FMLA an employee must have one year of service with the state of Arkansas and also worked 1250 hours in the preceding year as the date leave is requested. Please email or fax the [*10]  MD note from your doctor . . . I will need this by Friday at 4:30 p.m." (Id. at 18). On September 9, 2010, Ms. Bunch was terminated and was notified of such by a letter, which read:
You were hired on June 1, 2010 and your probationary period was extended on August 26, 2010. On August 31, 2010 you began missing work from your duties in the Psychiatric Research Institute/STRIVE Department and the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences due to your medical condition.
To be eligible for FMLA an employee must have one year of service with the state of Arkansas and also work 1250 hours in the preceding year as of the date leave is requested. As of September 8, 2010 you have one year of service with the state, but based on your hours worked in the preceding 12 months you do not qualify for the Family Medical Leave Act. You have to meet both criteria in order to qualify for FMLA.
As of September 8, 2010, you are in a no pay status. A note from your doctor dated August 31, 2010 requests that you be off work due to your medical condition. Due to the needs of the department, I will have to fill your position, therefore resulting in your termination, effective September 8, 2010. Once you are released [*11]  to "full duty", you are welcome to reapply for employment within this department and generally at UAMS in the future without any consequence of this action. However, no position is being held and no official preference will be granted upon your return.
Please contact Jessica Anderson, LCSW at 501-771-8261 regarding the separation process and the return of any UAMS property. I also suggest that you contact the UAMS Office of Human Resources at 686-5650 for assistance with your benefit questions.
(Id. at 21-22).
According to Ms. McCarther, the factors considered in making the termination decision were the needs of the department and the fact that Ms. Bunch had exhausted her leave. Ms. McCarther stated:
As a Program Eligibility Specialist, Ms. Bunch was assigned to work at specific locations. According to the information her doctor had submitted, Ms. Bunch's condition was lifelong but this particular flare up would improve in 2-3 weeks. While he had only requested, at the time, 2 weeks leave, the information indicated that she might be out as long as 3 weeks. Further, the information he provided indicated that she would be out regularly at least two times a month for two days each episode. Based on the information provided by her doctor, during these flare ups, Ms. Bunch could [*12]  not perform any work. Since these flare-ups are not predictable, we would not have been able to plan in advance for her absences and would have had to have someone constantly available to cover her work load.
(Dkt. No. 149, Ex. 2, McCarther Decl., ¶ 15).
Ms. Bunch filed a charge with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC") alleging that UAMS discriminated against her based on her race, gender, age, and disability and claiming that UAMS retaliated against her. Ms. Bunch filed her original EEOC charge on September 2, 2010 (Dkt. No. 149, Ex. to Bunch Depo., at 49). The parties do not dispute that the STRIVE program terminated Ms. Bunch's employment by letter dated September 9, 2010; this letter was dated seven days after Ms. Bunch filed her first EEOC charge. Ms. Bunch amended her EEOC charge on September 10, 2010, to include her discharge from UAMS (Id. at 47). In her amended EEOC charge, Ms. Bunch alleged:
I was hired on 6/1/10 as a Program Eligibility Specialist. During my employment, I have been subjected to a hostile work environment by other trying to provoke me to anger, setting up my work by changing the dates and talked to abrasively. I have informed management about my disabilities. [*13]  On 8/23/10, I was accused of not doing a billing that would cost the hospital money. On 8/26/10, my 90 day evaluation was extended. The MHPP Coordinator mentioned my disability. On 8/30/10, I attempted to file a discrimination grievance with Human Resources but I was denied. On 8/30/10, I requested a reasonable accommodation to be able to go to my doctor's appointments. On 9/1/10, I requested family medical leave. On 9/2/10, I requested leave without pay. On September 8, 2010, I was discharged. The MHPP Coordinator told me that my 90 day probations would be extended until November not meeting on cooperation and ability to supervise. On September 1, 2010, I learned that my request for family medical leave was denied. I must give 2 weeks notice for my doctor's appointments. I believe I was subjected to different terms and conditions of employment, 90 days probation extended, subjected to a hostile work environment, harassed and discharged because of my race, Black, sex, female, and retaliated against, in violation of Title VII and my age, 47, in violation of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act and denied a reasonable accommodation because of my disability in violation of The Americans [*14]  With Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended.
(Id.).
Ms. Bunch then filed her complaint with this Court. In her amended complaint, Ms. Bunch claims retaliation, race, and gender discrimination against "defendants" under §1983, § 1981, and Title VII (Dkt. No. 27, at 2). Ms. Bunch alleges ADA and Rehabilitation Act claims against ADHS and defendants "in their official capacity only" (Dkt. No. 27, at 3). Ms. Bunch alleges her ADEA claim against "the official capacity Defendant" for "relief allowed under Ex Parte Young." (Dkt. No. 27, at 4).

III. Legal Standard
Under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56(c), summary judgment is proper "if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). The plain language of Rule 56(c) mandates the entry of summary judgment, after adequate time for discovery and upon motion, against a party who fails to make a showing sufficient to establish the existence of an element essential to that party's case, and on which that party will bear the burden of proof at trial. Id. In such a situation, there can be "no genuine issue as to any material [*15]  fact," since a complete failure of proof concerning an essential element of the nonmoving party's case necessarily renders all other facts immaterial. Id. at 323. The moving party is "entitled to a judgment as a matter of law" because the nonmoving party has failed to make a sufficient showing on an essential element of her case with respect to which she has the burden of proof. Id.
A party seeking summary judgment always bears the initial responsibility of informing this Court of the basis for its motion and identifying those portions of "the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any," which it believes demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact. Id. One of the principal purposes of the summary judgment rule is to isolate and dispose of factually unsupported claims or defenses, and it should be interpreted in a way that allows it to accomplish this purpose. Id. at 324. There is no "discrimination case exception" to the application of summary judgment, which is a useful pretrial tool to determine whether any case, including one alleging discrimination, merits a trial. Torgerson v. City of Rochester, 643 F.3d 1031, 1043 (8th Cir. 2011).
After carefully reviewing Ms. Bunch's complaint, [*16]  this Court finds several grounds on which summary judgment must be granted. First, to the extent that Ms. Bunch's complaint may be construed as a request for money damages from the state for past injury, the Eleventh Amendment precludes this Court from imposing such an award against the state or one of its agencies. Second, insofar as Ms. Bunch seeks prospective relief against the state, the Court cannot direct or consider such relief against the state or one of its agencies given Ms. Bunch's failure to name any state official, with the possible exception of Mr. Hadley and Ms. Hughes as discussed at IV.A, infra. See, e.g., Santiago v. New York State Dep't of Corr. Servs., 945 F.2d 25, 32 (2d Cir. 1991) cert. denied 502 U.S. 1094 (1992) (concluding that while plaintiff's request for an injunction against a state agency was not barred by the Eleventh Amendment's ban on retroactive damage actions, the request must be dismissed because it does not follow the requirement, established in Ex Parte Young, that a plaintiff seeking prospective relief from the state must name as defendant a state official rather than the state or a state agency directly, even though in reality the suit is against the state and any funds required to be expended by an award of prospective relief will come from the state's treasury). Third, this Court [*17]  concludes that Ms. Bunch's claims each fail on the merits for the reasons discussed below.

IV. Analysis

A. Claims Against ADHS, Mr. Hadley, and Ms. Hughes
As an initial matter, the Court addresses Ms. Bunch's possible claims against ADHS, Mr. Hadley, and Ms. Hughes. Based on the representation in her response to the University's motion for summary judgment, it is unclear whether ADHS, Mr. Hadley, or Ms. Hughes is intended to be a defendant in this action. Ms. Bunch's response to the University's motion for summary judgment indicates that she may intend to abandon those claims (Dkt. No. 157, ¶ 21). As stated, there is no evidence in the record before the Court that ADHS, Mr. Hadley, or Ms. Hughes was served with the amended complaint. ADHS, Mr. Hadley, and Ms. Hughes have not appeared or answered the amended complaint.
Given this, the Court directs Ms. Bunch to inform the Court within 30 days of the date of this Order whether she persists in her claims against ADHS, Mr. Hadley, and Ms. Hughes and to demonstrate that she served these defendants with summons and the amended complaint within the time provided under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. The Court notifies Ms. Bunch that, if [*18]  she fails to respond within 30 days in compliance with this Court's Order, her claims against ADHS, Mr. Hadley, and Ms. Hughes will be dismissed. See Local Rule 5.5(c)(2) ("If any communication from the Court to a pro se plaintiff is not responded to within thirty (30) days, the case may be dismissed without prejudice.").

B. Sovereign Immunity
A key basis for the University's motion for summary judgment is its contention that UAMS is entitled to the protection of sovereign immunity as an instrumentality of the State. The Arkansas General Assembly established UAMS as a part of the University of Arkansas. Ark. Code Ann. § 6-64-401. UAMS, like other departments of the University of Arkansas, is under the management and control of the University's Board of Trustees. Ark. Code Ann. § 6-64-402. The Arkansas Supreme Court has determined that UAMS is a department of the University of Arkansas and, as such, is not an entity that can sue or be sued. Univ. of Arkansas for Med. Sciences v. Adams, 354 Ark. 21, 117 S.W.3d 588, 590 (Ark. 2003) (citing Assaad-Faltas v. UAMS, 708 F.Supp. 1026 (E.D. Ark. 1989), aff'd 902 F.2d 1572 (8th Cir.1990)). In addition, under Arkansas law, a suit against a state university or its board of trustees is a suit against the State and is barred by the doctrine of sovereign immunity. Id.
In determining whether Eleventh Amendment immunity applies to a particular entity, this Court must examine the particular entity in question [*19]  and its powers and characteristics as created by state law to determine whether the suit is in reality a suit against the state. Hadley v. N. Arkansas Cmty. Tech. Coll., 76 F.3d 1437, 1439 (8th Cir. 1996). Courts typically look at the degree of local autonomy and control and most importantly whether the funds to pay any award will be derived from the state treasury. Id. After examining these factors in Assaad-Faltas, the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Arkansas concluded that the University is an instrumentality of the State of Arkansas entitled to Eleventh Amendment immunity. Assaad-Faltas, 708 F. Supp. at 1030. This Court sees no reason to revisit that conclusion in this case. This Court concludes that UAMS is an entity that is an instrumentality of the State.

i. Claims Under § 1981 and § 1983
In its motion for summary judgment, the University contends that Ms. Bunch's § 1981 and § 1983 claims are barred by the Eleventh Amendment (Dkt. No. 150, at 12). The University also contends that UAMS is not a person subject to suit under § 1983. In her 268 page response, Ms. Bunch does not appear to address the University's argument regarding the Eleventh Amendment or its argument that it is not a person subject to suit under § 1983; she does acknowledge that UAMS is an instrument of the State of Arkansas (Dkt. No. 157, at 1). This Court concludes that Ms. Bunch's [*20]  § 1981 and § 1983 claims requesting compensatory damages are barred by the Eleventh Amendment. Alternatively, this Court concludes that UAMS is not a person subject to suit under § 1983 when sued for compensatory damages.
Section 1981 prohibits racial discrimination in all phases and incidents of a contractual relationship. Jones v. McNeese, 675 F.3d 1158, 1160 (8th Cir. 2012) (internal quotations omitted) (citing Gregory v. Dillard's, Inc., 565 F.3d 464, 468 (8th Cir. 2009) (en banc)). When raised directly against a state actor, a § 1981 claim must be brought under § 1983. Lockridge v. Bd. of Trs. of the Univ. of Ark., 315 F.3d 1005, 1007 (8th Cir. 2003) (en banc). Thus, § 1983 provides the gateway for Ms. Bunch's § 1981 claims.
The principle of sovereign immunity is a constitutional limitation on the federal judicial power established in Article III. Pennhurst State Sch. & Hosp. v. Halderman, 465 U.S. 89, 98-99, 104 S. Ct. 900, 79 L. Ed. 2d 67 (1984). The entire judicial power granted by the Constitution does not embrace authority to entertain a suit brought by private parties against a State without the State's consent because of the Eleventh Amendment. Id. Section 1983 does not override States' Eleventh Amendment immunity. Quern v. Jordan, 440 U.S. 332, 342, 99 S. Ct. 1139, 59 L. Ed. 2d 358 (1979).
Neither a State nor its officials acting in their official capacities are "persons" under § 1983. Will v. Michigan Dept. of State Police, 491 U.S. 58, 109 S. Ct. 2304, 105 L. Ed. 2d 45 (1989). Section 1983 provides a federal forum to remedy many deprivations of civil liberties, but it does not provide a federal forum for litigants who seek a remedy against a State for alleged deprivations of civil liberties. Id. at 66. Accordingly, § 1983 does not provide a federal forum for Ms. Bunch's § 1981 claim [*21]  against UAMS, an entity of the State. Moreover, Ms. Bunch's claims against UAMS are barred by the Eleventh Amendment.
Of course a state official in his or her official capacity, when sued for prospective injunctive relief, would be a person under § 1983 because "official-capacity actions for prospective relief are not treated as actions against the State." Kentucky v. Graham, 473 U.S. 159, 167 n.14, 105 S. Ct. 3099, 87 L. Ed. 2d 114 (1985); Ex Parte Young, 209 U.S. 123, 159-160, 28 S. Ct. 441, 52 L. Ed. 714 (1908). In her amended complaint, Ms. Bunch requested reinstatement and requested that all adverse job information be removed from her file (Dkt. No. 27, ¶ 27). Reinstatement and removal of negative information from an employment file constitute prospective relief. See, e.g., Murphy v. Arkansas, 127 F.3d 750, 754 (8th Cir. 1997) (determining that equitable relief such as reinstatement is prospective relief); Nix v. Norman, 879 F.2d 429, 433 (8th Cir. 1989) (finding that a requested injunction to clear an employment record of any false allegations or improper behavior is prospective in nature). In her response, Ms. Bunch asserts that she is unable to return to work. Consequently, it is unclear to this Court whether she persists in her request for prospective injunctive relief in the form of reinstatement or persists in her request to remove adverse job information from her file. However, what is clear to this Court is that there is no state official sued in [*22]  his or her official capacity, with the possible exception of Mr. Hughes and Ms. Hadley. See Part IV.A., supra. Because Ms. Bunch's amended complaint fails to name a person subject to suit under § 1983, this Court grants summary judgment on her § 1981 and § 1983 claims.

ii. Claims Under the ADA and ADEA
Next, the University contends that Ms. Bunch's ADA and ADEA claims are barred by the Eleventh Amendment (Dkt. No. 150, at 12). The University contends that the Ex Parte Young doctrine does not apply because Ms. Bunch has not sued any UAMS official (Dkt. No. 150, at 13). Ms. Bunch contends that the ADA's remedial scheme is not comprehensive and that the Eleventh Amendment does not bar prospective injunctive relief when a state official acts contrary to federal law (Dkt. No. 157, at 32). For the reasons set forth below, this Court grants the University's motion for summary judgment on Ms. Bunch's ADA and ADEA claims.
The ADA is designed to provide a clear and comprehensive national mandate for the elimination of discrimination against individuals with disabilities. Tennessee v. Lane, 541 U.S. 509, 516, 124 S. Ct. 1978, 158 L. Ed. 2d 820 (2004). It forbids discrimination against persons with disabilities in three major areas of public life: employment, which is covered by Title I of the statute; public services, programs, and activities, [*23]  which are the subject of Title II; and public accommodations, which are covered by Title III. Id. Title I of the ADA bars employers from discriminating against a qualified individual on the basis of disability in regard to "job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, . . . and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a).
In Board of Trustees of the University of Alabama v. Garrett, 531 U.S. 356, 121 S. Ct. 955, 148 L. Ed. 2d 866 (2001), the Supreme Court of the united States ruled that a state is immune from suits seeking compensatory damages under Title I of the ADA unless it waives its sovereign immunity. Faibisch v. Univ. of Minnesota, 304 F.3d 797, 800 (8th Cir. 2002). To waive sovereign immunity, a state must make a clear, unequivocal statement that it wishes to do so. Id. (citing Atascadero State Hosp. v. Scanlon, 473 U.S. 234, 238-40, 105 S. Ct. 3142, 87 L. Ed. 2d 171 (1985)). Arkansas has not waived its sovereign immunity with respect to claims under Title I of the ADA. Because the University is an arm of the state, it likewise has not waived its sovereign immunity with respect to claims under Title I of the ADA. Therefore, the Eleventh Amendment bars Ms. Bunch's claims of employment discrimination seeking compensatory damages under Title I of the ADA against the University. While a plaintiff can sue state officials for injunctive relief under the ADA by using the Ex Parte Young doctrine, Ms. Bunch has failed to name [*24]  any such official. Gibson v. Arkansas Dept. of Correction, 265 F.3d 718, 720-22 (8th Cir. 2001).
Similarly, the Supreme Court held in Kimel v. Florida Board of Regents, 528 U.S. 62, 120 S. Ct. 631, 145 L. Ed. 2d 522 (2000), that Congress exceeded its authority under § 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment in attempting to abrogate the States' Eleventh Amendment immunity in ADEA suits seeking compensatory damages. The Eighth Circuit has acknowledged that Arkansas is immune from ADEA suits seeking compensatory damages and has not waived that immunity. Whitten v. Arkansas Dep't of Human Servs., 2 F. App'x 595, 597 (8th Cir. 2001). Nothing prevents a plaintiff from suing state officials under the ADEA for prospective injunctive relief under the Ex Parte Young doctrine. See, e.g., Fiske v. State of Iowa Third Judicial District Department of Correctional Services, 633 F.Supp.2d 682, 692 (N.D. Iowa 2009) (analyzing this issue).
The Eleventh Amendment bars Ms. Bunch's ADA and ADEA claims for compensatory damages. To the extent that Ms. Bunch states a claim for prospective injunctive relief, she has failed to name any state official and, therefore, fails to meet the Ex Parte Young exception permitting prospective injunctive relief against a state official in his or her official capacity. However, to the extent that her ADA and ADEA claims for prospective injunctive relief under Ex Parte Young persist, this Court will examine the merits of those claims.

C. Claims Under the Rehabilitation Act and the ADA
To the extent Ms. Bunch brings claims under the Rehabilitation Act and the ADA alleging discrimination based on disability, cases [*25]  interpreting these acts are interchangeable in regard to their discussion of the prima facie case and the summary judgment analysis, as the same analysis applies to both types of claims. Wojewski v. Rapid City Reg'l Hosp., Inc., 450 F.3d 338, 344 (8th Cir. 2006).

i. Qualified Individual
Ms. Bunch claims that the University violated § 504 of the Rehabilitation Act by discriminating against her on the basis of her disability, failing to engage in good faith efforts to accommodate her disability, and retaliating against her for requesting accommodations and complaining when she did not receive any. To the extent her claim under the ADA persists, it is based on the same alleged facts.
Specifically in regard to her Rehabilitation Act claim, the University contends that it is entitled to summary judgment because Ms. Bunch has failed to allege sufficient facts to state a claim under the Rehabilitation Act. The University contends that Ms. Bunch brought her claims against only ADHS and Mr. Hadley and Ms. Hughes in their individual and official capacities. According to the University, Ms. Bunch has not brought a Rehabilitation Act claim against UAMS, STRIVE, or any of its employees. Alternatively, the University contends that Ms. Bunch's disability discrimination claims fail [*26]  because she cannot establish a prima facie case of liability under the Rehabilitation Act or the ADA. The Court agrees and grants the University's motion for summary judgment on Ms. Bunch's Rehabilitation Act and ADA claims.
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act prohibits "any program or activity" that receives federal financial assistance from discriminating against a qualified individual with a disability. Jim C. v. United States, 235 F.3d 1079, 1080 (8th Cir. 2000) (citing 29 U.S.C. § 794(a)). The statute, in relevant part, defines "program or activity" as: "(1)(A) a department, agency, special purpose district, or other instrumentality of a State or of a local government; or . . . (2)(A) a college, university, or other postsecondary institution, or a public system of higher education." 29 U.S.C. § 794(b). Under this definition, the State itself as a whole is not a program or activity. Rather, "only the department or agency which receives [or distributes] the aid is covered." Klinger v. Dep't of Corrections, 107 F.3d 609, 615 (8th Cir.1997). The acceptance of funds by one state agency therefore leaves unaffected both other state agencies and the State as a whole. The Rehabilitation Act requires States that accept federal funds to waive their Eleventh Amendment immunity to suits brought in federal court for violations of Section 504. Jim C., 235 F.3d at 1081 (citing 42 U.S.C § 2000d-7). Since Section 504 covers only the individual [*27]  agency or department that accepts or distributes federal funds, this waiver requirement is limited in the same way. Id. By accepting funds offered to an agency, the State waives its immunity only with regard to the individual agency that receives the funds. A State and its instrumentalities can avoid Section 504's waiver requirement on a piecemeal basis by simply accepting federal funds for some departments and declining them for others. Id. The State is not required to renounce all federal funding to shield chosen state agencies from compliance with Section 504. Id.
In her complaint, Ms. Bunch contends that UAMS received federal financial aid (Dkt. No. 27, ¶ 17). She has not alleged that STRIVE, the program which employed her, received federal funding. Because she has failed to allege sufficient facts to give rise to a claim under the Rehabilitation Act, Ms. Bunch's Rehabilitation Act claim fails.
Even if this Court were to find that Ms. Bunch alleged sufficient facts to show that STRIVE received federal funding, she has failed to state a prima facie case of liability under the Rehabilitation Act or the ADA. First, Ms. Bunch's claim fails because she cannot perform the essential functions of the job she [*28]  held with STRIVE. The Rehabilitation Act prohibits employers from discriminating against a qualified individual with a disability because of the individual's disability. 29 U.S.C. § 794(a). Decisions interpreting either the ADA or the Rehabilitation Act are applicable and interchangeable to claims under each statute. Hill v. Walker, 737 F.3d 1209, 1216 (8th Cir. 2013) (internal quotations and citations omitted). To establish discrimination under the ADA, an employee must show that she: (1) is disabled within the meaning of the ADA, (2) is a qualified individual under the ADA, and (3) has suffered an adverse employment action because of her disability. Huber v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 486 F.3d 480, 482 (8th Cir. 2007). To be a qualified individual under the ADA, an employee must: (1) possess the requisite skill, education, experience, and training for her position, and (2) be able to perform the essential job functions, with or without reasonable accommodation. Hill, 737 F.3d at 1216. Essential functions of a position are the fundamental duties of the job, but not its marginal functions. Id. at 1217. A job function may be essential if the reason the position exists is to perform that function or if a limited number of employees are available among whom the performance of that job function can be distributed. Id.
The University contends that Ms. Bunch [*29]  could not perform the essential functions of the job because she is totally and permanently disabled and is unable to work. Although Ms. Bunch has the burden of proving her prima facie case, the University has the burden of establishing what job functions are essential, as much of the information which determines those essential functions lies uniquely with the employer. Id.
In her affidavit, Ms. McCarther stated that Ms. Bunch was assigned to work in two schools in the North Little Rock School District performing duties that included making home visits, conducting interventions in the school, coordinating patient appointments when needed, meeting with teachers and other school staff, billing, and preparing progress notes (Dkt. No. 149, Ex. 3, McCarther Decl., ¶ 7). Ms. McCarther also stated that, based on the information provided by Ms. Bunch's doctor, during Ms. Bunch's fibromyalgia flare ups, Ms. Bunch could not perform any work (Id., ¶ 15). In addition, Ms. McCarther stated that because Ms. Bunch's flare-ups are not predictable, STRIVE employees would not have been able to plan in advance for her absences and would have had to have someone constantly available to cover her work [*30]  load (Id.).
In addition, Ms. Bunch acknowledged that the STRIVE program was understaffed during her period of employment, from June 2010 to September 9, 2010 (Dkt. No. 149, Ex. 1, Bunch Depo. at 23). Ms. Bunch acknowledged that her doctor submitted a letter stating that Ms. Bunch could not work for a period of two weeks, that she could not work part time during those two weeks, and that someone else would have to perform her job during that time (Id. at 182). Ms. Bunch also admitted that, at the time of her deposition, she was not able to engage in any gainful employment (Dkt. No. 149, Ex. to Bunch Depo., at 44).
Based on these facts, this Court concludes that Ms. Bunch was unable to perform the essential functions of her job with STRIVE because it is undisputed that there were a limited number of employees available and Ms. Bunch was unable to work at all during her absences, which were unpredictable. Thus, she could not perform the functions of her position with or without reasonable accommodations. Therefore, Ms. Bunch is not a qualified individual under the Rehabilitation Act or the ADA.

ii. Adverse Employment Action
Even if the Court were to determine that Ms. Bunch was a qualified individual [*31]  under the Rehabilitation Act or the ADA, she has failed to show that she suffered an adverse employment action because of her disability. The undisputed evidence reveals that Ms. Bunch submitted an FMLA request on September 1, 2010, and requested two weeks off from work without pay as a reasonable accommodation (Dkt. No. 149, Ex. 1, Bunch Depo., at 108, 144). At the time of her request, the undisputed evidence is that Ms. Bunch had just completed her first 90 days of employment and did not meet the threshold eligibility requirement under the FMLA; she had not worked more than 1250 hours in the preceding 12-month period. The record in this case shows that Ms. Bunch's employment was terminated because of excessive absenteeism. Although Ms. Bunch contends that her employer had access to her medical records and knew of her disability prior to her FMLA request, she offers no facts to support this allegation. There is no evidence in the record to indicate that any University decision maker reviewed Ms. Bunch's medical records or knew of her disability prior to her FMLA request. To survive summary judgment, Ms. Bunch must present more than a scintilla of evidence and must advance specific [*32]  facts to create a genuine issue of material fact for trial. Wurtele, 359 F. App'x at 684. She has not done so. This Court concludes that Ms. Bunch has failed to establish the third element of her prima facie case of disability discrimination because there is no record evidence that her discharge was on account of an actual or perceived disability.
Specifically with regard to her ADA claim, there is no per se liability under the ADA if an employer fails to engage in an interactive process, but the failure of an employer to engage in an interactive process to determine whether reasonable accommodations are possible is prima facie evidence that the employer may be acting in bad faith. Hill, 737 F.3d at 1218 (citing Kallail v. Alliant Energy Corporate Servs., Inc., 691 F.3d 925, 933 (8th Cir. 2012) (internal quotation and citation omitted)). To establish that an employer failed to participate in the interactive process, an employee must show, among other things, that the employee could have been reasonably accommodated but for the employer's lack of good faith. Here, Ms. Bunch maintains that she was unable to work at the time her employment was terminated and that she remains unable to work in any capacity for UAMS. Therefore, she has not shown that she could have reasonably been accommodated. See, e.g., White v. Kan. City. Area Transp. Auth., 558 Fed. App'x. 730 (8th Cir. 2014) (per curiam) [*33]  (unpublished) (affirming the denial of an ADA claim when the employee was excessively absent from work and the position required regular and dependable attendance).
For these reasons, the Court grants summary judgment in favor of the University on Ms. Bunch's Rehabilitation Act and ADA discrimination claims.

D. Claims Under the ADEA
The ADEA protects individuals aged 40 and over by prohibiting employers from discharging or otherwise discriminating against such individuals with respect to their compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment on the basis of their age. 29 U.S.C. § 623(a). To prove her claim under the ADEA to the extent this claim persists, Ms. Bunch must show, by a preponderance of the evidence, that age was the "but-for" cause of the challenged adverse employment action. See Gross v. FBL Fin. Servs., Inc., 557 U.S. 167, 129 S. Ct. 2343, 174 L. Ed. 2d 119 (2009) ("The burden of persuasion does not shift to the employer to show that it would have taken the action regardless of age, even when a plaintiff has produced some evidence that age was one motivating factor in that decision."); Haigh v. Gelita USA, Inc., 632 F.3d 464 (8th Cir. 2011) (same); Clark v. Matthews Int'l Corp., 628 F.3d 462, 469 (8th Cir. 2010) ("[The plaintiff] is required to prove that his age was the 'but-for' cause of [the employer's] challenged decisions regardless of whether he uses direct or circumstantial [*34]  evidence to prove his age-discrimination claims.").
Because Ms. Bunch has no direct evidence of discrimination, her ADEA claim is analyzed under the familiar burden-shifting framework of McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 802-03, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668, (1973). See Clark, 628 F.3d at 469 ("The Supreme Court in Gross declined to answer whether use of this evidentiary framework is appropriate in the context of ADEA claims . . . [but] [o]ther circuits . . . have continued to apply it."). First, Ms. Bunch must establish a prima facie case of age discrimination by showing: (1) she was at least 40 years old; (2) she was terminated; (3) she was meeting her employer's reasonable expectations at the time she was terminated; and (4) she was replaced by an individual who was substantially younger. Roeben v. BG Excelsior Ltd. P'ship, 545 F.3d 639, 642 (8th Cir.2008). If Ms. Bunch establishes a prima facie case, the burden shifts to the University to provide a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the termination. Id. Finally, if the University provides such a reason, the burden returns to Ms. Bunch to prove the University's reason was mere pretext for discrimination. Id. at 642-43.
Even if Ms. Bunch could establish the other elements of her prima facie case under the ADEA, Ms. Bunch cannot demonstrate the third element of her prima facie case nor can she rebut the [*35]  University's legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for her termination. The University contends it denied Ms. Bunch's request for leave without pay and terminated her employment because Ms. Bunch had exhausted her paid leave and the needs of the STRIVE department required that her position be filled. Ms. Bunch has presented no record evidence to contradict the University's assertion that she did not meet the eligibility requirements for FMLA leave. In addition, Ms. Bunch has failed to demonstrate that the department did not need to fill her position. Instead, Ms. Bunch admitted that STRIVE was understaffed and required more personnel. Because Ms. Bunch has not met her burden of showing that she was meeting her employer's reasonable expectations at the time she was terminated and because she cannot rebut the University's legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for her termination, the University is entitled to summary judgment on her ADEA claim.

E. Race and Gender Discrimination Claims Under Title VII
The University's next contention is that it is entitled to summary judgment on Ms. Bunch's Title VII claims alleging race and gender discrimination and retaliation. The University claims that [*36]  Ms. Bunch cannot establish that similarly situated employees outside of her protected class were treated differently. The University also contends that Ms. Bunch's complaint fails to state sufficient facts to state a claim for relief that is plausible on its face and, consequently, falls short of the pleading requirements of Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 129 S. Ct. 1937, 173 L. Ed. 2d 868 (2009).
First, this Court turns to the contention that Ms. Bunch's complaint fails to state a claim for relief that is plausible on its face.
Under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 8(a)(2), a pleading must contain a short and plain statement of the claim showing that the pleader is entitled to relief. . . . [T]he pleading standard Rule 8 announces does not require detailed factual allegations, but it demands more than an unadorned, the-defendant-unlawfully-harmed-me accusation. A pleading that offers labels and conclusions or a formulaic recitation of the elements of a cause of action will not do.
Id. at 677-78 (internal citations and quotations omitted). The question is whether, assuming the factual allegations are true, the plaintiff has stated a ground for relief that is plausible. Id. at 696 (Souter, J., dissenting).
Regarding her claims of race and gender discrimination, Ms. Bunch makes the following allegations in her amended complaint: [*37] 
2. Plaintiff is a black female over the age of 40 who is, or is regarded as, having an impairment that substantially limits her ability to concentrate, think, and work.
. . . .
9. On 8/20/10, Plaintiff's probationary period was extended in a conversation where her disability was mentioned. Plaintiff believes this was a violation of the federal disability law. On 8/30/10, Plaintiff attempted to file a discrimination grievance and requested reasonable accommodation to attend her doctor's appointments. Plaintiff was required to give two weeks notice of her doctor's appointment. This was unreasonable. Plaintiff also requested leave as an accommodation in September of 2010. Less than a week later she was discharged.
10. Similarly situated white, males, or younger employees were not discharged under the same or similar circumstances. Indeed, similarly situated whites, males, or younger employees were allowed the benefit of a good faith interactive process.
. . . .
13. Defendants retaliated against Plaintiff for her grievances filings and the filing of her 9/2/10 EEOC charge. She has been discriminated against because of her race and gender, black African-American female.
(Dkt. No. 27).
In her amended [*38]  complaint, Ms. Bunch describes some events leading to her termination, including her request for leave and request for an accommodation. She does not, however, describe any events that apply to her race or gender discrimination claims. She includes some relevant dates. She does not include the ages and ethnicities or nationalities of the relevant persons involved with her termination. Thus, Ms. Bunch's complaint fails to include enough facts to state a claim for relief based on alleged race or gender discrimination that is plausible on its face or shows that she is entitled to relief. Compare Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 127 S. Ct. 1955, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929 (2007) (holding that, in order to state a claim under § 1 of the Sherman Act, a plaintiff must plead enough facts to state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face) with Swierkiewicz v. Sorema N.A., 534 U.S. 506, 122 S. Ct. 992, 152 L. Ed. 2d 1 (2002) (holding that a complaint in an employment discrimination lawsuit need not contain specific facts establishing a prima facie case of discrimination under McDonnell Douglas framework, but instead, must contain only a short and plain statement of the claim showing that the pleader is entitled to relief).
Even if this Court were to accept Ms. Bunch's amended complaint as sufficient to state race and gender discrimination claims under [*39]  Iqbal and Twombly, this Court finds that the University is entitled to summary judgment on these claims because she has failed to identify a similarly situated employee who was treated differently from her. Because Ms. Bunch has not presented any direct evidence of discrimination, this Court analyzes her claims under the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework. Id. Under that framework, "plaintiff must first present a prima facie case of intentional discrimination. The burden then shifts to defendant to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its action. If defendant meets that minimal burden, plaintiff must show that the proffered nondiscriminatory reason is merely a pretext for unlawful . . . discrimination." Id. (citing Putman v. Unity Health Sys., 348 F.3d 732, 735 (8th Cir.2003)). To establish a prima facie case of race or gender discrimination, Ms. Bunch must demonstrate that: "(1) she was a member of a protected class; (2) she was qualified for her job; (3) she suffered an adverse employment action; and (4) there are facts that give rise to an inference of unlawful gender discrimination." Id. Assuming, without deciding, that Ms. Bunch established a prima facie case of race or gender discrimination, UAMS has offered a [*40]  legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for terminating her employment. Namely, that Ms. Bunch's employment was terminated for excessive absenteeism.
Moreover, at the pretext stage of the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the burden is on Ms. Bunch to show sufficient evidence of disparate treatment. Wierman v. Casey's Gen. Stores, 638 F.3d 984, 996 (8th Cir. 2011). Here, Ms. Bunch has failed to point to any comparable employee who was treated more favorably than she was treated by Ms. McCarther or any other STRIVE employee.
In her deposition, Ms. Bunch identified one employee, a white female named Jamie Hargis, who she alleged was permitted to take leave during the probationary period (Dkt. No. 149, Ex. 1, Bunch Depo., at 73). Ms. Bunch acknowledged that she did not know whether Ms. Hargis was permitted to take leave with or without pay during her probationary period. In addition, Ms. Bunch acknowledged that she had been permitted to take leave with pay during the probationary period. In her affidavit, Ms. McCarther stated that Ms. Hargis had not been allowed to take leave without pay during her probationary period (Dkt. No. 149, Ex. 2, McCarther Decl., ¶ 23). Ms. McCarther further stated that she did not know of any person within STRIVE who held a position [*41]  similar to Ms. Bunch's position and who requested, or was permitted to take, leave without pay during the probationary period (Id., ¶ 20). This Court concludes that Ms. Bunch has not met her burden of demonstrating that there were individuals outside the protected class but otherwise similarly situated in all relevant aspects to her who were treated differently. Therefore, the University is entitled to summary judgment on Ms. Bunch's race and gender discrimination claims.

F. Retaliation Claims
The University contends that it is entitled to summary judgment on Ms. Bunch's retaliation claims because Ms. Bunch cannot establish that she was retaliated against for engaging in a protected activity. She claims retaliation for engaging in protected conduct related to her alleged disability and for filing her EEOC charge. For the reasons set forth below, this Court agrees and grants the University's motion for summary judgment on all of Ms. Bunch's claims that UAMS retaliated against her.
To present a prima facie case of retaliation, a plaintiff must show that she engaged in protected conduct, that she suffered an adverse employment action, and that the adverse action was causally linked to the [*42]  protected conduct. Kiel v. Select Artificials, Inc., 169 F.3d 1131, 1136 (8th Cir. 1999). Here, the undisputed evidence shows that: (1) Ms. Bunch requested FMLA leave, (2) STRIVE denied her request for FMLA leave, (3) STRIVE denied her request for leave without pay, and (4) Ms. Bunch's employment was terminated approximately one week later. According to Ms. Bunch, these actions took place after she told Ms. McCarther and Mr. White that she was going to go to the EEOC. Thus, in the light most favorable to Ms. Bunch as the nonmoving party, the record facts indicate that Ms. McCarther terminated Ms. Bunch's employment with STRIVE shortly after denying Ms. Bunch's request for FMLA leave, after denying Ms. Bunch's request for leave without pay, and after Ms. Bunch claims she told Ms. McCarther and Mr. White that she intended to go to the EEOC.
While this Court acknowledges that contesting an unlawful employment practice is protected conduct, mere temporal proximity is not sufficient to present a genuine issue of material fact as to retaliation. Kiel, 169 F.3d at 1136 (holding that, generally, more than a temporal connection between the protected conduct and the adverse employment action is required to present a genuine factual issue on retaliation). Proximity must be considered [*43]  in conjunction with other evidence; here, no such other evidence has been presented. Sprenger v. Fed. Home Loan Bank of Des Moines, 253 F.3d 1106, 1114 (8th Cir. 2001). Therefore, this Court grants the University's motion for summary judgment with respect to Ms. Bunch's retaliation claims because she has not presented a prima facie case. Even if this Court were to conclude that Ms. Bunch made a prima facie case for retaliation, she has failed to show that the University's legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for terminating her was pretextual and that its real reason was to retaliate against her.
To establish a prima facie case of ADA retaliation, Ms. Bunch must show that she engaged in protected activity based on a reasonable good faith belief that an agent of the employer was engaging in disability discrimination and that she suffered an adverse employment action causally linked to that protected conduct. Lenzen v. Workers Comp. Reinsurance Ass'n, 705 F.3d 816, 821 (8th Cir. 2013). To establish a prima facie case of retaliation under Title VII, an employee must show: (1) she engaged in protected conduct; (2) she suffered a materially adverse employment action that would deter a reasonable employee from making a charge of employment discrimination or harassment; and (3) that a desire to retaliate for the protected conduct was the "but-for" [*44]  cause of the materially adverse employment action. Univ. of Texas Sw. Med. Ctr. v. Nassar, 570 U.S. 338, 133 S. Ct. 2517, 2528, 186 L. Ed. 2d 503 (2013).
The University contends it denied Ms. Bunch's request for leave without pay and terminated her employment because Ms. Bunch had exhausted her paid leave and the needs of the STRIVE department required that her position be filled. Ms. Bunch has presented no record evidence to contradict the University's assertion that she did not meet the eligibility requirements for FMLA leave. In addition, Ms. Bunch has failed to demonstrate that the department did not need to fill her position. Instead, Ms. Bunch admitted that STRIVE was understaffed and required more personnel. Because Ms. Bunch has not met her burden of showing that her termination was causally linked to protected conduct, the University is entitled to summary judgment on Ms. Bunch's retaliation claims. Temporal proximity alone is not sufficient to show a causal connection between an adverse employment action and protected activity. Hill, 737 F.3d at 1219. The Court notes that Title VII retaliation claims require proof that the desire to retaliate was the "but-for" cause of the challenged employment action. Nassar, 133 S. Ct. at 2528. This requires proof that the unlawful retaliation would not have occurred in the absence of [*45]  the alleged wrongful action or actions of the employer. Id. at 2533. The undisputed evidence in this case shows that Ms. Bunch's employment with the University was terminated because of excessive absenteeism and the needs of the STRIVE department, rather than because of her EEOC charge. In fact, Ms. Bradley denied having knowledge of Ms. Bunch's EEOC charge at the time STRIVE department officials decided to terminate Ms. Bunch's employment. Ms. Bunch has not offered any record evidence to contradict that statement. Because the record evidence in this case does not support the conclusion that the EEOC charge was the "but for" cause of Ms. Bunch's termination from the STRIVE department, the Court grants summary judgment in favor of the University on her Title VII retaliation claim.

G. Claims Under the FMLA
Finally, the University contends that it is entitled to summary judgment on Ms. Bunch's FMLA claims. The University claims that Ms. Bunch failed to allege in her amended complaint facts sufficient to state a claim for relief. In her amended complaint, Ms. Bunch states that her claims are "brought only under FMLA and Section 1983" (Dkt. No. 27, ¶ 1). Her amended complaint contains no other reference to the FMLA. In [*46]  fact, her amended complaint fails to allege that she is eligible for FMLA leave. To succeed on an interference claim under the FMLA, a plaintiff must show that she is eligible for FMLA leave. Hasenwinkel v. Mosaic, No. 14-3786, 809 F.3d 427, 2015 WL 9466276, at *3 (8th Cir. Dec. 29, 2015). To succeed on a retaliation claim under the FMLA, the plaintiff must also prove that her employer retaliated against her for exercising the FMLA rights to which she is entitled. Id. The Court agrees with the University and grants summary judgment to the University on the basis that Ms. Bunch's amended complaint fails to plead sufficient facts to state a claim under the FMLA that is plausible on its face.
In addition, the Court grants summary judgment to the University on the basis that Congress did not abrogate the States' Eleventh Amendment immunity by enacting the self-care provision of the FMLA. Coleman v. Court of Appeals of Maryland, 566 U.S. 30, 132 S.Ct. 1327, 1338, 182 L. Ed. 2d 296 (2012). It is undisputed that Ms. Bunch was seeking leave for self-care, to take care of her own serious health condition that interfered with her ability to perform at work; she was not seeking leave to address the health condition of another. Therefore, the University and UAMS, as instrumentalities of the State, are entitled to immunity from Ms. Bunch's FMLA claims.

IV. Conclusion
In conclusion, this Court grants the University's [*47]  motion for summary judgment as to each of Ms. Bunch's claims (Dkt. No. 149). There are no genuine issues for trial; her request for relief from the University is denied.
In her response to the University's motion for summary judgment, Ms. Bunch makes allegations relating to the Whistleblower Act, Worker's Compensation, Fair Labor Standard Act, and wage and equal pay violations. None of those allegations appear in Ms. Bunch's amended complaint. Ms. Bunch has not requested leave to amend her complaint to include any claims for these alleged violations. A plaintiff may not amend her complaint through arguments in a brief filed in opposition to a motion for summary judgment. See, e.g., Thomas v. United Steelworkers Local 1938, 743 F.3d 1134, 1140 (8th Cir. 2014), reh'g denied (Apr. 8, 2014) (holding that a party may not dismiss or withdraw federal claims in a memorandum in opposition to a motion for summary judgment and that the party must either obtain consent of the opposing parties or seek permission of the court to amend a complaint). Therefore, this Court does not consider those claims which are not part of Ms. Bunch's amended complaint.
The Court grants summary judgment in favor of the University as to each of Ms. Bunch's claims against the University (Dkt. [*48]  No. 149). The Court also directs Ms. Bunch to inform the Court within 30 days of the date of this Order whether she persists in her claims against ADHS, Mr. Hadley, and Ms. Hughes and to demonstrate that she served these defendants with summons and the amended complaint within the time provided under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. The failure to do so within 30 days of this Order will result in the dismissal of her claims against ADHS, Mr. Hadley, and Ms. Hughes. See Local Rule 5.5(c)(2)
It is so ordered this 17th day of March, 2016.
/s/ Kristine G. Baker
Kristine G. Baker
United States District Court Judge


End of Document

