Cadena v. El Paso Cty.
United States District Court for the Western District of Texas, El Paso Division
July 31, 2018, Decided; July 31, 2018, Filed
EP-16-CV-00209-FM

Reporter
2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 232868 *; 2018 WL 10231093
APRIL CADENA, Plaintiff, v. EL PASO COUNTY, CORIZON HEALTH INC., and ALEX SALAZAR, M.D., Defendants.
Subsequent History: Reversed by, in part, Affirmed by, in part, Remanded by Cadena v. El Paso Cty., 946 F.3d 717, 2020 U.S. App. LEXIS 81, 2020 WL 39019 (5th Cir. Tex., Jan. 3, 2020)
Prior History: Cadena v. El Paso Cty., 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 22371, 2018 WL 835210 (W.D. Tex., Feb. 12, 2018)
Counsel:  [*1] For Mrs. April Cadena, Plaintiff: Joseph P. Pinon, El Paso, TX.
For El Paso County, Defendant: Kevin Paul McCary, LEAD ATTORNEY, El Paso County Attorney, El Paso, TX; Manuel Romero, U.S. Attorney, Western District of Texas, El Paso, TX.
For Corizon Health, Inc., Dr. Alex Salazar, Defendants: Henry J. Paoli, Scott, Hulse, Marshall, Feuille, Finger, Thurmond, El Paso, TX.
Judges: FRANK MONTALVO, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: FRANK MONTALVO
Opinion



ORDER ADOPTING IN PART AND REJECTING IN PART THE REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE MAGISTRATE JUDGE AND DISMISSING CASE
On this day, the court considered the "Report and Recommendation of the Magistrate Judge" ("Report and Recommendation") [ECF No. 80], entered February 12, 2018 by United States Magistrate Judge Robert F. Castaneda; "Objections to the Report & Recommendation of the Magistrate Judge" ("Defendant's Objections") [ECF No. 86], filed February 26, 2018 by El Paso County ("Defendant"); "Plaintiff's Objections to Magistrate Judge's Report and Recommendation Regarding Defendant El Paso County's Motion for Summary Judgment" ("Plaintiff's Objections") [ECF No. 89], filed March 11, 2018 by April Cadena ("Plaintiff'); "El Paso County's Response to Plaintiff's [*2]  Objections to the Magistrate Judge's Report & Recommendation" ("Defendant's Response") [ECF No. 92], filed March 26, 2018 by Defendant; and "Plaintiff's Response to El Paso County's Objections to Magistrate Judge's Report and Recommendation Regarding its Motion for Summary Judgment" ("Plaintiff's Response") [ECF No. 94], filed April 2, 2018 by Plaintiff.
In the Report and Recommendation, the court considered "Defendant El Paso County's Motion for Summary Judgment" ("Motion") [ECF No. 62], filed October 13, 2017 by Defendant; "Plaintiff's Response to Defendant El Paso County's Motion for Summary Judgment" ("Response") [ECF No. 67], filed November 13, 2017 by Plaintiff; and "Defendant El Paso County's Reply in Support of its Motion for Summary Judgment" ("Reply") [ECF No. 70], filed November 27, 2017 by Defendant. Where the parties file timely objections to a Report and Recommendation, the court must conduct a de novo review.1 The court will thus examine the entire record and make an independent assessment of the law. Based on the Motion, Response, Reply, and the applicable law, and after considering the Report and Recommendation and the parties' objections, the Report and Recommendation [*3]  is ADOPTED IN PART AND REJECTED IN PART.

I. BACKGROUND

A. Factual Background
Corizon was contracted to provide medical services to inmates at El Paso County Detention Facility ("EPCDF"), and Dr. Salazar served as Corizon's medical director and as a physician at EPCDF.2 On June 18, 2014, five days prior to her arrest and incarceration at EPDCF, Plaintiff broke her leg.3 She was treated by physicians at Providence Memorial Hospital ("Providence"), who diagnosed her with a tibiofibular fracture and issues related to substance abuse.4 Dr. Thomas Alost, MD performed an intramedullary rodding surgery to repair the fracture.5 During the surgery, physicians inserted one "proximal screw" and one "distal screw" into Plaintiff's leg.6 She was discharged from Providence on June 22, 2014 with instructions that she refrain from putting weight on her right leg, and that she "[u]se crutches as directed."7 The next day she was arrested on outstanding warrants for failure to appear.8 She was incarcerated as a pre-trial detainee at El Paso County Detention Facility ("EPCDF") from June 23 through July 18 of 2014.9
As part of her entry into detention, personnel working for defendant Corizon Health, Inc. ("Corizon") [*4]  conducted a health screening of Plaintiff.10 During this process, Nurse Stephanie Portillo, LVN ("Nurse Portillo") noted that, although she arrived in a wheelchair, she was able to stand independently.11 That same day, Dr. Salazar ordered the following: (1) that Norco be given two times a day for two weeks, (2) that medical staff follow up with an orthopedic physician in two weeks, (3) that Plaintiff be given crutches, (4) that she be assigned to a lower bunk, and (5) that she be given wound care on her right leg.12 Plaintiff was assigned to a lower bunk, and she was placed in a single-occupancy cell due to her vulnerable condition.13
There is a dispute of fact as to whether and precisely when Plaintiff's wheelchair was removed once she arrived at her cell. Defendant cites evidence showing that she was examined on June 25, 2014 at 10:37 a.m. by Physician Assistant Keith Barnes, who entered orders including that she "may keep" her wheelchair.14 Plaintiff contends that on June 24, 2014, a detention officer provided crutches and took her wheelchair away.15 Defendant counters that there is no evidence that the wheelchair was ever taken away.16
On July 25, 2014, Plaintiff suffered a fall in her [*5]  cell.17 According to Defendant, Plaintiff fell in her cell at approximately 7:00 P.M. 25 that evening.18 She received prompt assistance from Nurse Fuentes, and was transported to University Medical Center ("UMC") for evaluation; following her arrival, UMC Physician "Dr. White" concluded that she had suffered no urgent or emergent condition.19 Plaintiff counters that she fell in her cell at approximately 4:30 PM, and that she fell because she was forced to carry her own food tray back to her cell with only the assistance of crutches.20
Nurse Fuentes documented the following medical issues: Plaintiff had fallen and reported "a pain level of 10+, a deformity distal from the knee"; she was unable to move her toes with only partial movement of her big toe; she was unable to feel tactile stimulus to the outside aspect of her foot; and urgent intervention was required.21 Officer Gloria Gallardo took Plaintiff to UMC.22 Nurse Fuentes contacted Dr. Salazar, who gave him permission to transfer Plaintiff to UMC's emergency room for further evaluation.23 The UMC discharge documents reflect that Plaintiff suffered a tibia fracture, malaligned tibia fracture with IM nail, and a proximal fibula fracture.24 On June [*6]  25, 2014 Dr. Salazar reviewed Plaintiff's discharge documents, and issued an order reading "No meds ordered at this time" and "[follow up] with surgeon today."25 He testified that his instructions were to be read as saying that no new medications should be administered, as a previous medication order was still in effect.26
On June 26, 2014 Corizon staff member Marissa Viera scheduled Plaintiff for the earliest appointment available at Texas Tech Orthopedic Clinic, which was July 14, 2014.27 On June 27, 2014, Defendant's medical staff recommended that Plaintiff be transferred to "10-Ward," which is a housing unit located on the 10th floor of EPCDF, near the jail's medical facility.28 Nurses working for Corizon provided wound care to Plaintiff on June 27, 28 and 29, and on July 1, 4, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 15 of 2014.29 Corizon's records reflect that Plaintiff refused medical care on July 8, 14, 16, 17 and 18 of 2014, and that she similarly refused medication on several occasions.30
On July 14, 2014, Plaintiff was taken to the Texas Tech Orthopedics Clinic, where Dr. Abdelgawad recommended urgent revision surgery.31 The surgery was scheduled for July 18, 2014.32 This surgery date was moved so that Plaintiff [*7]  could attend a court hearing, at which she pleaded guilty to several charges.33 On July 22, 2014, Plaintiff received surgery to correct the "mechanical complication of [her] internal orthopedic device."34 The surgery was a success, and Plaintiff was released from UMC on July 28, 2014.35 She left in a wheelchair, and was instructed that her right leg could be weight-bearing as tolerated within 24 to 48 hours.36
Plaintiff claims that the fall caused nerve damage in her leg, precluding her from engaging in activities that she had been able to do before the fall.37 These included swimming, walking quickly, wearing high heels, and riding a bicycle.38 Plaintiff further argues that after her fall she was unable to move, and that she could not attend educational and religious programs, shower, enjoy indoor or outdoor recreation, converse with other prisoners, or see visitors.39

B. Procedural Background
On June 21, 2016, Plaintiff filed her claim pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983 ("§ 1983") against Defendants, alleging violations of her First, Eighth, and Fourteenth Amendment rights under the Constitution of the United States.40 On February 12, 2018, Magistrate Judge Robert F. Castaneda entered his Report and Recommendation,41 recommending that Defendant's Motion [*8]  be granted in part and denied in part.42 Judge Castaneda recommended that the court award Defendant summary judgment on all claims except for Plaintiff's ADA claim for failure to accommodate.43 On February 26, 2018, Defendant objected to the Report and Recommendation,44 and Plaintiff responded to this objection on April 2, 2018.45 On March 11, 2018, Plaintiff objected to the Report and Recommendation,46 and Defendant responded to Plaintiff's Objection on March 26, 2018.47

C. Parties' Arguments
In its Motion, Defendant argues that, as Plaintiff's injury occurred outside of Defendant's facility and prior to her arrest, and further as her need for the second surgery arose from surgical error and not from an injury sustained in the facility, Plaintiff is therefore unable to recover from Defendant.48 Defendant argues that it provided Plaintiff with adequate medical care throughout her stay, that she was never intentionally denied a wheelchair due to disability discrimination, and that she did not suffer any compensable injury during her time in Defendant's custody.49 Defendant adds that Plaintiff has failed to show that she was ever denied a wheelchair, and that, even if she in fact had been, it did not [*9]  amount to discrimination because a wheelchair was not a medical necessity.50 Defendant contends that it has no legal obligation to provide treatment that comports with Plaintiff's preferences,51 and that there is no evidence that Defendant intentionally discriminated against her on the basis of her disability.52 According to Defendant, the evidence does not support the elements of any discrimination claim, as her alleged treatment does not rise to the level of intentional discrimination.53
Defendant also argues that the facts do not support § 1983 liability, as she cannot point to any official policy or custom that was the moving force behind any constitutional violation.54 As Plaintiff has failed to prove the existence of a custom or policy that violated her rights, Defendant insists that it is therefore entitled to summary judgment on these claims.55 Defendant argues that this applies to Plaintiff's First and Fourteenth Amendment claims as wel1.56 Finally, Defendant argues that inasmuch as Plaintiff has not shown that Defendant reacted to her serious medical needs with deliberate indifference, her claims under the Fourteenth Amendment must fail.57
Plaintiff argues that Defendant is incorrect when it asserts that her injuries arose prior to her [*10]  incarceration, arguing that the "eggshell plaintiff doctrine"58 applies, and that her injury was the result of Defendant's failure to take proper care in the way that it treated her.59 She strongly disputes the notion that a wheelchair was not medically necessary, contending that Defendant fails to proffer sufficient evidence to support this conclusion.60 She further argues that the Fifth Circuit rejected the deliberate indifference standard for ADA claims and instead infers intentional discrimination from the evidence in each case.61 She contends that discriminatory intent cannot be the failure to meet its affirmative obligation to make reasonable accommodations for her is sufficient to infer discriminatory intent,62 and that she can therefore establish her claims under the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act.63 She adds that Defendant's failure to provide a wheelchair,64 to properly screen Plaintiff's injuries, to enact proper food service policies, and to provide adequate follow up medical care amounted to intentional discrimination.65
Plaintiff argues that the policies and customs of Corizon and Dr. Salazar are attributable to Defendant, as they provided medical care, which constitutes a non-delegable [*11]  duty.66 Plaintiff adds that Defendant had policies or customs that served no reasonable legitimate governmental interest and constituted moving forces behind the constitutional violations she suffered.67
In its Reply, Defendant argues that the wheelchair was not a medical necessity, and therefore the question of whether it was taken away is immaterial.68 As Plaintiff's need for a second surgery did not arise from her fall within the jail, Defendant reasons, her claim fails as a matter of law.69 Defendant further asserts that Plaintiff may not rely on several exhibits submitted in dispute of the Motion, as they would not be admissible at trial.70 Defendant further disputes Plaintiff's assertion that its use of medical experts was insufficient to show that a wheelchair did not constitute a medical necessity.71 Defendant adds that Plaintiff may not assert an ADA discrimination claim on a theory of vicarious liability for Corizon's actions, as she failed to do so in her Original Complaint, and allowing it now would result in unfair prejudice.72 Defendant concludes by reiterating its argument that Plaintiff has failed to identify a policy that served as the moving force behind any alleged constitutional [*12]  violation.73

II. APPLICABLE LAW

A. Summary Judgment
Summary judgment should be granted only where "the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law."74 A genuine issue of material fact exists where "there is evidence sufficient for a rational trier of fact to find for the non-moving party."75 The substantive law defines whether disputed facts are material.76 The party moving for summary judgment bears an initial burden of identifying those portions of the pleadings and any discovery on record, including any affidavits, which it believes demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact.77 In considering only admissible evidence in the pretrial record,78 the court will "view all facts in the light most favorable to the non-moving party,"79 and draw all factual inferences in the nonmovant's favor.80 If the moving party cannot demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact, summary judgment is inappropriate.81
If the movant does meet this burden, however, the nonmovant must "go beyond the pleadings and by her own affidavits, or by the depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, [*13]  designate specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial."82 Accordingly, the "burden is not satisfied with some metaphysical doubt as to the material facts, by conclusory allegations, by unsubstantiated assertions, or by only a scintilla of evidence."83 "[T]he nonmovant may not rely on mere allegations in the pleadings; rather, the nonmovant must respond to the motion for summary judgment by setting forth particular facts indicating that there is a genuine issue for trial."84 The court does not, "in the absence of any proof, assume that the nonmoving party could or would prove the necessary facts."85 If the nonmovant fails to satisfy this requirement, then summary judgment is appropriate.86 Summary judgment is appropriate "if no reasonable juror could find for the nonmovant."87
Materiality is defined by the substantive law underlying an issue.88 "Only disputes over facts that might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law will properly preclude the entry of summary judgment."89 Disputes over facts that are irrelevant or unnecessary will not suffice to preclude summary judgment.90

B. 42 U.S.C. § 1983
1. The Statutory Text
Title 42 U.S.C. § 1983 ("Section 1983") provides in relevant part:
"Every person who, under [*14]  color of any statute, ordinance, regulation, custom, or usage, of any State ... subjects, or causes to be subjected, any citizen of the United States or other person within the jurisdiction thereof to the deprivation of any rights, privileges, or immunities secured by the Constitution and laws, shall be liable to the party injured in an action at law, suit in equity, or other proper proceeding for redress. . ."91
In order to state a claim under this statute, a plaintiff must assert that her constitutional or other federal rights were violated.92 She must show that a person acting under color of state law engaged in conduct that deprived her of one or more of these rights.93 A municipality or other local government may be held liable under Section 1983 where the governmental body itself "subjects" a person to a deprivation of rights or "causes" a person "to be subjected" to such deprivation.94
2. Municipalities
The purpose of Section 1983 is to "deter state actors from using the badge of their authority to deprive individuals of their federally guaranteed rights and to provide relief to victims if such deterrence fails."95 In order to be held liable, the municipality must have taken the action that caused the deprivation, [*15]  and municipalities are not vicariously liable for the actions of their employees.96 Rather, the plaintiff may only impose liability on a municipality where the employee or representative took an "action pursuant to official municipal policy, and that this action caused her injury."97 "Official municipal policy includes the decisions of a government's lawmakers, the acts of its policymaking officials, and practices so persistent and widespread as to practically have the force of law."98 A private corporation that performs a fundamental government function, including the administration of medical care to prison inmates, may be treated as a municipality and sued under Section 1983.99
A private corporation may be found liable under Section 1983 only where four elements are present: (1) there is a policymaker that could be held responsible, through actual or constructive knowledge, for enforcing a policy or custom that caused the claimed injury;100 (2) the corporation has an official custom or policy that could subject it to Section 1983 liability;101 (3) the corporate action was taken with the requisite degree of culpability; and (4) there was a direct causal link between the action and the deprivation of federal rights. [*16] 102 A claimant may demonstrate culpability either by pointing to an unconstitutional official policy or by highlighting a facially innocuous policy that was adopted with deliberate indifference to a known or obvious risk that a constitutional violation would result.103
"Deliberate indifference is a stringent standard of fault, requiring proof that a municipal actor disregarded a known or obvious consequence of his action."104 The plaintiff must show that the officials "refused to treat [her], ignored [her] complaints, intentionally treated [her] incorrectly, or engaged in any similar conduct that would clearly evince a wanton disregard for any serious medical needs."105

C. The First Amendment to the United States Constitution
"A prison inmate is entitled to [her] First Amendment right to freedom of expression as long as it is not inconsistent with [her] status as a prisoner and does not adversely affect a legitimate state interest."106 As a consequence, First Amendment rights may be limited in the name of legitimate penological interests, "including deterrence of crime, rehabilitation of prisoners, and institutional security."107

III. DISCUSSION

A. Plaintiff's First Amendment Claims Pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983
According to Plaintiff, Defendant violated her rights under the [*17]  First Amendment when it refused to mail a complaint letter she had written to the Inspector Genera1.108 She alleges that, on or about September 23, 2014, she provided Defendant's personnel with the stamped envelope containing her letter of complaint, and that Defendant refused to mail it.109 The Fifth Circuit has recognized that a "prison official's interference with a prisoner's legal mail . . . may violate the prisoner's First Amendment right to free speech-i.e., the right to be free from unjustified governmental interference with communication."110 These actions, she contends, constituted violations of the "Free Speech and Right to Petition Clauses of the First Amendment" and the Fourteenth Amendment as the mail "would have been forwarded" to Defendant.111 Plaintiff adds that Defendant violated her First Amendment rights when it failed to provide her with a handbook regarding a prison grievance procedure.112
"To establish a claim under § 1983, 'a plaintiff must (1) allege a violation of a right secured by the Constitution or laws of the United States and (2) demonstrate that the alleged deprivation was committed by a person acting under color of state law."113 These claims may be brought against "persons in their individual capacity, or against a governmental entity."114 As Defendant is a government entity, it may be held liable under [*18]  § 1983 if Plaintiff demonstrates that the "execution of a government's policy or custom" inflicted a constitutional injury.115 Accordingly, it is incumbent upon Plaintiff to establish the existence of an official policy, promulgated by a municipal policy-maker, that was the moving force behind the violation of her constitutional rights.116
In the context of the First Amendment, "a prisoner retains only those rights 'that are not inconsistent with [her] status as a prisoner or with the legitimate penological objectives of the corrections system.'"117 Generally, the court considers security, order, and rehabilitation as legitimate penological objectives. 118 Although it is true that a prison official's interference with a prisoner's legal mail may violate the prisoner's constitutional right of access to the courts,119 in order to state a claim based on delay or interference with her mail, the plaintiff must show actual injury.120 Where the plaintiff is unable to show that the delay in mail unfairly prejudiced her claims, she cannot state a First Amendment claim under § 1983.121
Plaintiff's grievance letter to the Inspector General constitutes legal mail, as it amounts to her attempt to [*19]  exercise her rights under the law. The failure to mail the letter, however, did not prejudice her claim. She was able to file her case in this court, and has failed to show how the refusal to mail the grievance letter in any way diminished her ability to seek relief. As she has failed to demonstrate actual injury, she may not pursue her claim that the failure to mail the grievance letter violated her rights under the First Amendment. Accordingly, the court adopts the conclusion of the Magistrate Judge as to this part of Plaintiff's First Amendment claim.
Plaintiff also alleges that Defendant's refusal to provide her with a grievance handbook constituted a violation of her First Amendment.122 "[T]he right of access to the courts is an aspect of the First Amendment right to petition the Government for redress of grievances."123 Under the Constitution, inmates must have a "reasonably adequate opportunity to present claimed violations of fundamental constitutional rights to the courts."124 The Fifth Circuit has held that the court may not deem grievance procedures unavailable to a litigant where she had a "fair, reasonable opportunity to apprise [herself] of the procedures."125 Although Plaintiff may not have been given a grievance handbook, it is undisputed [*20]  that she had access to a law library, which contained the relevant information regarding grievance procedures.126 She has thus failed to establish that she suffered a cognizable harm because she was deprived of a grievance handbook, and accordingly she cannot assert a First Amendment claim under § 1983.127 She has moreover failed to establish which, if any, of Defendant's policies constituted the moving force behind this alleged violation.128
Plaintiff has failed to state a cognizable § 1983 claim for violation of her First Amendment rights under the United States Constitution. Defendant's failure to mail Plaintiff's letter and to provide her with a grievance handbook are insufficient. As Plaintiff has failed to object to the Magistrate Judge's conclusion, the court adopts the conclusion of the Magistrate Judge and finds that Defendant is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's First Amendment claims.

B. Plaintiff's Claims Under the ADA
The ADA provides that "no qualified individual with a disability shall, by reason of such disability, be excluded from participation in or be denied the benefits of the services, programs, or activities of a public entity, or be subjected to discrimination by any such entity."129 The ADA parallels the language of [*21]  Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, and indeed it stipulates that it will provide the same "remedies, procedures and rights"130 as Section 504 of that statute.131 In order to make a prima facie claim under the ADA, a plaintiff must establish "(1) that [she] is a qualified individual within the meaning of the ADA; (2) that [she] is being excluded from participation in, or being denied benefits of, services, programs, or activities for which the public entity is responsible, or is otherwise being discriminated against by the public entity; and (3) that such exclusion, denial of benefits, or discrimination is by reason of [her] disability."132 Plaintiff alleges that the refusal to provide her with a wheelchair, to alter the food service, or to provide adequate medical care constitutes a violation of her rights under the ADA.133
It is undisputed that Plaintiff was disabled under the meaning of the statute, satisfying the first element of the prima facie claim. The facts are unequivocal that her injuries left her with a "physical . . . impairment that substantially limits one or more of [her] major life activities."134 The second and third elements, however, require a more intensive analysis.
According to Plaintiff, Defendant [*22]  failed to provide adequate medical care, improperly removed Plaintiff's wheelchair, and wrongfully delayed and interfered with her medical treatments.135 Plaintiff attempts to satisfy the second and third elements of her ADA claim by arguing that Defendants failed to accommodate her disability.136 Title I of the ADA defines "discriminat[ion] . . . on the basis of disability" as including the failure to make "reasonable accommodations" for the disabled employee's "known physical or mental limitations."137 Although Title II does not contain "similarly explicit" language, the Fifth Circuit has recognized that a public entity's failure to reasonably accommodate the known limitations of a disabled individual can constitute disability discrimination under Title II as well.138
Where a public entity fails to make reasonable accommodation, the court does not examine the cause of the failure, but rather only whether the requested accommodation was "reasonable," or would "fundamentally alter the nature of the service, program, or activity."139 The Fifth Circuit has held that, where a plaintiff asserts that the public entity failed to accommodate her disability, the question the court must examine is not "whether [*23]  the denial of the accommodation to that disability was caused solely or only in part by the animus of the defendants," but rather "whether the failure to accommodate the disability violates the ADA."140 In order to answer this question, the court must determine whether the requested accommodation was reasonable.141 An accommodation is considered reasonable if it provided the claimant with "meaningful access" to take advantage of the benefit.142
1. Plaintiff's Intake
Plaintiff alleges that Nurse Portillo was not qualified to make assessments of injured prisoners, and that in conducting plaintiff's intake she made an improper assessment of her medical condition.143 She contends that LVN's were "not supposed to make assessments, including assessments of the mobility of prisoners."144 There is no reason to conclude that Nurse Portillo's initial assessment deprived Plaintiff of the benefit of her rights under the ADA. Nurse Portillo evaluated Plaintiff's ability to stand, and contacted Dr. Salazar regarding her analysis of Plaintiff's condition.145 Plaintiff fails to indicate how Nurse Portillo's evaluation constituted a denial of rights under the ADA. Accordingly, her ADA claim must be dismissed as it [*24]  applies to Nurse Portillo's initial evaluation.
2. The Wheelchair
Plaintiff contends that Defendant's refusal to provide her with a wheelchair amounted to disability discrimination under the ADA.146 There is no genuine dispute that Dr. Salazar ordered that Plaintiff be given crutches instead of a wheelchair after conferring with Nurse Portillo regarding her condition.147 Given the medical staff's independent evaluation, the court finds that the provision of crutches was a reasonable accommodation, and accordingly Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim fails as a matter of law. As Plaintiff has failed to provide evidence indicating that this decision was enacted on the basis of a discriminatory intent, rather than independent medical judgment, summary judgment is proper.
3. Food Delivery Policy
Plaintiff insists that Defendant's food delivery policy amounted to a failure to accommodate her condition, and in fact caused her injuries.148 She testifies that she was required to use her crutches to walk to the cellblock door to retrieve her food, and then to return to her cell carrying both her food and her crutches.149 As a result of this arrangement, she contends, she slipped and fell on her right [*25]  leg, suffering severe injury.150 Defendant provides a starkly different account, asserting that food was hand delivered to Plaintiff in her cell, and that Officer Lopez assisted in feeding her.151 At first blush, this appears to be a dispute of material fact that would preclude summary judgment on Defendant's ADA claim regarding the food delivery policy. Self-serving testimony, however, is insufficient to defeat summary judgment.
"[S]elf-serving allegations are not the type of significant probative evidence required to defeat summary judgment."152 Indeed, a non-moving party may not rely on "a conclusory and self-serving affidavit" to avoid summary judgment.153 Instead, they must bring forth "evidence sufficient for a rational trier of fact" to find in their favor.154 As Plaintiff relies solely on her own testimony to support her account of food delivery, the court lacks an adequate basis for concluding that she has raised a genuine issue of material fact that precludes summary judgment. Even if the court were to take Plaintiff's self-serving account as true, it lacks any indication that it was motivated by discriminatory animus.155 Accordingly, Defendant is entitled to summary judgment on this claim, [*26]  and the court will thus depart from the Magistrate Judge's conclusion.156
Plaintiff further alleges that Defendant's failure to accommodate represents intentional disability discrimination.157 "A claim which is not raised in the complaint but, rather, is raised only in response to a motion for summary judgment is not properly before the court."158 As Plaintiff for the first time raises intentional discrimination in her Response, it is not properly before the court. However, even were this claim properly before the court, Plaintiff has failed to demonstrate intent. There is no evidence of ill will, malice or prejudice towards Plaintiff. Nor is there evidence that Defendant had knowledge that a federally protected right was substantially likely to be violated, and then failed to prevent said violation. Accordingly, Defendant is also entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's ADA claim for intentional discrimination.
Plaintiff has failed to state an ADA claim that can survive summary judgment. She has neglected to proffer evidence sufficient to raise a material question of fact, and has otherwise failed to show that her treatment amounted to deliberate indifference or intentional discrimination [*27]  based on her disability. Accordingly, Defendant is entitled to summary judgment on all of Plaintiff's ADA claims.

C. Plaintiff's Eighth and Fourteenth Amendment Claims Pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983
Plaintiff asserts that the treatment she received violated the Eighth Amendment's ban on cruel and unusual punishment."159 As "[p]rison walls do not form a barrier separating prison inmates from the protections of the Constitution . . . federal courts must take cognizance of the valid constitutional claims of prison inmates."160 The Eighth Amendment, "which applies to the States through the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, prohibits the infliction of 'cruel and unusual punishments' on those convicted of crimes."161
The Supreme Court has interpreted the Eighth Amendment as establishing "the government's obligation to provide medical care to those whom it is punishing by incarceration."162 In order to state a cognizable Eighth Amendment claim in the medical context, "a prisoner must allege acts or omissions sufficiently harmful to evidence deliberate indifference to serious medical needs."163 "It is only such indifference that can offend 'evolving standards of decency' in violation of the Eighth Amendment."164 Pretrial detainees are similarly protected through the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment."165
"Constitutional challenges by pretrial detainees may be brought under two alternative theories: [*28]  as an attack on a 'condition of confinement' or as an 'episodic act or omission.'"166 A challenge to a condition of confinement "is a challenge to 'general conditions, practices, rules, or restrictions of pretrial confinement.'"167 Put another way, a plaintiff brings a condition of confinement claim where they can highlight either an official or a de facto policy that violates his or her rights under the Eighth Amendment.168 In order to succeed on a condition of confinement claim, the plaintiff must establish that the rule or policy that violated her constitutional rights was not reasonably related to a legitimate goal, constituting "arbitrary or purposeless" regulation.169
"An episodic-acts-or-omissions claim, by contrast, faults specific jail officials for their acts or omissions."170 In other words, where "the complained-of harm is a particular act or omission of one or more officials, the action is characterized properly as an 'episodic act or omission' case."171 This occurs where "an actor 'is interposed between the detainee and the municipality, such that the detainee complains first of a particular act of, or omission by, the actor and then points derivatively to a policy, custom, or rule (or lack thereof) of [*29]  the municipality that permitted or caused the act or omission.'"172 As Plaintiff has failed to highlight an official or de facto policy that precipitated her injuries, and further because Corizon and individual medical professionals were "interposed" between Defendant and Plaintiff, it is clear that she is making an episodic act or omission claim.173 Indeed, as she is challenging Defendant's "failure to provide medical care," it follows that she is not challenging "a condition, practice, rule, or restriction."174
In order to succeed in a § 1983 action based on "episodic acts or omissions" in violation of the claimant's rights under the Fourteenth Amendment, a pretrial detainee must establish that defendants were subjectively deliberately indifferent to her rights.175 The plaintiff must "show that the official knew of and disregarded a substantial risk of serious harm."176 In engaging in this analysis, the court is mindful that merely "inept, erroneous, ineffective, or negligent" decisions by officials are not sufficient to qualify as deliberate indifference.177 In order to constitute deliberate indifference, the "official conduct must be 'wanton,' which is defined to mean 'reckless.'"178 Indeed, the prisoner must show that: [*30]  "(1) the official was aware of facts from which an inference of substantial risk of serious harm could be drawn; (2) the official actually drew that inference; and (3) the official's response indicates the official subjectively intended that harm to occur."179 Importantly, the Fifth Circuit has been clear that a plaintiff must establish that the defendant actually knew of the risk, not merely that it "should have known" of it.180
1. Plaintiff's Intake
Nurse Portillo conducted Plaintiff's medical intake and concluded that, although she arrived in a wheelchair, she was able to stand independently and did not need one.181 Plaintiff contends that LVN Portillo was not qualified to conduct medical intake, and that allowing her to do so constituted deliberate indifference to Plaintiff's medical condition.182 She relies on Dr. Salazar's testimony that LVN's are not qualified to perform assessments. Even if the court were to find that allowing Nurse Portillo to conduct intake amounted to "negligence" or even "medical malpractice," it would be insufficient to establish deliberate indifference.183 There must be evidence that Defendant knew of the risk of serious harm and an action indicating subjective intent [*31]  for the harm to occur, neither of which are present in allowing Nurse Portillo to conduct intake. As Plaintiff has failed to proffer such evidence, the court finds no deliberate indifference.
2. The Wheelchair
Dr. Salazar instructed that the wheelchair be removed and that Plaintiff be provided with crutches instead.184 Plaintiff's discharge instructions from Providence explained that she should "use crutches as directed."185 The instructions further state: "Discharge Activity: Progressive Ambulation, Up with assistive device."186 These instructions were in Dr. Salazar's possession when he prescribed the use of crutches instead of a wheelchair.187 Plaintiff contends that on June 24, 2014, a detention officer provided crutches and took her wheelchair away.188
The court does not doubt that Plaintiff views the crutches as grossly inadequate. Even if the court were to agree, however, it would not rise to the level of deliberate indifference. "Unsuccessful medical treatment, acts of negligence, or medical malpractice do not constitute deliberate indifference, nor does a prisoner's disagreement with his medical treatment, absent exceptional circumstances."189
Merely disagreeing with the medical professional's [*32]  judgment is insufficient to establish deliberate indifference. Instead, Plaintiff must "submit evidence that prison officials 'refused to treat [her], ignored [her] complaints, intentionally treated [her] incorrectly, or engaged in any similar conduct that would clearly evince a wanton disregard for any serious medical needs.'"190 Plaintiff has failed to present evidence that Dr. Salazar actually knew of a substantial risk of harm in prescribing crutches, or that he took action intending the harm to occur.191 Dr. Salazar's decision to provide crutches instead of a wheelchair is clearly a medical judgment, one that does not rise to the level of deliberate indifference. Accordingly, Plaintiff has failed to demonstrate that his decision amounted to a violation of her constitutional rights.
3. Pain Management
The same analysis applies to Plaintiff's claim that, in refusing to provide her with additional pain management medication, Dr. Salazar was deliberately indifferent to Plaintiff's medical condition. She insists that Dr. Salazar acted with deliberate indifference when he delayed or denied her additional pain medication following her fall on June 25, 2014.192 According to Dr. Salazar, the [*33]  order he gave when Plaintiff returned from UMC was that no new medicine would be administered, and it did not revoke the previously issued order for Norco.193 Even taking Plaintiff's account as true, however, there is not sufficient evidence to establish deliberate indifference with regard to Salazar's decision. Plaintiff has not proffered evidence indicating that Dr. Salazar actually knew of a substantial risk of harm in changing her medicine, or that he took action intending the harm to occur.194 Accordingly, Dr. Salazar's conduct in regards to treating Plaintiff's pain does not rise to the level of deliberate indifference.
4. Delayed Treatment
Plaintiff contends that Defendant acted with deliberate indifference when it failed to provide her with prompt and competent medical care.195 She asserts that Dr. Salazar was aware of her need for prompt surgery, and that he delayed scheduling her follow-up appointment and surgery, knowing that doing so posed a substantial risk of serious harm.196 Plaintiff fell in her jail cell on June 25, 2014 and was taken to the emergency room at UMC that same day.197 On July 7, 2014, she was taken to Texas Tech Orthopedics Clinic for evaluation by Dr. Abdelgawad.198 A revision [*34]  surgery was scheduled for July 18, 2014.199 On July 17, 2014, Dr. Salazar postponed Plaintiff's surgery to July 22, 2014 due to the fact that the original date conflicted with a court hearing that Plaintiff was required to attend.200
It is clear that, in delaying the surgery, Dr. Salazar was exercising his medical judgment regarding the urgency of the procedure. Merely disagreeing with his medical judgment is insufficient to establish deliberate indifference. Plaintiff must show that Dr. Salazar "refused to treat [her], ignored [her] complaints, intentionally treated [her] incorrectly, or engaged in any similar conduct that would clearly evince a wanton disregard for any serious medical needs."201 Delaying the surgery does not rise to this level. Accordingly, the purported delay of treatment is insufficient to establish deliberate indifference.
5. Food Delivery Policy
Plaintiff alleges that Defendant failed to recognize that she was unable to ambulate with crutches, and its deliberate indifference led to her falling and suffering severe injuries.202 She has submitted evidence that on June 25, 2014, she was medically allowed to keep a wheelchair, but it was taken away before she fell.203 Plaintiff [*35]  asserts her fall resulted from carrying her own food tray back to her cell with the assistance of crutches, rather than a wheelchair.204 Regardless of whether this occurrence played a role in her fall, she has failed to establish that Dr. Salazar or any other employees of Defendant took any actions with knowledge that it posed a substantial risk of harm. While they may have exhibited negligence in allowing for this arrangement, negligence does not rise to the level of deliberate indifference; Plaintiff must present evidence that Defendant or Dr. Salazar actually knew of a substantial risk of harm, or otherwise took action intending the harm to occur.205 Her failure to do so dooms her claim that the food delivery policy, if any, amounted to a violation of her constitutional rights.
6. Failure to Train
Plaintiff contends that Defendant failed to properly train its employees regarding the needs of mobility-disabled prisoners, and to keep accurate records of special needs considerations for each prisoner at EPCDF.206 Defendant insists that there is no connection between its policies and the alleged violation of Plaintiff's rights.207 In order for Plaintiff to succeed in holding Defendant liable, [*36]  she must show that its training policy or procedure was inadequate, that the inadequate policy was a "moving force" behind the violation of her rights, and that Defendant was deliberately indifferent in adopting its training policy.208 Plaintiff has failed to offer evidence regarding which training was inadequate, or to demonstrate how the policy was the "moving force" behind the violations. Indeed, there is no evidence from which the court may conclude that these alleged violations were anything more than isolated incidents. Accordingly, it is impossible to find Defendant was deliberately indifferent in its training of staff.
In sum, Plaintiff has failed to establish deliberate indifference and, consequently, the court need not engage in an analysis of whether these actions can be attributed to Defendant. Although Plaintiff has every right to question the treatment she received, the court is limited in its analysis to whether, in viewing all facts in the light most favorable to her, she has established deliberate indifference. Disagreement with the policies under which she lived or with the treatment she received is insufficient to satisfy this obligation. Accordingly, summary judgment [*37]  must be granted in favor of Defendant on all of her § 1983 claims.

D. Summary Judgment Evidence
Attached to Plaintiffs Response are the "Declaration of April Cadena No. 2" ("Plaintiff's Second Declaration")209 and the "Declaration of Alberto Puebla" ("Puebla Declaration").210 Defendant objects to Plaintiffs Second Declaration on the grounds that it would not be admissible at trial,211 as it discusses her current incarceration, and is therefore irrelevant. Defendant further objects to the Puebla Declaration on the grounds that Alberto Puebla's knowledge of lockdown procedure in October of 2017 is irrelevant, and further because comments he reported hearing from a fellow inmate, "Chavez," are inadmissible hearsay.212
Pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56, parties may object to summary judgment evidence on the grounds that it cannot be presented in an admissible form.213 The burden falls to the party seeking to proffer the evidence to "show that the material is admissible as presented or to explain the admissible form that is anticipated."214 The Federal Rules of Evidence define hearsay as "a statement, other than one made by the declarant while testifying at the trial or hearing, offered in evidence to prove the truth of the matter [*38]  asserted."215 The court may not consider hearsay evidence unless it falls under one of the exceptions as laid out in Federal Rule of Evidence 803. The court is further limited to accepting only relevant evidence; evidence is relevant if "(a) it has any tendency to make a fact more or less probable than it would be without the evidence; and (b) the fact is of consequence in determining the action."216
Puebla's knowledge regarding the procedure is relevant because it tends to show that the procedures Defendant undertakes are substantially the same. Accordingly, it is relevant because it tends to make the fact of these procedures more probable. Chavez's statements to Puebla, however, constitute hearsay, and none of the exceptions laid out in Federal Rule of Evidence 803 are applicable. Accordingly, Defendant's objections are sustained insofar as they apply to Puebla's recounting of Chavez's statements. Defendant's objections regarding the relevance of Puebla's testimony, however, are overruled.
Plaintiff's current incarceration is not relevant to her claim. It does not make any fact asserted in her Complaint more or less probable, nor does it tend to determine her claim against Defendant. Accordingly, her testimony regarding her current incarceration [*39]  does not meet the standard of relevance under Federal Rule of Evidence 401. The court thus sustains Defendant's objections to Plaintiff's Second Declaration.

E. Punitive Damages
In her Complaint, Plaintiff demands economic damages, noneconomic damages, attorney's fees, costs, and punitive damages.217 Although this issue is mooted by the court's finding in favor of Defendant, it is worth noting that punitive damages are not recoverable in suits seeking relief under the ADA or the Rehabilitation Act,218 nor are they available under § 1983.219 Accordingly, Plaintiff would not be entitled to punitive damages regardless of whether the court granted the Motion.

F. Plaintiff's Objections to the Report and Recommendation
Plaintiff raises numerous objections to the Report and Recommendation.220 She contends that the Magistrate Judge committed numerous errors, and her objections fit into several broad categories. According to Plaintiff, the Magistrate Judge failed to consider the correct facts, or to consider them in the light most favorable to Plaintiff; failed to make the proper inferences from the evidence, including the intent of Defendant and its employees; failed to failed to recognize the harm she suffered; and finally failed to conduct [*40]  the proper legal analysis with regard to Plaintiff's claims and Defendant's defenses.221 As a result of the fact that the court engaged in a de novo review of the facts and the law, the court hereby OVERRULES Plaintiff's objections in their entirety.

G. Defendant's Objections to the Report and Recommendation
Defendant raises several objections to the Report and Recommendation. First, Defendant argues, the Magistrate Judge erred in finding a genuine dispute of material fact regarding whether or not it provided reasonable accommodations or modifications in its food delivery policy; Defendant insists that the Magistrate Judge was therefore wrong to find that this question precluded summary judgment on Plaintiff's ADA claim.222 As is clear from its de novo analysis of this issue, the court agrees with Defendant. Accordingly this objection is SUSTAINED.
Second, Defendant argues that the Magistrate Judge improperly neglected to analyze causation under the ADA.223 This objection is OVERRULED.
Third, Defendant insists that the Magistrate Judge erred in overruling its objections to Plaintiff's summary judgment evidence.224 This objection is OVERRULED.
Fourth, Defendant asserts that the Report [*41]  and Recommendation improperly found that Officer Gallardo stated that he would take Plaintiff to the hospital of her choice.225 Defendant also objects to the Report and Recommendation's following statement of fact: "Nurse Daphne Jones informed Cadena that the sheriff did not want to pay for surgery and that she would have to make her own financial arrangements; a social worker helped Cadena get discounts from UMC and Texas Tech."226 Finally, Defendant objects to the Report and Recommendation's statement that Plaintiff "repeatedly asked for a wheelchair."227 These objections are OVERRULED.

IV. CONCLUSION
In sum, Plaintiff has failed to raise a genuine dispute as to any material fact, or to otherwise overcome Defendant's argument that it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Accordingly, the court enters the following orders:
1. The "Report and Recommendation of the Magistrate Judge" is ADOPTED IN AND REJECTED IN PART.
2. "Defendant El Paso County's Motion for Summary Judgment" [ECF No. 62] is GRANTED.
3. All pending motions in this cause, if any, are DENIED AS MOOT.
4. The Clerk of the Court is INSTRUCTED to CLOSE this case.
SO ORDERED.
SIGNED this 31st day of July, 2018.
/s/ Frank Montalvo
FRANK [*42]  MONTALVO
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

