Callahan v. Paramount Pictures Corp.
United States District Court for the Central District of California
September 24, 2010, Decided; September 24, 2010, Filed
Case No. SACV08-01407 DMG (RNBx)

Reporter
2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 154472 *; 2010 WL 11595920
MARY CALLAHAN, Plaintiff, v. PARAMOUNT PICTURES CORPORATION, et al., Defendants.
Counsel:  [*1] For Mary Callahan, Plaintiff: Margaret Byrne Ikeda, LEAD ATTORNEY. Patricia Barbosa, LEAD ATTORNEY, Barbosa Group, Huntington Beach, CA USA; Jeff A Harrison, Jordon Metz, Metz and Harrison LLP, El Segundo, CA USA; Thomas J Leanse, Katten Muchin Rosenman LLP, Los Angeles, CA USA.
For Paramount Pictures Corporation, Defendant: Helen Madelleine Cho, LEAD ATTORNEY, Katten Muchin Rosenman, Los Angeles, CA USA; Thomas J Leanse, LEAD ATTORNEY, Katten Muchin Rosenman LLP, Los Angeles, CA USA; Imran Hayat, Akerman Senterfitt LLP, Los Angeles, CA USA.
Judges: DOLLY M. GEE, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: DOLLY M. GEE
Opinion



ORDER RE: DEFENDANT PARAMOUNT PICTURES CORPORATION'S MOTION for PARTIAL SUMMARY JUDGMENT AND PLAINTIFF'S MOTION for SUMMARY JUDGMENT [94,98]
This matter is before the Court on the parties' cross-motions for summary judgment. The Court held a hearing on September 16, 2010. Having duly considered the respective positions of the parties, as presented in their briefs and at oral argument, the Court now renders its decision. For the reasons set forth below, Defendant Paramount Pictures Corporation's ("Defendant") Motion for Partial Summary Judgment is GRANTED in part and DENIED in part and Plaintiff's [*2]  Motion for Summary Judgment is DENIED.

I.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY
On December 11, 2008, Plaintiff filed a complaint in this Court alleging: (a) violations of Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 19952, 19955 .et seq and Cal. Civ. Code §§ 51 and 54 et seq.; and (b) violations of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (the "ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12101 .et seq In particular, Plaintiff alleges that Defendants failed to provide an accessible and safe path of travel, including: (a) parking at the Cemetery that is correctly located, signed and configured for disabled parking; (b) an accessible and safe path of travel from the Cemetery to the entrance of the "Dr. Phil Show," which is inaccessible and dangerous, requiring wheelchair users and walkers to use the street to reach the Studio entrance; (c) an accessible entrance from the public right of way to the entrance to the show's public waiting area; (d) an accessible queue line in the security area, or an alternate policy to check in disabled persons; (e) an accessible path of travel from the waiting area into the studio; (f) accessible seating with companion seating in locations that permit disabled persons to see the stage and be seen as part of the television audience; and (g) barriers in the public restrooms. (Compl. ¶¶ 15, 31.) Plaintiff seeks injunctive [*3]  relief, as well as general, compensatory, and statutory damages, and attorneys' fees and costs.
On March 2, 2010, the Court approved and granted a Consent Decree for Settlement between Plaintiff and Defendant Hollywood Forever Cemetery, Inc., resolving all of Plaintiff's claims against that Defendant. [Doc. # 57.] On March 5, 2010, the Court approved the Settlement Agreement for Injunctive Relief (the "CBS/Peteski Settlement Agreement") between Plaintiff and Defendants Peteski Productions, Inc. ("Peteski") and CBS Studios Inc. ("CBS"). [Doc. # 60.]
On July 9, 2010, Defendant filed a Motion for Partial Summary Judgment and Plaintiff filed a Motion for Summary Judgment. The parties filed their respective Oppositions on July 30, 2010 and Replies on August 6, 2010.

II.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND1

A. Plaintiff's August 26, 2008 Visit to the Dr. Phil Show
Plaintiff is a "qualified person with a disability" under the ADA, 42 U.S.C. § 12131(2), who is mobility impaired. (Pl.'s Statement of Undisputed Facts ("Pl.'s Facts") ¶ 1.) Plaintiff is unable to drive and must have a caregiver with her at all times. (Def.'s Statement of Disputed and Undisputed Facts ("Def.'s Facts") ¶ 7.) On August 26, 2008, Plaintiff's friends took Plaintiff [*4]  to attend a live taping of the Dr. Phil Show. (Pl.'s Facts ¶ 7; Def.'s Facts ¶¶ 2, 3.)
The Dr. Phil Show is filmed at Stage 29 of the Paramount Pictures Studios lot ("Paramount Lot"), which is located at 5555 Melrose Avenue in Los Angeles, California. (Pl.'s Facts ¶¶ 2, 7; Def.'s Facts ¶ 1.) The Paramount Lot is comprised of approximately 63 acres and abuts Melrose Avenue to the south, Gower Street to the west, Van Ness to the east, and the Hollywood Forever Cemetery (the "Cemetery") to the north. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 1.) Stage 29 is a sound stage located on the northwest corner of the Paramount Lot. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 2.) Defendant owns a parking structure located at Gower Street and Waring Avenue (the "Gower Parking Structure"), across the street and south of Stage 29. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 16.) Defendant does not own, maintain, or otherwise control the Cemetery site.2 (Decl. of Kirk Solomon in Supp. of Def.'s Opp'n ("Solomon Opp'n Decl.") ¶ 13.)
On August 26, 2008, Plaintiff and her friends arrived early for the show and parked at the Cemetery. (Decl. of Mary Bank in Supp. of Pl.'s Mot. ("Bank Decl.") ¶¶ 3, 5, Ex. 1.) Plaintiff used a walker at the time of her visit. (Decl. of Patricia Barbosa in [*5]  Supp. of Pl.'s Mot. ("Barbosa Decl.") ¶ 22, Ex. 11; Deposition of Mary Callahan ("Callahan Depo.") p. 80.) According to Plaintiff, Plaintiff could not use the sidewalks that led from the Cemetery to the Dr. Phil Show entrance and instead traveled on Gower Street to reach the entrance. (Barbosa Opp'n Decl. ¶ 5, Ex. 3; Callahan Depo. pp. 37-40.) Plaintiff states that upon reaching the Paramount Lot entrance, she had difficulty climbing the curb in front of the entrance. (Id.) Plaintiff further states that inside, the seating for disabled persons did not have companion seating and was located behind a camera, which did not move for the majority of the taping, and where Plaintiff could not see Dr. Phil.3 After the show ended, Plaintiff attempted to use the restroom, but did not see an accessible restroom stall and instead used a non-accessible stall with her friends' assistance.4
The visit was Plaintiff's first and only attendance at a taping of the Dr. Phil Show, or any other live-taped show. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 3.) Other than her August 26, 2008 visit to the Dr. Phil Show, Plaintiff has never attended any live taping of any television program at the Paramount Lot or anywhere else. [*6]  (Def.'s Facts ¶ 4.)

B. The Paramount Lot, Stage 29, and Parking Facilities
Defendant is the owner of the Paramount Lot. (Answer of Paramount Pictures Corporation ("Paramount's Answer") ¶ 1.) There is an entrance to the Paramount Lot at 860 North Gower Street. (Id.) Stage 29 and the immediately adjacent waiting area and restrooms are places of public accommodation under the ADA where members of the general public may attend a live audience taping of a show. (Barbosa Decl. ¶¶ 14-15, Ex. 8; Def.'s Supp. Resp. to Pl.'s Req. for Admis. No. 10.)
CBS Television Distribution, a division of CBS, is the producer of the Dr. Phil Show. (Answer of CBS Corporation, CBS Studios Inc., and Peteski Productions, Inc. ("CBS/Peteski Answer") ¶ 1.) Peteski is the owner of the Dr. Phil Show. (CBS/Peteski Answer ¶ 1.) The Dr. Phil Show commenced production in Stage 29 in or about 2002. (Decl. of Edmund Cortez Lee in Supp. of Def.'s Mot. ("Cortez Lee Decl.") ¶ 9.)
CBS and Peteski use Stage 29 for the taping of the Dr. Phil Show pursuant to a Facilities License Agreement ("FLA"), dated May 19, 2008, by and between Defendant as Licensor and CBS as Licensee.5 (Cortez Lee Decl. ¶ 9, Ex. 2.) Pursuant to the terms of the FLA, CBS is responsible [*7]  for (a) the interior area of the Dr. Phil Show set, which includes the interior stage design and layout, and (b) the show's policies and procedures regarding the show taping, production and audience management, including queuing and seating policies. (Cortez Lee Decl. ¶ 10.) CBS and/or Peteski were also responsible for its former practice of directing audience members to park at the Cemetery. (Id.)
The Paramount Lot has on-lot surface parking lots that can be accessed only through a security gate and are primarily for Defendant's private business use for employees, production needs, and business guests of Defendant's employees or authorized businesses, such as production companies filming on the Paramount Lot. (Cortez Lee Decl. ¶ 16.) The only circumstance under which a member of the public may park in the on-lot parking facilities is if Defendant's employee or authorized business associate obtains a "drive-on" pass for a guest. (Id.) These parking facilities are not made available to Dr. Phil Show audience members. (Id.)
The Gower Parking Structure is not made available for Dr. Phil Show audience members. (Cortez Lee Decl. ¶ 17.) In fact, when the Dr. Phil Show is taping, [*8]  a sign is placed at the vehicular entry point, which expressly states that no parking for Dr. Phil Show audience members is allowed. (Id.)

C. CBS/Peteski Settlement Agreement
On or about February 25, 2010, Plaintiff settled her claims against Defendants CBS and Peteski. (Barbosa Opp'n Decl. ¶ 4.) The settlement was memorialized in the CBS/Peteski Settlement Agreement, which provides, in part, that Plaintiff would return to Stage 29 on the Paramount Lot to see another taping of the Dr. Phil Show after all barriers that Plaintiff previously experienced had been removed. (Id.)
According to Defendant, pursuant to the Consent Decree, CBS and Peteski agreed to the removal of alleged access barriers inside Stage 29 and the modification of policies and procedures for serving and seating audience members with disabilities.6 [Doc. # 51] The extent to which CBS and Peteski have removed all access barriers, and implemented all modifications and clarifications of policies and procedures discussed in the Agreement appears to be a disputed fact. (Id.)

D. Plaintiff's Barrier Report
The parties dispute whether, and to what extent, accessibility barriers existed at Stage 29 and on the Paramount Lot as of [*9]  June 30, 2010.
Experts for both Plaintiff and Defendant attended a joint site inspection on May 28, 2009. As a result of the joint site inspection, Plaintiff's expert, Peter Margen, produced a report, "Survey, Report and Recommendations" dated August 14, 2009 ("Plaintiff's Barrier Report"). (Margen Decl. ¶ 10, Ex. 43.) Defendant's expert, Michael P. Gibbens, subsequently visited the Paramount Lot on June 30, 2010. (Declaration of Michael Gibbens in Supp. of Def.'s Mot. ("Gibbens Decl.") ¶ 5.) Jeff Mastin, on behalf of Plaintiff, conducted a follow-up site inspection on July 1, 2010 and subsequently authored a report dated July 20, 2010 ("Mastin Report"). (Margen Opp'n Decl. ¶ 22, Ex. 2.)
Defendant's expert, Mr. Gibbens, testifies that based on his multiple visits to the Paramount Lot, the conditions identified in Plaintiff's Barrier Report can be categorized as follows: (1) there is no legal requirement to provide certain accommodations referenced in Plaintiff's Barrier Report; (2) certain conditions do not, in fact, exist; (3) the conditions are compliant with the applicable California Building Code, Title 24-2 of the California Code of Regulations ("CBC") and Americans with Disabilities [*10]  Act Access Guidelines ("ADAAG")7 requirements; (4) conditions or alternative accommodations are provided that afford disabled persons with equal or greater access; and/or (5) certain conditions are within dimensional tolerances and do not constitute an architectural barrier.8 (Gibbens Decl. ¶ 7, Ex. 3; Def.'s Issues ¶ 41.)
In response, Plaintiff's expert Mr. Margen states that he "adopt[s] Mr. Mastin's report and findings as [his] own, and agrees with his conclusions that the facilities are in violation of accessibility standards and [he] believe[s] that the paramount studios lot [sic] and the Dr. Phil show [sic] is not readily accessible to or usable by persons with mobility disabilities, due to physical barriers."9 (Margen Opp'n Decl. ¶ 22.) In the Mastin Report, Mr. Mastin identified a number of barriers that existed as of his July 1, 2010 visit, including items he describes as: (1) "modified but noncompliant"; (2) "noncompliant, appears unchanged"; (3) "existing but noncompliant"; (4) "modified, width not usable"; and (5) "appears unchanged." (Margen Opp'n Decl. ¶ 22, Ex. 2.)

III.

LEGAL STANDARD
Summary [*11]  judgment should be granted "if the pleadings, the discovery and disclosure materials on file, and any affidavits show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the movant is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(2); accord Mattos v. Agarano, 590 F.3d 1082, 1085 (9th Cir. 2010). Material facts are those that may affect the outcome of the case. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S.Ct. 2505, 91 L.Ed.2d 202 (1986). An issue is genuine "if the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party." Id.
The moving party bears the initial burden of establishing the absence of a genuine issue of material fact. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S.Ct. 2548, 91 L.Ed.2d 265 (1986). Where the moving party does not have the ultimate burden of persuasion at trial, the moving party meets its burden of production and persuasion by either producing evidence negating an essential element of the nonmoving party's claim or defense or showing that the nonmoving party does not have enough evidence of an essential element to carry its ultimate burden of persuasion at trial. Id. at 325; see also Nissan Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 210 F.3d 1099, 1102 (9th Cir. 2000).
Once the moving party has met its initial burden, Rule 56(e) requires the nonmoving party to "go beyond the pleadings and by her own affidavits, or by the 'depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file,' designate 'specific facts showing that there [*12]  is a genuine issue for trial.'" Celotex, 477 U.S. at 324; see also Bias v. Moynihan, 508 F.3d 1212, 1218 (9th Cir. 2007). "[T]he inferences to be drawn from the underlying facts . . . must be viewed in the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion." Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 587, 106 S.Ct. 1348, 89 L.Ed.2d 538 (1986). However, "an opposing party may not rely merely on allegations or denials in its own pleading." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e).
A court presented with cross-motions for summary judgment should review each motion separately, giving the nonmoving party for each motion the benefit of all reasonable inferences from the record. Center for Bio-Ethical Reform, Inc. v. Los Angeles County Sheriff Dep't, 533 F.3d 780, 786 (9th Cir. 2008), cert. denied, 555 U.S. 1098, 129 S. Ct. 903, 173 L. Ed. 2d 108 (2009).

IV.

DISCUSSION

A. Defendant's Motion For Partial Summary Judgment
Defendant moves for partial summary judgment on the following grounds: (1) Plaintiff lacks standing to succeed on her claim for injunctive relief because she is unlikely to return to the Paramount Lot; (2) Plaintiff is not entitled to injunctive relief for the removal of alleged barriers to the extent such alleged barriers do not exist; (3) Plaintiff is not entitled to injunctive relief for alleged barriers that are minor deviations or departures from particular technical or scoping requirements within dimensional tolerances; (4) Defendant does not have an obligation to provide parking for disabled audience members where it does not [*13]  provide any parking for able-bodied audience members; and (5) Defendant is not responsible for a third party's policies and procedures relating to non-structural alleged barriers.

1. Plaintiff Does Not Lack Standing to Assert a Claim for Injunctive Relief
Defendant contends that Plaintiff lacks standing to assert her claim for injunctive relief because she is unlikely to return to the Paramount Lot.
"It goes without saying that those who seek to invoke the jurisdiction of the federal courts must satisfy the threshold requirement imposed by Article III of the Constitution by alleging an actual case or controversy." City of Los Angeles v. Lyons, 461 U.S. 95, 101, 103 S.Ct. 1660, 75 L.Ed.2d 675 (1983). The Supreme Court has instructed that courts take "a broad view of constitutional standing in civil rights cases, especially where, as under the ADA, private enforcement suits 'are the primary method of obtaining compliance with the Act.'" Doran v. 7-Eleven, Inc., 524 F.3d 1034, 1039 (9th Cir. 2008) (quoting Trafficante v. Metro. Life Ins. Co., 409 U.S. 205, 209, 93 S.Ct. 364, 34 L.Ed.2d 415 (1972)).
In order for Plaintiff to establish standing, she must demonstrate the following:
First, [she] must have suffered an injury in fact--an invasion of a legally protected interest which is (a) concrete and particularized; and (b) actual or imminent, not conjectural or hypothetical. Second, there must be a causal connection between the injury and the [*14]  conduct complained of. . . . Third, it must be likely, as opposed to merely speculative, that the injury will be redressed by a favorable decision.
Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560-60, 112 S.Ct. 2130, 119 L. Ed. 2d 351 (1992) (citations and quotation marks omitted); see also D'Lil v. Best Western Encina Lodge & Suites, 538 F.3d 1031, 1036 (9th Cir. 2008). In conducting the standing inquiry, the Court examines the facts as they existed at the time Plaintiff filed the Complaint.10 Best Western, 538 F.3d at 1036.
In the context of the ADA, a plaintiff's injury is "particularized" where the plaintiff is injured as a result of the defendant's noncompliance with the ADA. Pickern v. Holiday Quality Foods Inc., 293 F.3d 1133, 1137-38 (9th Cir. 2002). With respect to the "actual or imminent" requirement, the Ninth Circuit has held that:
a disabled individual who is currently deterred from patronizing a public accommodation due to a defendant's failure to comply with the ADA has suffered 'actual injury.' Similarly, a plaintiff who is threatened with harm in the future because of existing or imminently threatened non-compliance with the ADA suffers 'imminent injury.'
Best Western, 538 F.3d at 1037 (citing Holiday Quality Foods, 293 F.3d at 1138). In cases where the public accommodation being sued is far from the plaintiff's home, a plaintiff's injury is "actual or imminent injury" if a plaintiff demonstrates "an intent to return to the geographic area where the accommodation is located and a desire to visit the accommodation [*15]  if it were made accessible." Best Western, 538 F.3d at 1037; see also 7-Eleven, 524 F.3d at 1041 (court determined that the plaintiff's answer, "Yes, once it's fixed" to question of whether he had any plans to return to the store demonstrated his intent to return in the future once the barriers had been removed). An intent to return to the place of accommodation at issue "some day" is insufficient. Lujan, 504 U.S. at 564.
ADA plaintiffs are not required to "engage in the 'futile gesture'" of returning to the inaccessible place of public accommodation in order to establish standing. Id. 538 F.3d at 1037 (citing Holiday Quality Foods, 293 F.3d at 1135). A plaintiff's allegations that she visited a public accommodation on a prior occasion and is currently deterred from visiting as a result of accessibility barriers establish that a plaintiff's injury is actual or imminent. 7-Eleven, 524 F.3d at 1041.
Here, relying on Harris v. Stonecrest Care Auto Center, LLC, 472 F.Supp.2d 1208 (S.D. Cal. 2007) and Molski v. Mandarin Touch Restaurant, 385 F. Supp. 2d 1042 (C.D. Cal. 2005),11 Defendant argues that Plaintiff fails to satisfy standing requirements because Plaintiff was unlikely to return to the Paramount Lot due to the distance from her home to Stage 29, the fact that Plaintiff had never attended the live taping of any television show prior to or since her visit to Stage 29, her lack of any strong affinity for the Dr. Phil Show, her dislike of traveling to Los Angeles, and the fact that her physical [*16]  condition has worsened. In this case, Defendant's reliance upon Stonecrest Care and Mandarin Touch is misplaced.
In Stonecrest Care and Mandarin Touch, the courts had reason to question the sincerity of the plaintiffs' professed intent to return, in part as a result of the numerous ADA cases filed by each plaintiff (i.e., 20 in Mr. Harris' case and 400 in Mr. Molski's case).12 In Mandarin Touch, the court stated:
"For a variety of reasons, the Court finds that Mr. Molski's litigation history undercuts his credibility and belies an intent to return to the Mandarin Touch. As a result, Mr. Molski's professed intent to return to the Mandarin Touch is insufficient to establish standing."
Mandarin Touch, 385 F. Supp. 2d at 1046. The Stonecrest Care court similarly noted the "recognized trend of abusive ADA litigation" and emphasized a need to exercise "special diligence and vigilant examination" of standing requirements as a result. Stonecrest Care Auto Center, 472 F. Supp. 2d at 1215.
Here, Defendant does not present, and the Court does not find, any reason to question the sincerity of Plaintiff's professed intent to return to the Dr. Phil Show. Plaintiff alleges in the Complaint that she was discriminated against as a result of Defendant's alleged [*17]  wrongful conduct and "deterred from returning and safely viewing the taping of the "Dr. Phil Show', [sic] and other programs taped at Paramount Studios, without facing continuing discrimination." (Compl. ¶¶ 17-20, 33.) The parties do not dispute that Plaintiff, in fact, attended the August 26, 2008 live taping of the Dr. Phil Show and that she encountered a number of accessibility barriers during her visit. Plaintiff testified at her deposition that she "would like to" attend future tapings of the Dr. Phil Show, (Barbosa Opp'n Decl. ¶ 5, Ex. 3; Callahan Depo. p. 24), and notes that the CBS/Peteski Settlement Agreement provides, in part, that Plaintiff would return to Stage 29 on the Paramount Lot to see another taping of the Dr. Phil Show after all barriers that Plaintiff previously experienced had been removed (Barbosa Opp'n Decl. ¶ 4).
Drawing all inferences in Plaintiff's favor, the Court cannot find, as a matter of law, that Plaintiff lacks standing in this case and denies Defendant's Motion as to that issue.

2. There Are Disputed Issues of Fact Regarding Whether the Alleged Barriers Exist, the Deviations Are Minor, and Departures from Technical or Scoping Requirements are Within [*18]  Dimensional Tolerances
Defendant contends that Plaintiff cannot be awarded injunctive relief under the ADA unless she can prove that current barriers exist. Defendant also maintains that various issues identified in Plaintiff's Barrier Report are merely "minor deviations from particular technical and measurement requirements that are within dimensional tolerances" or provide "substantially equivalent" access.13
Under the ADA, injunctive relief is available "to alter facilities to make such facilities readily accessible and usable by individuals with disabilities." 42 U.S.C. § 12188(a)(2). In fact, money damages are not available in private ADA suits and injunctive relief is the sole remedy available to private parties under the ADA.14 Antoninetti v. Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc., 614 F.3d 971, 2010 WL 2891005 at * 6 (9th Cir. 2010). Nevertheless, "past wrongs do not in themselves amount to that real and immediate threat of injury necessary to make out a case or controversy," Lyons, 461 U.S. at 103, and the Court is unable to enjoin an event that has already [*19]  occurred. See Bernhardt v. County of L.A., 279 F.3d 862, 871 (9th Cir. 2002) ("Where activities sought to be enjoined already have occurred . . . the action is moot, and must be dismissed. . . ."); see also Pickern v. Best Western Timber Cove Lodge Marina Resort, 194 F. Supp. 2d 1128, 1130 (E.D. Cal. 2002) (defendants' remedial efforts rendered her ADA claim for injunctive relief moot).
Thus, to the extent that the barriers identified in Plaintiff's Barrier Report have been redressed, Plaintiff's claims would be moot. Indeed, at the September 16, 2010 hearing, Plaintiff conceded that to the extent the Mastin Report identifies the barriers as now being "compliant," such accessibility barriers are no longer at issue in this case. In light of the testimony by the parties' dueling experts as to the accessibility barriers that remain, however, the Court cannot determine, as a matter of law, that all of the barriers identified in Plaintiff's Barrier Report no longer exist, or that they are merely "minor deviations from particular technical and measurement requirements that are within dimensional tolerances" or provide "substantially equivalent" access. The Court therefore denies Defendant's Motion to the extent that there are disputed issues of fact as to the current state of the barriers.

3. Defendant's Obligation to Provide Parking and Path of Travel [*20]  for Disabled Audience Members
Defendant contends that because Defendant does not provide parking for able-bodied attendees of the Dr. Phil Show, Defendant is not required under the ADA to do so for disabled persons. Defendant further contends that because Defendant does not make parking available at either the Gower Parking Structure or the Cemetery available to Dr. Phil Show audience members, and because the path of travel from such facilities are along public thoroughfares, Defendant is also not required to provide an accessible path of travel. Plaintiff, on the other hand, argues that Defendant failed to remove any barriers or modify its policies to provide accessible parking and an accessible path of travel to disabled persons.

a. Discrimination Under the ADA
The ADA mandates equal access for persons with disabilities. Title III of the ADA provides that:
No individual shall be discriminated against on the basis of disability in the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations of any place of public accommodation by any person who owns, leases (or leases to), or operates a place of public accommodation.
42 U.S.C. § 12182(a).
To prevail on a discrimination [*21]  claim under Title III of the ADA, a plaintiff must show that: (1) she is disabled within the meaning of the ADA; (2) the defendant is a private entity that owns, leases, or operates a place of public accommodation; and (3) the plaintiff was denied public accommodations by the defendant because of her disability. Arizona ex rel. Goddard v. Harkins Amusement Enterprises, Inc., 603 F.3d 666, 670 (9th Cir. 2010). Any violation of the ADA necessarily constitutes a violation under California's Unruh Civil Rights Act and California's Disabled Persons Act.15 See Cal. Civ. Code §§ 51(f), 54.1(d); see also Molski v. M.J. Cable, Inc., 481 F.3d 724, 731 (9th Cir. 2007).
Under the ADA, discrimination includes:
(ii) a failure to make reasonable modifications in policies, practices, or procedures, when such modifications are necessary to afford such goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations to individuals with disabilities, unless the entity can demonstrate that making such modifications would fundamentally alter the nature of such goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations . . .
42 U.S.C. §§ 12182(b)(2)(A)(ii) (emphasis added).
Discrimination also includes "a failure to remove architectural barriers, and communication barriers that are structural in nature, in existing facilities . . . where such removal is readily achievable." 42 U.S.C. § 12182(b)(2)(A)(iv) (emphasis added). "Readily achievable" means [*23]  "easily accomplishable and able to be carried out without much difficulty or expense." 42 U.S.C. § 12181(9). If barrier removal is not "readily achievable," "the public accommodation shall not fail to make its goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations available through alternative methods, if those methods are readily achievable." 28 C.F.R. § 36.305(a) (emphasis added).
As the Ninth Circuit explained in Fortyune v. Multi-Cinema Inc., 364 F.3d 1075 (9th Cir. 2004), a place of public accommodation is obligated under the ADA to provide equal access to disabled individuals, even where certain "preferential" concessions may be required in order to do so:
Indeed, the ADA defines discrimination as a public accommodation treating a disabled patron the same as other patrons despite the former's need for a reasonable modification. For example, unlike non-disabled patrons, disabled individuals are permitted to bring service animals into public accommodations. Such concessions, while certainly 'preferential' in the sense that they confer upon disabled patrons a benefit denied to others, are not only contemplated by the ADA, they are required. The ADA's implementing regulations are designed 'to place those with disabilities on an equal footing, not to give them an unfair [*24]  advantage.'
Fortyune, 364 F.3d at 1086.

b. Accessible Parking
Defendant argues that Plaintiff fails to cite to any authority under the ADA or California disability laws imposing on Defendant an independent duty to provide parking to audience members.16 The crux of Defendant's Motion, however, is that because it "does not provide any parking for attendees of the Dr. Phil Show whatsoever," it is not required to provide parking to disabled attendees. (Def.'s Mot. at 13; emphasis in original.) (Id.) Plaintiff presents evidence that suggests that Defendant may, on occasion, provide parking to certain audience members. Christine Rudder, an individual with a mobility disability, testifies that after attending a live taping of the Dr. Phil Show on September 29, 2009, she was handed a VIP pass to return to another taping of the show and that the VIP pass stated that parking would be provided on the Paramount Lot. (Decl. of Christine Rudder in Supp. of Pl.'s Mot. ("Rudder Decl.") ¶¶ 2, 5.) Ms. Rudder also provides a copy of the Irvine Valley College website, which purports to advertise silent auction items, including VIP tickets to a Dr. Phil Show taping, donated by Dr. Phil McGraw, as follow:
You and (3) three friends are [*25]  entitled to VIP seating in the audience of an upcoming Dr. Phil taping. You will have priority seating in the studio as well as parking on the world famous Paramount Pictures Studio lot in Hollywood. You must call in advance for reservations. Taping days are usually Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday mornings from August through April. Everyone in your party must be at least 18 years old. This invitation is good for one year from date of event. (Value: priceless)
Donated by
Dr. Phil McGraw
(Rudder Decl. ¶ 6, Ex.)
Defendant objects to Ms. Rudder's testimony on various grounds. Defendant first contends that Ms. Rudder's testimony should be stricken in its entirety because Plaintiff failed to disclose Ms. Rudder in her Rule 26 disclosures or to supplement those disclosures. Defendant further objects to Ms. Rudder's testimony regarding the VIP pass because it is hearsay, lacks authentication, and violates the best evidence rule. Defendant also objects to her presentation of the Irvine Valley College website page because it lacks foundation and violates the best evidence rule.
First, Rule 37(c)(1) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure provides that in lieu of prohibiting a party from presenting a previously undisclosed witness' testimony, the [*26]  Court may, instead, impose sanctions on the non-disclosing party.17 Fed. R. Civ. P. 37(c)(1). Here, it is unclear to the Court when Plaintiff became aware that Ms. Rudder might be called as a witness in this case. Defendant complains that Plaintiff's nondisclosure deprived it of the opportunity to depose Ms. Rudder. Accordingly, as Defendant has requested it, the Court will re-open discovery solely to allow Defendant to depose Ms. Rudder and, if Plaintiff cannot demonstrate good cause for its delay in identifying her as a witness, the Court will entertain a motion for sanctions.
With regard to Defendant's objection to the VIP pass, Ms. Rudder testifies to what she read on the VIP pass handed to her by someone who was ostensibly acting as Defendant's agent. While the VIP is not conclusive evidence that Defendant, in fact, offered parking, the [*27]  VIP pass is an admission by a party-opponent (see Fed. R. Evid. 801(d)(2)) and sufficient to give rise to an inference that Defendant has offered parking to audience members in the past. The Court therefore overrules Defendant's objection. With regard to Defendant's objection to the Irvine Valley College website, Ms. Rudder presents the website as evidence that Defendant advertised parking on the Paramount Lot. The website, however, is not the best evidence of what the Dr. Phil Show offered Irvine Valley College for the silent auction and Plaintiff fails to provide authentication of the underlying information, i.e., that Defendant offered parking on the Paramount Lot. The Court therefore sustains Defendant's objection to the Irvine Valley College website.
The Court also notes the contradictory testimony presented by Defendant's witness, Edmund Cortez Lee, as to whether Dr. Phil Show audience members may park at the Gower Parking Structure. Mr. Cortez Lee first testified at his deposition on June 2, 2010, that guests and employees, including "patrons of the Dr. Phil Show," can use the Gower Street Parking for a $5 fee. (Barbosa Opp'n Decl. ¶ 6, Ex. 4; Cortez Lee Depo. pp. 27-28.) Mr. Cortez Lee later testified [*28]  in a July 9, 2010 declaration that the Gower Parking Structure is not made available for Dr. Phil Show audience members and that when the Dr. Phil Show is taping, a sign placed at the entry point states that no parking for the Dr. Phil Show audience members is allowed. (Cortez Lee Decl. ¶ 17.)
As Defendant concedes, section 4.1.2(5)(a) of the ADAAG states, "If parking spaces are provided for self-parking by employees or visitors, or both, then accessible spaces complying with 4.6 shall be provided in each such parking area." (28 C.F.R. Pt. 36, App. A, § 4.1.2(5)(a); Def.'s Opp'n at 10.) Title 24-2 of the California Building Code, section 1129B.1 further provides that a "parking structure where parking is provided for the public as clients, guests or employees, shall provide accessible parking as required by this section." (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 24, § 1129B.1; Def.'s Opp'n at 11.) Under such provisions, to the extent Defendant provides parking for able-bodied guests, Defendant would be required under the ADA and California law to provide accessible parking for guests with physical disabilities.
In the alternative, Defendant contends that (1) it would be unreasonable to require Defendant to modify its policy of not providing any audience parking at the Gower Parking Structure to "ultimately require Defendant [*29]  to modify public thoroughfares, including widening the sidewalks along Gower Street or demolishing a concrete wall that encloses the Paramount Lot along Gower" and (2) providing parking for audience members at one of the on-Lot parking areas "would require a fundamental alteration of Paramount's facilities and services."18 (Def.'s Reply at 13.) Defendant does not present any evidence in support of such conclusory contentions and, furthermore, a determination of whether a modification is "reasonable" or would "fundamentally alter" is a fact-intensive inquiry that is not before the Court at this time.
Viewing all the evidence in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, a reasonable jury could find that Defendant provides parking to audience members at either the Gower Parking Structure or at one of the on-Lot parking areas, even if occasionally. [*30]  The Court further finds that whether it would be "reasonable," or whether it would "fundamentally alter" Defendant's facilities and services, to require Defendant to provide parking to disabled audience members are issues of fact more appropriate for a jury to decide.

c. Accessible Path of Travel
Defendant contends that even if Defendant had an obligation to provide a path of travel from the Gower Parking Structure to Stage 29, Defendant could not be required to modify the public sidewalk leading to Stage 29. The Court agrees.
Title III imposes a duty on Defendant to modify only those places of public accommodation that it "owns, leases (or leases to), or operates." 42 U.S.C. § 12182(a); Pickern v. Pier 1 Imports (U.S.), Inc., 457 F.3d 963, 968 (9th Cir. 2006). Pursuant to the Ninth Circuit's decision in Pier 1 Imports, Defendant cannot be held liable under the ADA for the sidewalk's inaccessibility insofar as Defendant does not own, lease, or control the public sidewalk. See Pier 1 Imports, 457 F.3d at 965-68 (where there was no evidence that the defendants owned, leased, or controlled the grassy strip of land between the public sidewalk and the defendant's property, the defendant could not be held liable under the ADA for discrimination on such property).
Here, [*31]  neither party presents evidence that the public sidewalk from either the Gower Parking Structure or the Cemetery is owned, leased, or operated by Defendant. The Court finds that Defendant is not liable for providing a path of travel along a public sidewalk where Defendant does not own, lease, or operate the sidewalk and grants Defendant's Motion accordingly.

4. Defendant's Responsibility for Alleged Non-Structural Barriers
Relying on a footnote in Independent Living Resources v. Oregon Arena Corp., 982 F. Supp. 698, 768 n. 94 (D. Or. 1997), Defendant argues that it cannot be held responsible for policies and procedures implemented by CBS and/or Peteski, or for the non-structural barriers within the interior of the Stage 29 building that were designed and constructed by the co-defendants. Defendant contends that pursuant to the FLA, CBS and Peteski are responsible for: (1) the interior area of the Dr. Phil Show set, which includes all interior areas inside the Stage 29 building; and (2) the policies and procedures regarding the show's filming, production and audience seating. The Court disagrees.
Federal regulations address landlord-tenant liability:
Both the landlord who owns the building that houses a place of public accommodation and the tenant who owns or operates the place [*32]  of public accommodation are public accommodations subject to the requirements of this part. As between the parties, allocation of responsibility for complying with the obligations of this part may be determined by lease or other contract.
28 C.F.R. § 36.201(b) (emphasis added). Federal regulations also prohibit an owner from evading its obligations through contracts, licenses or other arrangements. See 28 C.F.R. § 36.202. The Ninth Circuit also expressly addressed this issue in Botosan v. McNally Realty, 216 F.3d 827 (9th Cir. 2000) and held that both the owner of the public accommodation and the owner of the facility that houses the public accommodation have obligations under the ADA that cannot be eliminated by contract. Botosan, 216 F.2d at 832-33.
Neither the federal regulations nor the Ninth Circuit's decision in Botasan support the distinction that Defendant urges this Court to adopt, i.e., between an obligation to alter policies and procedures implemented by CBS and/or Peteski on the one hand (which Defendant contends is the tenant's responsibility), or to remove structural barriers on the other (which Defendant appears to concede may be its responsibility as the landlord). While 28 C.F.R. § 36.201(b) uses the language "public accommodations subject to the requirements of this part," there is no indication that "this [*33]  part" was intended to refer only to 28 C.F.R. § 36.304, pertaining to the removal of architectural barriers, and not also to 28 C.F.R. § 36.302, pertaining to reasonable modifications of policies, practices, or procedures. Rather, as the Ninth Circuit stated in Botasan, "the landlord is a necessary party in an ADA action, regardless of what the lease provides." Id. at 834.
Here, Defendant is the undisputed owner of the Paramount Lot. (Paramount's Answer ¶ 1.) The scope of CBS and/or Peteski's obligations in the FLA is irrelevant to the determination of Defendant's separate liability to Plaintiff under the ADA and California disability laws.

B. Plaintiff's Motion For Summary Judgment
Plaintiff moves for summary judgment on Plaintiff's claims of liability against Defendant and asks the Court to find that Defendant discriminated against Plaintiff in violation of her rights under Title III of the ADA and California Civil Code §§ 51 and 54, .et seq on the basis of her disability. As discussed supra, in light of the genuine issues of material fact that exist as to whether the barriers identified in Plaintiff's Barrier Report are still extant, the Court cannot find, as matter of law, that Plaintiff is entitled to injunctive relief under the ADA. The disputed facts also prevent [*34]  this Court from finding that Defendant is liable under California disability laws. In particular, in addition to disputing whether Defendant is, and was, required to provide accessible parking and a path of travel for persons with disabilities, the parties dispute which accessibility barriers Plaintiff encountered at the time of her visit on August 26, 2008.19 Considering the evidence in the light most favorable to Defendant will not alter this conclusion.

V.

CONCLUSION
In light of the foregoing:
1. Defendant's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment is GRANTED in part and DENIED in part as follows:
a. Defendant's Motion is GRANTED to the extent the Court finds that Defendant is not responsible for providing a path of travel along a public sidewalk where Defendant does not own, lease, or operate the sidewalk.
b. Defendant's Motion is DENIED in all other respects.
2. Plaintiffs' Motion for Summary Judgment is DENIED.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
DATED: September 24, 2010
/s/ Dolly M. Gee
DOLLY M. GEE
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

