Clark v. Champion Nat'l Sec., Inc.
United States District Court for the Northern District of Texas, Dallas Division
November 14, 2018, Decided; November 14, 2018, Filed
Civil Action No. 3:17-CV-1802-C

Reporter
2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 235654 *; 2018 WL 10582163
GEORGE CHARLES CLARK, Plaintiff, v. CHAMPION NATIONAL SECURITY, INC., Defendant.
Subsequent History: Affirmed by Clark v. Champion Nat'l Sec., 947 F.3d 275, 2020 U.S. App. LEXIS 1191, 2020 WL 205647 (5th Cir. Tex., Jan. 14, 2020)
Affirmed by Clark v. Champion Nat'l Sec., Inc., 952 F.3d 570, 2020 U.S. App. LEXIS 8344, 2020 WL 1147164 (5th Cir. Tex., Jan. 14, 2020)
Counsel:  [*1] For George Charles Clark, Plaintiff: Susan E Hutchison, LEAD ATTORNEY, James Robert Hudson, Jr., Hutchison & Stoy PLLC, Fort Worth, TX.
For Champion National Security, Inc., Defendant: Harold D Jones, LEAD ATTORNEY, Greg Patrick McAllister, Littler Mendelson PC, Dallas, TX.
Judges: SAM R. CUMMINGS, SENIOR UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: SAM R. CUMMINGS
Opinion



ORDER
On this day, the Court considered:
(1) Defendant Champion National Security, Inc.'s Motion for Summary Judgment, filed September 11, 2018; and
(2) Plaintiff George Charles Clark's Response to Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment, filed October 2, 2018.
The Court, having considered the foregoing, is of the opinion Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment should be GRANTED.

I.

BACKGROUND
On July 10, 2017, George Charles Clark ("Plaintiff") filed the above-styled and -numbered civil action against Champion National Security, Inc. ("Defendant"), pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") and the Texas Labor Code. Plaintiff asserts claims alleging disability discrimination, disability harassment, retaliation, failure to accommodate a disability, and failure to engage in the interactive process under both the ADA and Texas Labor Code. Plaintiff [*2]  claims he is entitled to the recovery of compensatory damages for emotional pain, suffering, inconvenience, mental anguish, loss of enjoyment of life, and other non-pecuniary losses pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 12117 and Tex. Labor Code § 21.2585(d). Plaintiff claims entitlement to an award of back pay pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 12117 and Tex. Labor Code § 21.258(b). Further, Plaintiff claims entitlement to an award of front pay pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 12117 and Tex. Labor Code § 21.258(b). Plaintiff alleges Defendant engaged in unlawful employment practices with malice or with reckless indifference, therefore an award of exemplary damages is appropriate. Last, Plaintiff seeks attorney's fees and expert fees incurred as a result of filing the above-styled and -numbered civil action, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 12117 and Tex. Labor Code § 21.259.
To provide insight, Plaintiff was diagnosed with Type II Diabetes in 2006 and was later hired by Defendant in October of 2015. Plaintiff claims he was wrongfully denied part of a raise while employed by Defendant. Plaintiff further contends he was denied an opportunity to interview for the position of national training manager, though he claims to have met and exceeded every requirement listed for the position. Last, Plaintiff alleges he was forced to receive medical treatment after passing out at work, but later received a [*3]  phone call from a company employee advising him he was terminated for failing to be alert at work.1 Among other things, Plaintiff contends he was discriminated against and harassed as a result of his medical conditions.
Defendant now moves for summary judgment on the basis that: (1) Plaintiff has failed to meet the conditions precedent for certain federal law claims and all state law claims; (2) Plaintiff has failed to establish a prima facie case for disability discrimination; (3) Plaintiff's disability harassment claim does not meet the standard of showing a hostile work environment; (4) Plaintiff does not establish a claim for failure to accommodate; (5) Plaintiff's claim for failure to engage in the interactive process is not a separate cause of action; (6) Plaintiff has failed to show how his compensatory damage claims are connected to his employment; (7) if Plaintiff's termination is not the adverse action for the claims asserted, then his back damages are limited; and (8) if Plaintiff's termination is not the adverse action for the claims asserted, then Plaintiff is not entitled to front pay, compensatory damages, and/or exemplary damages.

II.

STANDARD
Summary judgment is appropriate [*4]  when "the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a); Tagore v. United States, 735 F.3d 324, 328 (5th Cir. 2013). A material fact is one that might affect the outcome of the case under the governing law; a dispute concerning a material fact is genuine if the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the non-moving party. Tagore, 735 F.3d at 328 (quoting Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986)) (quotations omitted). To determine whether a genuine dispute exists such that the case must be submitted to a jury, courts must consider all of the evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, draw all reasonable inferences in favor of the non-moving party, refuse to make credibility determinations or weigh the relative strength of the evidence, and disregard all evidence favorable to the movant that the jury would not be required to believe. Haverda v. Hays County, 723 F.3d 586, 591 (5th Cir. 2013).
If the burden at trial would be on the non-moving party, the movant must merely demonstrate "that there is an absence of evidence to support the non-moving party's case." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 325, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986); Bayle v. Allstate Ins. Co., 615 F.3d 350, 355 (5th Cir. 2010). The burden then shifts to the non-moving party to produce evidence showing the existence of a genuine issue of material fact for trial. Bayle, 615 F.3d at 355; Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e). To meet this burden, the non-movant [*5]  must go beyond the pleadings and present specific facts indicating a genuine issue for trial. Bayle, 615 F.3d at 355. "[C]onclusory statements, speculation, and unsubstantiated assertions" are not specific facts and are not sufficient to defeat a motion for summary judgment. RSR Corp. v. Int'l Ins. Co., 612 F.3d 851, 857 (5th Cir. 2010).

III.

DISCUSSION

A. Scope of Plaintiff's EEOC Charge

i. Federal Law Claims
Defendant argues that Plaintiff's EECO charge "alleges that discrimination took place from May 23, 2016 through July 1, 2016," and therefore, summary judgment is appropriate for "any cause of action (and any damages claim) based on alleged actions occurring (a) before May 23, 2016 and/or (b) after July 1, 2016." Def.'s Mot. for Summ. J. ¶ 17. Plaintiff counters, arguing that Defendant misrepresented the content of the EEOC charge. Specifically, Plaintiff points to the narrative of the EEOC charge, which provides "the disability harassment began in April 2016 . . . [and concluded] with the unlawful termination . . . in December 2016." Pl.'s Resp. to Def.'s Mot. for Summ. J. p. 2; see also Pl.'s App. 286-88. Plaintiff's viewpoint is that "[s]imply because there was a typographical error in the boxes marked 'earliest' and 'latest' [that error] has no effect on the scope [*6]  of the charge or the investigation." Id.
"ADA and TCHRA claims are properly raised in federal court only when 'they are within the scope of the . . . investigation which can reasonably be expected to grow out of the [administrative] charge of discrimination" Williams v. Tarrant Cty. Coll. Dist., 717 F. App'x 440, 445 (5th Cir. 2018), reh'g denied (Feb. 20, 2018) (quoting Robles v. Tex. Tech Univ. Health Scis. Ctr., 131 F.Supp.3d 616, 632 (W.D. Tex. Sept. 18, 2015)). The Fifth Circuit "views administrative charges in the 'broadest reasonable sense.'" Id. (quoting Sanchez v. Standard Brands, Inc., 431 F.2d 455, 467 (5th Cir. 1970). Accordingly, "[b]ecause administrative charges are rarely drawn by an attorney, the only absolutely essential element of a timely charge of discrimination is the allegation of fact contained therein." Id. (internal citations omitted); see also Sanchez, 431 F.2d at 462 ("the crucial element of a charge of discrimination is the factual statement contained therein. Everything else entered on the form is, in essence, a mere amplification of the factual allegations.")
The Court, having reviewed Plaintiff's charge, is of the opinion Plaintiff's typographical error in the boxes disclosing the dates of discrimination does not limit the scope of the charge. Accordingly, to the extent Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment seeks to limit the scope of Plaintiff's Federal law claims, the Court is of the opinion that the same [*7]  should be DENIED.

ii. State Law Claims
Under the Texas Labor Code, a charge "must be filed not later than the 180th day after the date the alleged unlawful employment practice occurred." Tex. Labor Code § 21.202. A charge filed with the EEOC, more than 180 days after the occurrence of an alleged unlawful employment practice under the Texas Commission on Human Rights Act ("TCHRA"), is subject to dismissal as time-barred.2 See Adams v. DaimlerChrysler Services NA LLC, 252 F. App'x 681, 683 (5th Cir. 2007).
Plaintiff filed his EEOC charge on January 10, 2017. Applying the limitation imposed by the TCHRA, all state law claims arising before July 14, 2016, must be dismissed as time-barred. Accordingly, the Court is of the opinion that all claims arising under state law that are alleged to have occurred between April of 2016 and July 13, 2016, should be DISMISSED as time-barred.

B. Disability Discrimination
Title II of the ADA prohibits employer discrimination of an employee who is a "qualified individual with a disability on the basis of that disability." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). "In a discriminatory-termination action under the ADA, the employee may either present direct evidence that she was discriminated against because of her disability or alternatively proceed under the burden-shifting analysis first articulated [*8]  in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green. . . ." E.E.O.C. v. LHC Grp., Inc., 773 F.3d 688, 694 (5th Cir. 2014). "Under the burden-shifting test established by the Supreme Court . . . a plaintiff who . . . relies on circumstantial evidence to claim discriminatory treatment must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination." Henderson v. City of Dallas, No. 3:16-CV-3317-S, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 154145, 2018 WL 4326936, at *9 (N.D. Tex. Sept. 10, 2018) (Scholer, J.)
"To establish a prima facie discrimination claim under the ADA, a plaintiff must prove: (1) that he has a disability; (2) that he was qualified for the job; [and] (3) that he was subject to an adverse employment decision on account of his disability."3 LHC Grp., Inc., 773 F.3d at 697; see E.E.O.C. v. Chevron Phillips Chem. Co., 570 F.3d 606, 615 (5th Cir. 2009). In the event the plaintiff "is successful, then [the defendant] must articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for terminating [the plaintiff]." Id. The burden then shifts back to the plaintiff to show that the defendant's "proffered reason is pretextual." Id.

i. Direct Evidence
Plaintiff argues that there is direct evidence to support his claim of disability discrimination. In this context, "[d]irect evidence is evidence which, if believed, proves the fact without inference or presumption." Etienne v. Spanish Lake Truck & Casino Plaza, L.L.C., 547 F. App'x 484, 488 (5th Cir. 2013). "If an inference [*9]  is required for the evidence to be probative as to [defendant's] discriminatory animus in firing [plaintiff], the evidence is circumstantial, not direct." Bennett v. Dallas Indep. Sch. Dist., 936 F. Supp. 2d 767, 776 (N.D. Tex. 2013) (Fitzwater, J.) (quoting Sandstad v. CB Richard Ellis, Inc., 309 F.3d 893, 897-98 (5th Cir. 2002)). The Court, having reviewed all supporting evidence, finds that the record does not support Plaintiff's assertion that he can establish a claim for disability discrimination through direct evidence. Rather, the Court is of the opinion the evidence proffered fails to establish that Defendant relied upon any forbidden factor in making the ultimate decision to fire Plaintiff. Accordingly, Plaintiff must "show a violation of the ADA using circumstantial evidence [and] must satisfy the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework." Cannon v. Jacobs Field Servs. N. Am., Inc., 813 F.3d 586, 590 (5th Cir. 2016).

ii. Prima Facie Case for Disability Discrimination
The Court finds Plaintiff has not met his burden of establishing a prima facie case for disability discrimination because he fails to adequately address the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework analysis in his response. The Court will assume arguendo that Plaintiff adequately responded to Defendant's Motion and will address each requirement, in turn, needed to establish a prima facie case for disability discrimination.

a. Plaintiff's [*10]  Disablity
A person is disabled under the ADA if he (1) has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities, (2) has a record of such impairment, or (3) is regarded as having such an impairment. 42 U.S.C. § 12102(2); see Weems v. Dallas Indep. Sch. Dist., 260 F. Supp. 3d 719, 727 (N.D. Tex. 2017) (Lindsay, J.). The record clearly indicates Plaintiff suffers from Type II Diabetes. Additionally, it does not appear that the parties dispute such. Accordingly, the Court will assume Plaintiff satisfies the first element of establishing a prima facie case.

b. Qualified Individual
Plaintiff must next prove that he was qualified as it relates to his employment position. "To determine whether a plaintiff is otherwise qualified for a given job, the court must conduct a two-part inquiry: first, it must determine whether the plaintiff could perform the essential functions of his job, functions that bear more than a marginal relationship to the job at issue,' and second, if it finds that the plaintiff is not able to perform the essential functions of his job, it must determine whether any reasonable accommodation by the employer would enable him to perform those functions." Martinez v. Lennox Int'l, Inc., No. CIV.A.3:96-CV-0702-G, 1997 WL 209306, at *3 (N.D. Tex. Apr. 18, 1997) (Fish, J.) (quoting [*11]  Chandler v. City of Dallas, 2 F.3d 1385, 1393-94 (5th Cir.1993)).4 Of significance, "[t]he burden lies with [Plaintiff] to show that he is otherwise qualified." Id.
The Court, having reviewed the parties' briefing and all evidence submitted, finds Plaintiff was not a qualified individual under the ADA. The Court is of the opinion, based upon the evidence proffered and the reasons set forth in Defendant's Motion that Plaintiff, with or without reasonable accommodations, could not perform the essential functions of his job.5,6 Further, the evidence demonstrates, that at the time of termination, Plaintiff used insulin at work, stored insulin at work, was not restricted from attending doctor's appointments, and did not request any further accommodations. Def.'s Ex. D [Pl.'s Dep. App. p. 126 at 247:1-7]. In any event, "the ADA does not insulate an employee from adverse action taken by an employer because of misconduct in the workplace, even if his improper behavior is arguably attributable to an impairment." Green v. Medco Health Sols. of Texas, LLC, 947 F. Supp. 2d 712, 729 (N.D. Tex. 2013) (Boyle, J.) Accordingly, Plaintiff was not qualified as defined under the ADA.

c. Adverse Employment Decisions
The Court, having reviewed the parties' briefing and all relevant evidence, is of the opinion Plaintiff cannot show he was subject to an adverse [*12]  employment decision on account of a disability. The evidence proffered establishes Plaintiff was terminated for violating Defendant's Terminable Offenses Agreement. The Agreement provides employees may be subject to disciplinary action and/or immediate termination for "[f]ailure to maintain alertness: sleeping. . ." Def.'s App. p. 145. Further, Plaintiff admitted the reason he was terminated was because he was not awake at work.7 Accordingly, the Court finds Plaintiff cannot show he was subjected to an adverse employment decision on account of a disability.
The Court, having found no direct evidence to support Plaintiff's disability discrimination claim and having concluded Plaintiff has not carried his burden in establishing a prima facie case, is of the opinion Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment should be GRANTED as it relates to the claim alleging disability discrimination. In the alternative, even if Plaintiff presented a prima facie case for disability discrimination, the Court is of the opinion Defendant has a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for terminating Plaintiff: failing to be alert at work.8 Moreover, Plaintiff fails to rebut Defendant's position and establish that [*13]  the reason for termination was pretextual. To the extent Plaintiff asserts claims arising under the Texas Labor Code for disability discrimination that have not been dismissed as time-barred, the Court GRANTS Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment on those remaining claims.

C. Disability Harassment
To prevail on a claim of disability-based harassment, "the plaintiff must prove: (1) that she belongs to a protected group; (2) that she was subjected to unwelcome harassment; (3) that the harassment complained of was based on her disability or disabilities; (4) that the harassment complained of affected a term, condition, or privilege of employment; and (5) that the employer knew or should have known of the harassment and failed to take prompt, remedial action." Flowers v. S. Reg'l Physician Servs. Inc., 247 F.3d 229, 235-36 (5th Cir. 2001). The parties do not dispute Plaintiff belongs to a protected group. Accordingly, the Court will assume arguendo Plaintiff belongs to a protected group.
Plaintiff alleges he was harassed as a result of his diabetic condition. Plaintiff argues that as a result of having diabetes, he developed eczema and dry skin which prevented him from abiding by Defendant's policy requiring that employees maintain clean shaven faces. [*14]  Plaintiff contends that as a result of his inability to shave, he was denied part of an employment raise. Further, Plaintiff alleges that due to a shoulder surgery, he was prevented from following Defendant's dress code requiring that employees tuck in their shirts. Plaintiff maintains he was subject to continuing ridicule relating to Defendant's dress code and grooming requirements.
The Court, having reviewed the parties' briefing and all relevant evidence, is of the opinion Plaintiff's disability harassment claim fails to meet the standards imposed by Fifth Circuit precedent. Specifically, the Court finds Plaintiff fails to sufficiently connect his harassment claim based upon his inability to shave with his diabetic condition. Defendant points out that Plaintiff was "excused from the shaving requirement [because of his] eczema and dry skin." Def.'s Ex. K, App. 160. The medical doctor's letter excusing Plaintiff from shaving does not mention Plaintiff's diabetes. Accordingly, any harassing conduct complained of is not based on Plaintiff's diabetic condition. Likewise, the conduct complained of regarding Defendant's dress code is based upon Plaintiff's inability to tuck in his shirt [*15]  due to a shoulder surgery, not his diabetic condition.
Accordingly, the Court GRANTS Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment as it relates to Plaintiff's disability harassment claims. To the extent Plaintiff asserts claims arising under the Texas Labor Code for disability harassment that have not been dismissed as time-barred, the Court GRANTS Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment on those remaining claims.

D. Failure to Accommodate
"A plaintiff must prove the following statutory elements to prevail in a failure-to-accommodate claim: (1) the plaintiff is a qualified individual with a disability; (2) the disability and its consequential limitations were known by the covered employer; and (3) the employer failed to make reasonable accommodations for such known limitations." Feist v. Louisiana, Dep't of Justice, Office of the Atty. Gen., 730 F.3d 450, 452 (5th Cir. 2013).
In any event, it appears Plaintiff fails to adequately respond to Defendant's arguments relating to his claim of failure to accommodate. Further, Plaintiff fails to pinpoint any request(s) that were not subsequently accommodated.9 Accordingly, the Court is of the opinion that Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment as it relates to Plaintiff's claim of failure to accommodate be GRANTED. To the extent Plaintiff asserts [*16]  claims arising under the Texas Labor Code alleging failure to accommodate that have not been dismissed as time-barred, the Court GRANTS Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment on those remaining claims.

E. Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process
Fifth Circuit precedent recognizes that when an employee's "disability, resulting limitations, and necessary reasonable accommodations, are not open, obvious, and apparent to the employer, the initial burden rests primarily upon the employee . . . to specifically identify the disability and resulting limitations, and to suggest the reasonable accommodations." E.E.O.C. v. Chevron Phillips Chem. Co., LP, 570 F.3d 606, 621 (5th Cir. 2009). "[O]nce the employee presents a request for an accommodation, the employer is required to engage in the interactive process so that together they can determine what reasonable accommodations might be available." Id. at 22; see Taylor v. Principal Fin. Grp., Inc., 93 F.3d 155, 165 (5th Cir. 1996) ("it is the employee's initial request for an accommodation which triggers the employer's obligation to participate in the interactive process of determining one. If the employee fails to request an accommodation, the employer cannot be held liable for failing to provide one.") In the event the "employer does not engage in a good faith interactive process, that employer [*17]  violates the ADA. . . ." Id. at 21.
Defendant argues "[t]he ADA does not create a separate cause of action for failure to engage in an interactive process." Def.'s Mot. for Summ. J. ¶ 61. Alternatively, if the Court recognizes such an action, Defendant argues summary judgment is warranted pursuant to the arguments previously raised. See id. at ¶ 62.
Plaintiff's deposition transcript provides:
Mr. McAllister: Have you ever spoken to Champion about that your diabetes can lead to you passing out and falling asleep at work?
Clark: Like I said, I think we talked about [it] when it [came] up, about eating some type of foods or some of the sweets they brought, you know. Comments were made, "well if you hear a thump in my office, come check on me."
. . . .
Mr. McAllister: Did you ever tell Champion you needed an accommodation because you might pass out and fall asleep at work from diabetes?
Clark: The only accommodation I asked for was to put the refigerator, mini-fridge in my office for the insulin.
Mr. McAllister: You never asked for an accommodation about diabetes possibly leading to — you falling asleep, passing out at work. Right?
Clark: No.
Mr. McAllister: You agree with me that you never did that. Right? [*18] 
Clark: Yes.
Def.'s Ex. D [Pl.'s Dep. App. 125-26 at 246:6-247:7]
The Court, having considered the parties' briefing and all proffered evidence, is of the opinion Plaintiff did not carry his burden "to specifically identify the disability and resulting limitations, and suggest . . . reasonable accommodations." Chevron Phillips Chem. Co., LP, 570 F.3d at 621. Further, any accommodations Plaintiff did request were fulfilled. Accordingly, the Court is not persuaded Defendant failed to engage in the interactive process. Therefore, the Court GRANTS Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment as it relates to Plaintiff's claim alleging failure to engage in the interactive process. To the extent Plaintiff asserts claims arising under the Texas Labor Code for failure to engage in the interactive process that have not been dismissed as time-barred, the Court GRANTS Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment on those remaining claims.

F. Retaliation
"Retaliation claims brought under the ADA are analyzed using the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting test. . . ." First, a plaintiff must establish a prima facie case of retaliation. Cortez v. Raytheon Co., 663 F. Supp. 2d 514, 525 (N.D. Tex. 2009) (Kinkeade, J.) To establish a prima facie claim of retaliation, a plaintiff must show: "(1) engagement in an activity protected [*19]  by the ADA, (2) an adverse employment action, and (3) a causal connection between the protected act and the adverse action." Tabatchnik v. Cont'l Airlines, 262 F. App'x 674, 676 (5th Cir. 2008). "If . . . successful, the burden shifts to [defendant] to articulate a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the challenged employment action." Cortez, 663 F. Supp. at 525. "If [defendant] does so, [plaintiff] must demonstrate that the proffered reason is either pretextual, or if the proffered reason is admittedly true, that retaliatory intent also motivated [defendant's] . . . decisions." Id. "Therefore, the ultimate issue is whether the employer unlawfully retaliated against the employee for exercising protected activity. The ultimate issue of retaliation requires the employee to prove that the adverse employment action would not have occurred 'but-for' the protected activity. Sherrod v. Am. Airlines, Inc., 132 F.3d 1112, 1122 (5th Cir. 1998).
Contrary to Defendant's position, and although Plaintiff's complaint could have been more clearly pleaded, the Court is of the opinion Plaintiff asserts a cause of action for retaliation.10 Plaintiff claims he was retaliated against after launching an internal complaint against certain employees based upon harassment, thereby leading to his subsequent termination. However, the Court is of the opinion Plaintiff [*20]  fails to assert a prima facie claim alleging retaliation.
Although Plaintiff did suffer an adverse employment action by virtue of his termination, the Court is not persuaded Plaintiff has established a prima facie claim for retaliation because he fails to show a causal connection between any protected act and the adverse action. "In order to establish the causal link between the protected conduct and the illegal employment action as required by the prima facie case, the evidence must show that the employer's decision to terminate was based in part on knowledge of the employee's protected activity." Sherrod v. Am. Airlines, Inc., 132 F.3d 1112, 1122 (5th Cir. 1998). The Court, having considered the parties' briefing and all relevant evidence is of the opinion Plaintiff fails to establish Defendant's decision to terminate Plaintiff was based upon Defendant's knowledge of any protected activity.
In the alternative, even if Plaintiff were to establish a prima facie claim for retaliation, Defendant has already asserted a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the challenged employment action in that Plaintiff was terminated for failing to be alert at work.11 Further, the Court finds Plaintiff has failed to satisfy his burden of demonstrating that the proffered [*21]  reason for termination was pretextual. Ultimately, Plaintiff has not proven "that the adverse employment action would not have occurred 'but-for' the protected activity." Sherrod v. Am. Airlines, Inc., 132 F.3d 1112, 1122 (5th Cir. 1998). Accordingly, the Court hereby GRANTS Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment on Plaintiff's claim alleging retaliation under both the ADA and the Texas Labor Code.

G. Damages
The Court, having granted Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment as it relates Plaintiff's claims alleging disability discrimination, disability harassment, failure to accommodate, retaliation, and failure to engage in the interactive process, pursuant to the ADA and Texas Labor Code, hereby DENIES Plaintiff's request for compensatory damages. The Court further DENIES Plaintiff's request for back pay, front pay, exemplary damages, attorney's fees and expert fees.

IV.

CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, Defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment is GRANTED. Specifically, the Motion is GRANTED as it relates to Plaintiff's claims alleging disability discrimination, disability harassment, failure to accommodate, retaliation, and failure to engage in the interactive process arising under both the ADA and Texas Labor Code. Any other relief sought [*22]  by Plaintiff is hereby DENIED. Further, the Court's trial setting of January 7, 2019, is hereby VACATED.
SO ORDERED this 14th day of November, 2018.
/s/ Sam R. Cummings
SENIOR UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

FINAL JUDGMENT
On this day, the Court granted Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment. For the reasons stated in the Court's Order of even date,
IT IS ORDERED, ADJUDGED, AND DECREED that Plaintiff, George Charles Clark, take nothing on his claims asserted against Defendant, Champion National Security, Inc. This judgment fully and finally resolves all claims against Defendant in the above-styled and numbered civil action.
SO ORDERED this 14th day of November, 2018.
/s/ Sam R. Cummings
SAM R. CUMMINGS
SENIOR UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

