Cloutier v. City of Lowell
United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts
July 12, 2017, Decided; July 12, 2017, Filed
Civil Action No. 15-12780-FDS

Reporter
2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 226890 *; 2017 WL 11488633
DIANE CLOUTIER, Plaintiff, v. CITY OF LOWELL; BERNARD F. LYNCH, in his official and individual capacities; CHRISTINE P. O'CONNOR, in her official and individual capacities; MARY M. CALLERY, in her official and individual capacities; KAREN A. GAGNON, in her official and individual capacities; VICTORIA B. WOODLEY, in her official and individual capacities; SUSAN FOUGSTEDT, in her official and individual capacities; SARAH E. GILBERT, in her official and individual capacities; ROBERT SPARKS, individually and as President of Absolute Investigations, Inc.; ABSOLUTE INVESTIGATIONS, INC.; and DOES 1-10, Defendants.
Prior History: Cloutier v. City of Lowell, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 166889 (D. Mass., Dec. 14, 2015)
Counsel:  [*1] Diane Cloutier, Plaintiff, Pro se, Lowell, MA.
For Diane Cloutier, Plaintiff: Lana Sullivan, Newton, MA.
For Absolute Investigations, Inc., Robert Sparks, Defendants: Kara G. Thorvaldsen, LEAD ATTORNEY, George C. Rockas, Wilson, Elser, Moskowitz, Edelman & Dicker, LLP, Boston, MA.
For City of Lowell, Karen A. Gagnon, Bernard F. Lynch, Christine P. O'Connor, Defendants: James F. Wellock, LEAD ATTORNEY, Ciy of Lowell Law Department, City Hall, Lowell, MA; Rachel M. Brown, LEAD ATTORNEY, Hannah B. Pappenheim, City of Lowell Law Department, Lowell, MA.
For Mary M. Callery, Sarah E. Gilbert, Susan Fougstedt, Victoria B. Woodley, Defendants: James F. Wellock, LEAD ATTORNEY, Ciy of Lowell Law Department, City Hall, Lowell, MA; Rachel M. Brown, LEAD ATTORNEY, City of Lowell Law Department, Lowell, MA.
Judges: F. Dennis Saylor IV, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: F. Dennis Saylor IV
Opinion



MEMORANDUM AND ORDER ON DEFENDANTS' MOTIONS FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
SAYLOR, J.
This is a case involving, among other things, alleged disability discrimination and retaliation. Plaintiff Diane Cloutier, a former Library Assistant in the Pollard Memorial Library in Lowell, Massachusetts, has brought suit against the City of Lowell, various [*2]  City employees, a private corporation, a private individual, and ten unnamed defendants.
Defendants have moved for summary judgment on all counts. For the reasons set forth below, the motions will be granted as to all claims except for one group of claims: the claims for retaliation arising out of plaintiff's discharge brought against the City and certain City defendants.

I. Background

A. Standard for Consideration of Evidence
There are relatively few facts in this relatively uncomplicated case that are genuinely in dispute. Nonetheless, plaintiff has filed 337 pages of responses to defendants' two statements of material fact that purport to contest nearly every factual assertion that they make. For example, she has contested such seemingly uncontroversial facts as "The City of Lowell's public library is called the Pollard Memorial Library," and "The Library has several departments, of which 'Circulation' is one." (Pl. Resp. to City Def. SMF ¶¶ 1-2). She has also "denied" facts despite asserting substantially the same information in her own response. For example, she denied defendants' statement that "[o]n September 11 and 12, 2013, Cloutier called in sick"—but admitted instead that she [*3]  "called in sick" on those days. (Id. ¶ 62).
Plaintiff's approach has made it extraordinarily, and unnecessarily, difficult to establish what is actually in dispute, or indeed what is properly in the record for consideration on summary judgment. Under the circumstances, some discussion of the standard under which courts are permitted to consider facts on a motion for summary judgment is warranted.
Rule 56(c) provides that "[a] party asserting that a fact cannot be or is genuinely disputed must support the assertion by . . . citing to particular parts of materials in the record." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(1)(A). A party may use an affidavit to support or oppose a motion for summary judgment, if such an affidavit is made on personal knowledge and sets out admissible evidence to which the affiant is competent to testify. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(4). A party opposing summary judgment may not rest "upon mere allegation or denials of his pleading." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 256, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). In evaluating a motion for summary judgment, courts must review the facts adduced from admissible sources in the light most favorable to the non-moving party to determine whether there is a genuine dispute as to any material fact. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a); Daury v. Smith, 842 F.2d 9, 11 (1st Cir. 1988).
Consistent with that standard, the following facts are—unless otherwise noted—not [*4]  genuinely in dispute and are presented in the light most favorable to Cloutier.

B. Factual Background

1. The Parties
Plaintiff Diane Cloutier is a former Library Assistant at the Pollard Memorial Library in Lowell, Massachusetts. (Pl. Resp. to City Def. SMF ¶¶ 2, 4).
Seven of the eight individual defendants are currently or formerly employed with the City of Lowell. Victoria Woodley is the Library Director. (Woodley Aff., ¶ 2). Susan Fougstedt is the Assistant Library Director. (Fougstedt Aff. ¶ 2). Bernard Lynch was the Lowell City Manager, or "chief executive" of the City from 2006 to 2014. (Lynch Aff. ¶¶ 2-3). Mary Callery is the Director of the City's Human Relations Department. (Callery Aff. ¶ 2). Christine O'Connor is the City Solicitor. (O'Connor Aff. ¶ 2). Karen Gagnon is the City's Workers' Compensation Agent. (Gagnon Aff. ¶ 2). Sarah Gilbert is the City Physician. (Gilbert Aff. ¶ 2). The City and its employees will collectively be referred to as "the City defendants."
The remaining individual defendant, Robert Sparks, is a private investigator. He is the president and founder of Absolute Investigations, Inc. (Sparks Decl. ¶ 1). Absolute is a licensed private investigation firm. [*5]  (Id. ¶ 6). Sparks and Absolute will collectively be referred to as "the Absolute defendants."

2. Cloutier's Position
Cloutier began working for the City of Lowell as a Library Assistant in January 1998. (Pl. Resp. to City Def. SMF ¶ 4). She held that position for nearly sixteen years, until October 29, 2013. (Id. ¶ 4). While employed with the City, she was a member of a union and her employment was subject to a collective-bargaining agreement. (Id. ¶ 12; Id. Ex. 60-61).
As described in the job posting from the time that Cloutier was hired, the "essential duties and responsibilities" of a Library Assistant are as follows:
Perform[] routine acquisitions, cataloging and processing tasks.
Provide[] reference and reader's advisory assistance to library users; assist[] in use of various services, including but not limited to: on-line public access catalogs, CD ROM's, micro-form printer-readers, and similar technology.
Direct[] the activities of the[] library pages.
Perform all tasks related to circulation and inventory of library materials to users; maintain[] database.
Assist[] in planning and executing all phases of children's/adult programming.
Process[] reserve requests for library materials [*6]  and pursue[] via computer links with appropriate databases as needed.
Maintain[] non-print materials and equipment.
Other duties as assigned.
(Id. Ex. 34).
Woodley described the "principal functions" of a Library Assistant as (1) pulling requested material from shelves and reshelving materials ("pull list duty"), (2) checking in items from bins that have been returned ("bin duty"), and (3) sitting at a public desk for four-hour shifts responding to public inquiries ("public desk duty"). (Woodley Aff. ¶¶ 11-13). Three Library Assistants similarly testified that pull list, bin, and public desk duties are the principal duties of a Library Assistant, although other duties may also be assigned. (Dominique Aff. ¶ 5; MacPhail Aff. ¶ 5; Sakellaris Aff. ¶ 6). Library assistants may also make calls to patrons, perform data entry, and perform other miscellaneous tasks from time to time. (Woodley Aff. ¶¶ 11-13).

3. Cloutier's Vision Impairment
Cloutier has a congenital defect that has left her severely nearsighted in both eyes. (Pl. Resp. to City Def. SMF Ex. 38). Her right eye is amblyopic, or "lazy." (Id.). In 2000, she had a severe retinal detachment that caused her left eye to become totally blind. [*7]  (Id. Ex. 37). She had surgery to repair the detachment, which restored her vision; however, she experienced multiple complications and had to undergo subsequent procedures that left her with extensive scarring, blurred vision, and blind spots. (Id.). She has no lens in her left eye. (Id.). Cloutier's vision impairment prevents her from reading small print and makes it difficult to refocus on objects on different visual planes. (Id.). As an accommodation for her vision impairment, in 2005, Cloutier requested that she not be required to read small print and that she not be required to work at a public desk for more than two hours per day. (Cloutier Dep. Vol I 62).
Among the documents Library Assistants are required to read are "hold slips," which identify patrons who have requested books to be placed on hold to be collected later. (Woodley Aff. ¶ 14). For many years, the hold slips were written in small print that was difficult for Cloutier to read. (Id.; Cloutier Dep. Vol. I 123-125). Cloutier testified that on several occasions she was required to read small print on hold slips, but could not recall when or the number of times. (Id. 116). In May 2011, the library switched the software it used [*8]  to produce hold slips, and the size of the font increased. (Id. 124-25; Woodley Aff. ¶ 14). After that change, Cloutier was able to read the hold slips, apparently without difficulty. (Cloutier Dep. Vol. 1 125; Pl. Resp. to City Def. SMF ¶ 8).
Between 2005 and her departure from the library in 2013, Cloutier was assigned public desk shifts of no more than two hours consecutively, as well as fifteen-minute shifts to relieve another employee during that person's break. (Woodley Aff. ¶ 15). From time to time, she was scheduled to work both a fifteen-minute shift and a two-hour shift on the same day. (Id.). For three days in 2009, Cloutier was scheduled to work a desk shift for longer than two hours consecutively. (City Def. SMF Ex. 21 106-08; Cloutier Dep. Vol. I 108-09). Cloutier testified that, other than those three days, she could not recall any occasions when she was required to work at a public desk for more than two hours, although it was possible that it happened. (Cloutier Dep. Vol. I 108-09).

4. Cloutier's Asthma
Cloutier has asthma. (Pl. Resp. to City Def. Ex. 119). She notified the library of that condition as early as May 2010, when she provided a note from the Director of Interventional [*9]  Pulmonology at the Lahey Clinic. The note stated that she has "chronic asthma" and requested that she be transferred away from an area where renovations were then occurring to an area "where she will not come into contact with the dust and work going on near her." (City Def. SMF Ex. 34 at CLO 607). The record does not indicate when the relevant renovations began or ended.

5. April 2011 Electronic Chat
On April 28, 2011, two non-supervisory library employees, Molly Hancock and Elizabeth Brassel, engaged in an electronic chat that referred unsympathetically to Cloutier. (Brassel Aff. ¶ 21). Brassel is legally blind and uses a vision-assistance machine at the library. (Id. ¶¶ 20-21).
Brassel started the chat with Hancock with the statement that "She [Cloutier] never, ever shuts up." (Pl. Resp. to City Def. SMF Ex. 52). The two proceeded to complain about Cloutier's long-windedness, using colorful language. (Id.). Among other things, Hancock stated, "It's a compulsion. I bet Hitler was like that. Maybe the reason people follow those types is they hope that by agreeing with them they will shut it." (Id.). Brassel asked Hancock if she would call someone if Brassel "get[s] arrested for murder" [*10]  to which Hancock replied "I can . . . say I was a witness and swear it was a suicide. It's up to the authorities to determine how she choked herself to death on a piece of a vision assistance machine." (Id.). Brassel later stated, "Okay, how about this one. I load a bookcart up with some very heavy things and run her over (and over and over)." (Id.).
Brassel and Hancock have both since stated that the vision-assistance machine referred to in the chat was that belonging to Brassel. (Brassel Aff. ¶ 21; Hancock Aff. ¶ 18). There is no evidence in the record that Cloutier uses, or has ever used, a vision-assistance machine. According to Brassel and Hancock, the chat was "an expression of . . . frustration" and was not meant to be viewed by anyone else. (Brassel Aff. ¶ 21; Hancock Aff. ¶ 18).
Nonetheless, in May 2011, someone left a print-out of the chat enclosed in a sealed envelope bearing Cloutier's name in the circulation staff mailbox, where she discovered it. (Cloutier Dep. Vol. I 206). There is no evidence in the record as to who placed it there, or why.
Cloutier testified that after receiving the print-out, she began to fear Brassel and Hancock because "they threatened to murder [her]." [*11]  (Id. 208). She did not, however, file a police report concerning the incident. (Id. 206).
Lynch (the City Manager) met with Brassel and Hancock following the incident and verbally reprimanded them. (Lynch Dep. 147). He did not meet with Cloutier concerning the incident, nor did he order a further investigation. (Id. 149-150).
In February 2012, Cloutier filed a complaint with the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination ("MCAD") naming the City, Lynch, Woodley, Fougstedt, Brassel, and Hancock as defendants. (City Def. SMF Ex. 43). The complaint alleged that the City had discriminated against Cloutier on the basis of her vision impairment and cited the electronic chat as an example of harassment. (Id.). That matter remains pending. (O'Connor Aff. ¶ 8).

6. Cloutier's June 2012 Shoulder Injury
On June 23, 2012, Cloutier reportedly injured her right shoulder while closing a window in the library. (City Def. SMF Ex. 66 at CP 1262). She provided the library with a note from her primary-care physician dated June 26, 2012. The note indicated a diagnosis of a "shoulder injury" and stated that she should be placed on "light duty" with "no heavy lifting" for at least two weeks, until she saw an orthopedic surgeon. [*12]  (Id. Ex. 35 at CP 1268).
Another doctor from her primary-care physician's office wrote a more detailed note on July 2, 2012, stating "no pull list [that is, removing and reshelving books] because it involves stretching and bending, no public desk time as it involves multitasking and use of both arms," and that she could "answer phone[s], make calls, [perform] data entry and check in items off [the] public desk." (Id. at CP 1267).
On July 11, 2012, Cloutier provided an additional note concerning the shoulder injury from an orthopedic specialist. (Id. at CP 1115). That note provided that her work duties should include "[n]o repetitive lifting with r[ight] arm, may use l[eft] arm for 1-arm activities. . . . No lifting > 10 lbs, no pull list or public desk if requires 2 hands to do job." (Id.). It further indicated that those restrictions would be in place "until follow-up in 4-6 w[ee]ks." (Id.).
Cloutier submitted additional notes from the orthopedic specialist repeating those restrictions in August, September, and November 2012, and February 2013. (Id. at CP 1119, 10224, 1127, 1130). On April 1, 2013, more than nine months after her shoulder was injured, she submitted a note from an orthopedic [*13]  surgeon stating that "she continues to have significant work restrictions" and that "she is presently on light duty, no lifting greater than 10 pounds. No climbing ladders, no pulling, limited to standing, no kneeling and bending." (Id. at CP 1131).
Because of her shoulder injury, beginning in July 2012 Cloutier was no longer assigned to public desk duty, pull list duty, or bin duty. (City Def. SMF Ex. 63; Fougstedt Aff. ¶ 10; Pl. Resp. to City Def. SMF ¶ 24).1 Her direct supervisor, Pam Colt, observed that Cloutier's duties became less onerous following her shoulder injury, and were ultimately reduced to making phone calls and doing data entry. (Colt Aff. at ¶ 12; Fougstedt Aff. ¶ 10). Other employees, including fellow Library Assistants, confirmed that Cloutier's duties became less onerous after her shoulder injury. (Dominique Aff. ¶ 12; MacPhail Aff. ¶ 12; Sakellaris Aff. ¶ 12).
Cloutier contends that she would have been able to perform all of her duties if she had been given help, but that her supervisors "didn't want to do that; they overloaded me with work." (Cloutier Dep. Vol. II 124). When asked whether she requested assistance performing pull list or desk duty, she replied that [*14]  she could not remember having done so. (Id. 127-28). In early July 2012, before she was taken off of bin duty, she informed Fougstedt (the Assistant Library Director and one of her direct supervisors) that she could not perform bin duty unless someone could assist her by emptying the bins and removing the rubber bands and slips to allow her to check books in. (Pl. Resp. to City Def. SMF Ex. 80).
The City is self-insured for workers' compensation claims. Shortly after Cloutier's shoulder injury, the City began to pay for physical therapy and medical expenses related to the injury. (O'Connor Aff. ¶ 8; Cloutier Dep. Vol. I 220-21). It also reimbursed her for mileage costs to attend her medical appointments. (Cloutier Dep. Vol. I 220-21). Cloutier did not file a formal claim for workers' compensation benefits before the Department of Industrial Accidents. (Pl. Resp. to City Def. SMF Ex. 75 at 4). However, shortly after her injury on July 30, 2012, she submitted medical bills to the City's Nurse Case Manager, Patricia Svrcek, and wrote that those bills concerned her "Worker's Compensation Claim." (City Def. SMF Ex. 47). On September 24, 2012, she sent a letter, through counsel, to the Lowell City [*15]  Council stating that the "the Law Department has refused . . . to reimburse Ms. Cloutier for expenses associated with travel to her medical/physical therapy appointments for her injured shoulder even though she is legally entitled to such reimbursement under workers' compensation law." (City Def. SMF Ex. 5 at CP 6991).
Cloutier contends that during the summer of 2012, Fougstedt was watching her at work through hidden cameras. (Compl. ¶¶ 60-68). Fougstedt denies those allegations, and Cloutier has not provided any admissible evidence to substantiate that claim. (City Def. SMF Ex. 28 at 186-87; Deuso Dep. 69).
Beginning in the late summer 2012, Cloutier was assigned certain modified tasks that could be performed with only one arm. (Woodley Dep. 253-55). On September 6, 2012, Woodley (the Library Director) sent Cloutier a memorandum instructing her that she could resume checking in books, consistent with her work restriction, by using a new protocol. (City Def. SMF Ex. 56; Id. ¶ 30). Under that protocol, other staff members would sort books to select ones with barcodes on the front cover (some materials had internal barcodes), deliver those books to Cloutier, and she could scan them using [*16]  only one hand. (Id. Ex. 56). The instruction further provided that this work could be "carried out intermittently throughout [her] 7-hour workday as long as the total time [she] spend[s] performing these tasks doesn't exceed more than 2 hours per day." (Id.).
Cloutier refused to perform the work instruction, on the basis that it could not be performed with only one arm, and was not intended to be an accommodation but instead was a "punitive" measure. (Cloutier Dep. Vol. I 249-51).
On September 7, 2012, Karen Gagnon, who administers benefits to City employees related to workplace injuries, sent Cloutier a letter following up on an earlier conversation in which Cloutier had complained that the book-scanning work instruction violated her physician's work restriction. (City Def. SMF Ex. 48; Gagnon Aff. ¶ 3). Gagnon stated that she found that the work restriction "coincide[d] with [her] physician's recommended work restrictions," and that the City did not have "any medical evidence that rebuts [her] doctor's input or would otherwise prohibit [her] from performing the work instruction/assignment as outlined." (City Def. SMF Ex. 48).
On November 9, 2012, Woodley gave Cloutier a second memorandum [*17]  instructing her on a method for answering the library telephone using a headset that required the use of only one arm. (Id. Ex. 56). Cloutier says that she attempted to perform the work instruction on one occasion for three hours, but thereafter refused to do so again on the basis that answering the telephone required her to use two hands. (Cloutier Dep. Vol. I 261-63). She explained that she needed both hands to take the headset off and remove her reading glasses as needed on calls. (Id. 256-58). She contends that she requested "several" unspecified "alternatives" but that Woodley "would not hear of any of them." (Id. 260).
On November 14, 2012, counsel for Cloutier sent a letter to Gagnon stating that the headset instruction "clearly violates the medical restrictions issued by [] Cloutier's physician" and was part of a law department's effort to "harass, discriminate, and punish [Cloutier]." (City Def. SMF Ex. 45 at CP 7733).

7. October 2012 Medical Examination
On October 17, 2012, Gagnon sent Cloutier a letter scheduling a mandatory medical examination with the City Physician, Dr. Sarah Gilbert. (City Def. SMF Ex. 48 at CP 1620). The City contends that the examination was scheduled in connection with [*18]  what it considered to be a workers' compensation claim concerning Cloutier's shoulder injury. (Id. ¶ 38). Cloutier contends that the payments made to reimburse her for medical appointments and mileage in connection with the shoulder injury did not constitute workers' compensation benefits, because no formal claim had been lodged at that time. (Pl. Resp. to City Def. SMF ¶ 21). However, the letter notifying Cloutier of the appointment provided that the only sanction for failure to appear was the possible suspension of her workers' compensation benefits. (City Def. SMF Ex. 48 at CP 1620).
On October 22, 2012, Cloutier met with Dr. Gilbert for the examination in a room in City Hall. (Gilbert Aff., ¶¶ 6-7; Cloutier Dep. Vol. II 69). Also present for the examination was Corey Robinson, the vice-president of Cloutier's union, who accompanied Cloutier at her request, and the Nurse Case Manager, Patricia Svrcek. (City Def. SMF Ex. 68; Robinson Aff. ¶ 6). The examination room had a medical examining table, medical instruments next to the table, a sink, a medical scale, and a desk. (City Def. SMF Ex. 67). Cloutier contends that the room was a "public restroom"; however, photographs she took of [*19]  the room on the day of her examination reveal that although there was a small adjoining room with a lavatory, the lavatory was separated from the main area by a door. (Id.; Cloutier Dep. Vol. II 69-70). According to Dr. Gilbert, there was nothing unusual about the place of examination or the manner in which it was conducted. (Gilbert Aff. ¶ 9).
Dr. Gilbert reported that she "noticed certain inconsistencies [in] Cloutier's presentation and her complaints of pain." (Id.). In her written report, Dr. Gilbert detailed Cloutier's physical condition and capabilities with respect to her shoulder, and recommended that she submit to an "Independent Medical Examination" ("IME") with a specialist in orthopedic surgery for further diagnosis. (Pl. Resp. to City Def. SMF Ex. 104; City Def. SMF Ex. 50 at CP 1594; Id. ¶ 42).
The City sent Cloutier a letter informing her that a follow-up IME had been scheduled for December 20, 2012. The letter again warned that "refusal to submit to [the] examination may result in your Worker's Compensation benefits being suspended or denied." (City Def. SMF Ex. 48 at CP 1595).
Two days prior to the visit, counsel for Cloutier sent a letter to Gagnon stating that Cloutier [*20]  would "not be attending this 'exam.'" (Id. Ex. 45 at CP 7011). That letter stated that the fact the law department "continues to refuse to put ego and arrogance aside is despicable" and accused Gagnon of following her "base impulse to punish [Cloutier]." (Id.).

8. Winter 2012-13 Surveillance
After the October 2012 examination, Dr. Gilbert met with Gagnon, Svrcek, and O'Connor (the City Solicitor) to discuss whether the City should undertake surveillance of Cloutier "as a further diagnostic tool." (Gilbert Aff. ¶ 9). In early November 2012, Gagnon submitted a request to Absolute Investigations, Inc. for surveillance of Cloutier. (City Def. SMF Ex. 59; Pl. Resp. to City Def. SMF ¶ 106).
Absolute is a licensed private-investigation firm that often works with insurance companies and self-insured entities to conduct surveillance of individuals making injury claims. (Sparks Decl. ¶ 8). The City, which as noted is self-insured, had worked with Absolute on prior occasions to investigate workers' compensation claims. (O'Connor Aff. ¶ 9; City Def. SMF Ex. 4 ¶ 15).
An Absolute employee, Matthew Nawoichik, was the investigator responsible for performing surveillance on Cloutier. (Sparks Decl. ¶ 25). [*21] 2 Absolute provided the City with periodic reports and edited footage as the investigation progressed. (Sparks Decl. ¶¶ 28-30). Gagnon never spoke with Nawoichik directly. (Gagnon Dep. 169-70).
Absolute provides its investigators with hand-held video cameras to document the activities of subjects. (Sparks Dep. 27-28). Those cameras are purchased off-the-shelf and come equipped with a zoom function that enables users to focus in more closely on a particular area. (Id.). Nawoichik did not use a telephoto lens or any other special enhancement features on his camera in connection with the surveillance of Cloutier. (Nawoichik Dep. 159-60).
In the winter of 2012 to 2013, Absolute provided surveillance footage to the City from three periods: November 15-20, 2012, November 27-December 5, 2012, and February 1-7, 2013. (City Def. SMF Ex. 55).3 Typically, the footage shows Cloutier outdoors engaging in quotidian activities, such as entering and leaving the library, grocery stores, and her vehicle. (Id.). She was occasionally filmed indoors in public places, including in the library and at a grocery store. (Id.).
Some of the footage depicts Cloutier using both arms to perform activities, including [*22]  carrying a large pet crate, lifting grocery bags, and closing car doors. (City Def. SMF Ex. 55 at CP 7221, 7231, 7237, 7241). After reviewing the footage showing Cloutier performing activities with both arms, the City considered bringing a fraud claim, but ultimately decided not to pursue it. (Lynch Aff. ¶ 10).
The raw footage from December 10, 2012, includes four clips taken of Cloutier through the second-floor window of her physical therapist's office, apparently while she was attending an appointment. (Absolute Def. SMF ¶ 75; Pl. Resp. to Absolute Def. SMF Ex. 46 at Clip No. 294-297). The investigator took the footage in those clips from his vehicle as he sat in a parking lot adjacent to the building. (Pl. Resp. to Absolute Def. SMF Ex. 46 at Clip No. 294-297; Nawoichik Dep. 152). The blinds on the windows were drawn open, allowing a clear line of sight into the window from the street level. (Id.).
In the footage, the investigator zooms in on the window. (Id.). Three of the four clips depict Cloutier talking to another woman and nodding her head periodically. (Id. at Clip No. 294, 295, 297). No sounds from inside the building are audible. At one point, she briefly walks to another [*23]  area of the room and disappears behind a wall. (Id. at Clip No. 294, 295, 297). The clips of the physical therapist's office total 25 minutes and nine seconds in duration, of which Cloutier is visible for less than 15 minutes.

9. March 2013 Altercation with a Patron
In the spring of 2013, the Library Director, Victoria Woodley, was out on medical leave, and the former Library Director, Mary Johnson Lally, was serving as interim director. (Woodley Dep. ¶ 17).
On March 20, 2013, while Woodley was away, Cloutier was involved in an argument with a library patron. (City Def. SMF Ex. 38). She contends that she felt threatened by the patron and reported the incident to Fougstedt. Fougstedt did not call the police, and instead reported it to Lally. (Fougstedt Dep. 163-64). Cloutier filed a police report concerning the incident. (City Def. SMF Ex. 38). The following week, on March 28, 2013, the same patron returned to the library, and Cloutier again called the police. (Id.).
The library has a number of permanent video cameras installed for security purposes. (Deuso Dep. 69). Cloutier made multiple requests to O'Connor for the surveillance tapes of the incidents. (City Def. SMF Ex. 47 at CP 1917). [*24]  Cloutier's third request stated that the City's failure to provide the tapes is "no doubt . . . simply part of your plan to further retaliate against me for filing a claim with the MCAD." (Id.). The City apparently never produced the tapes. (Ans. ¶ 92). O'Connor contends that she never took possession of the tapes and suggests that they are now lost. (Id.).

10. May 2013 Suspension
By May 2013, Woodley had returned to work. On May 13, 2013, she asked Cloutier to attend a meeting in her office. (Pl. Resp. to City Def. SMF ¶ 47). Cloutier refused to attend without a union representative present, prompting Woodley to send her home for insubordination. (Id.; Woodley Dep. 182). Cloutier immediately called Robinson, the union representative, who told her to meet him outside of Woodley's office the following morning. (Robinson Aff. ¶ 13).
On the morning of May 14, Cloutier and Robinson arrived at Woodley's office. (Id.). When Woodley arrived, Robinson informed her that she needed to put something in writing concerning Cloutier's suspension for insubordination. (Id.). Woodley typed a note stating, "Diane is suspended" and gave it to Robinson. (Id.). Robinson responded that the note was unacceptable [*25]  and stated that they needed to involve Mary Callery in the Human Relations Department concerning the incident. (Id.).
In a follow-up meeting with Callery, Cloutier requested without success that the suspension letter be rescinded. (Id. ¶ 14). She returned to work the following day. She did not lose any pay or benefits as a result of the suspension. (City Def. SMF ¶ 47; City Def. Mem. in Supp. of Mot. to Dismiss Ex. J).

11. Letters from Cloutier Concerning the Law Department
From 2011 through 2013, Cloutier sent multiple letters to City Officials concerning alleged harassment by City employees. (City Def. SMF Ex. 45).
On November 22, 2011, Cloutier sent a letter through counsel to City Solicitor O'Connor detailing her harassment claims and offering the City "an opportunity to address the matter reasonably and responsibly and to permit the parties to avoid the time, expense and unpleasantness of protracted and public litigation over this matter." (Id. at CP 6104). On January 9, 2012, apparently after having received a response from O'Connor, she sent another letter stating that "[i]t is unfortunate that the City has chosen to eschew any meaningful dialogue . . . but if you, as City Solicitor, [*26]  . . . have determined that you would rather litigate at the taxpayers' expense . . . then so be it." (Id. at CP 6110).
On September 24, 2012, Cloutier, again through counsel, sent a letter to the City Council of Lowell stating that "the City should consider hiring separate counsel to represent its interests because members of the Law Department have been directly involved in the efforts to intimidate and punish Ms. Cloutier." (Id. at 6691). She sent another letter to the City Council on May 17, 2013, stating: "Yet again I strongly encourage you to hire separate counsel to represent the City's interests given the Law Department's direct involvement in the efforts to intimidate and punish Ms. Cloutier." (Id. at 7028).

12. September 2013 Altercation with Woodley
In the summer of 2013, the air conditioner in the main area of the library did not function consistently. (Fougstedt Dep. 149-153). In June and July 2013, Cloutier repeatedly requested that a custodian open the windows, which she said she needed to breathe more easily because of her asthma. (Pl. Resp. to City Def. SMF ¶ 50). On August 1, 2013, Cloutier provided a doctor's note in support of her request, which stated that "due to her breathing difficulties," [*27]  Cloutier needed "a properly functioning air conditioner or [to] be allowed to open window[s] for fresh air while at work." (City Def. SMF Ex. 34 at CLO 753). Cloutier testified that she did not need open windows all of the time, and instead that they were required only when the air inside the library was not cool enough to breathe easily. (Cloutier Dep. Vol I 165).
The parties dispute many details concerning the frequency with which Cloutier was permitted to open windows in the main area of the library.4 However, it is undisputed that Cloutier was permitted to work in the circulation office with a window open as needed. (Woodley Aff. ¶¶ 21, 24). The Circulation Office was a separate room to the side of the main circulation desk on the first floor of the library. (Woodley Aff. ¶ 20). Fougstedt testified that there was also a properly functioning air conditioner in that office, although there appears to be some dispute about whether it worked consistently. (Fougstedt Dep. 149-50; City Def. SMF ¶ 53). Cloutier contends that she preferred not to work in the circulation office because she felt that doing so "segregate[ed]" and unnecessarily "confined" her, and prevented her from assisting [*28]  patrons while not on desk duty. (Pl. Resp. to City Def. SMF Ex. 119). On September 3, 2013, she wrote a letter to Woodley informing her of those objections that concluded: "I expect that upon receipt of this letter, the windows will be opened prior to opening the library on a daily basis. . . . It is outrageous that this retaliatory behavior continues in response to my filing an MCAD complaint." (Id.).
On September 10, 2013, Cloutier and Woodley got into an argument concerning the windows. (Cloutier Dep. Vol. II 128-30; Hickey Aff. ¶ 8; City Def. SMF ¶ 61). In Cloutier's telling, although the two women never made physical contact, Woodley was moving her arms up and down and "was right in [Cloutier's] face, to the point her hair was touching [Cloutier's] face." (Cloutier Dep. Vol II 129). Another employee who witnessed the event described it as initially "just talking" but then "it got louder" and at some point he "got in the middle of them, physically." (Hickey Aff. ¶ 8). Cloutier contends that she "quickly lifted" her right arm to "shield[] herself" from Woodley, and in the process, aggravated her shoulder injury. (Cloutier Dep. Vol II 129).
Cloutier called in sick due to shoulder pain [*29]  on September 11 and 12, 2013. (Pl. Resp. to City Def. SMF ¶ 62). On September 13, she provided Gagnon with a note from her orthopedic surgeon requesting that she be excused from work from September 12, to an "undetermined" time, and that she would be "reevalu[ated] after [an] MRI." (Id. Ex. 83 at CLO 758; City Def. SMF ¶ 63).
Cloutier did not show up for her scheduled shift on September 16, 2013. By that time, she had no accrued sick time or personal time remaining. (City Def. SMF Ex. 64). She also did not instruct the library to use her vacation time for her absences. (Callery Aff. ¶ 4). According to Callery, if an employee is out for medical reasons but has exhausted her sick leave and has not provided any instructions about use of vacation time, he or she can be removed from the payroll. (Id. ¶ 5). Pursuant to that policy, Cloutier was taken off the payroll during her absence. (City Def. SMF ¶ 63). The parties dispute whether Cloutier notified the City about the altercation with Woodley before or after she took that leave. (Robinson Aff. ¶ 20).

13. October 2013 Discharge
On October 2, 2013, Cloutier attended an appointment with an orthopedic surgeon at the Lahey Clinic. (City Def. [*30]  SMF Ex. 35 at CP 1145). The surgeon provided a note authorizing Cloutier to return to work subject to a "light duty" restriction and, in a blank reserved for "other limitations," he wrote "same restrictions." (Id.). Cloutier provided that note to the City law department. Gagnon, the Workers' Compensation Agent, then wrote to the surgeon requesting "clarification concerning [Cloutier's] limitations and work capabilities," because the note "fail[ed] to state [her] specific limitations." (Id. Ex. 36 at CP 1578).
On October 10, 2013, the law department received a response from the surgeon. It included a "work status form" dated October 9. (Id. Ex. 37).5
The work-status form had boxes checked indicating that Cloutier was unable to lift or carry objects that weighed between zero and 10 pounds; that she could "occasionally" bend, squat, and climb stairs; and that could use only her left hand to do gross grasping and fine motor tasks. (City Def. SMF Ex. 37 at CP 1565). The top of the form bears her name and date of birth and the bottom of the form bears a signature, beneath which is stamped her doctor's name. (Id.).
Cloutier contends that the work-status form was written without her knowledge [*31]  or input. (Cloutier Dep. Vol. I 269). She speculates that the letter may be "about someone else" because she "cannot believe [her] doctor would have provided a note without conferring with [her]." (Id. 269-70).6
On October 7, 2013, Cloutier returned to work and resumed her normal schedule. (City Def. SMF ¶ 64). On October 22, 2013, she filed a claim with the Department of Industrial Accidents ("DIA") for workers' compensation payments for the period between September 11 and October 6, 2013. (City Def. SMF Ex. 39). The following day, City Solicitor O'Connor received a letter from Cloutier, copied to the City Council, in which she accused the library of discriminating and retaliating against her by refusing to open windows to accommodate her asthma. (Pl. Resp. to City Def. SMF Ex. 128). The letter states: "I hope the City is prepared to spend another $100,000 or more to defend against a second MCAD claim, which will name the law department and Human Resources as participants. . . . That may be a difficult thing to explain to the taxpayers in this election year." (Id.).
At some point, Gagnon returned from vacation and saw the October 9 work-status form from Cloutier's orthopedic surgeon. (Gagnon Dep. [*32]  141). She contacted Dr. Gilbert to discuss the form. (Id.). Dr. Gilbert assessed the restrictions and found that they "were more substantial than Cloutier's previous recommendations." She stated that "there wasn't anything safe Cloutier could do in the workplace under her doctor's new restrictions." (Gilbert Aff. ¶ 12).
On October 29, 2013, Callery and Gagnon entered the library and asked to speak with Cloutier. (Cloutier Dep. Vol. I 281-82). Callery handed Cloutier a sealed envelope and informed her that she would need to gather her things. (Id. 282-83). Cloutier testified that Callery told her that she would need to leave the library because her "doctor said that [she] could not work," and that "[b]ased on [her] limitations" the City could not "accommodate" her and "ha[d] no work to offer [her]." (Id. 282-83). Callery and Gagnon escorted Cloutier as she gathered her belongings and left the library. (Id. 283-86). Cloutier reports that two employees and various patrons saw her leave the library with Callery and Gagnon. (Id. 281-88). She contends that the fact that she was escorted from the building made it appear as if she "had done something . . . really wrong" and she cried as she walked out to the street. (Id. 286).
The letter [*33]  handed to Cloutier was written by Gagnon. It began by denying her DIA claim. (City Def. SMF Ex. 50). It went on to state that Dr. Gilbert had reviewed the "new restrictions" recommended by her orthopedic surgeon and opined that under those restrictions, she was limited to walking, sitting, and standing, that she "may not pick up anything with either extremity," and "may not even lift or push a book with either arm, as books weigh more than zero pounds." (Id.). The letter stated that, in light of those restrictions, Cloutier's "position as a Library Assistant cannot be modified to reasonably accommodate [her] significant medical condition." (Id.). If further stated that "[i]t is the recommendation of this office . . . that you will not be allowed to return to work at the City until such time that your medical condition heals sufficiently to allow you to return to full unrestrictive duty or when the City can implement a reasonable accommodation for you." (Id.).
Cloutier contends that, despite the letter's reference to "new restrictions" recommended by her orthopedic surgeon, she interpreted the letter as referring to the restrictions in place to accommodate her asthma and vision impairments, [*34]  rather than her shoulder injury. (Id.; Cloutier Dep. Vol. I 308-09). She also contends that she was provided with a copy of the work-status form for the first time the following day, on October 30. (Id. 269).
Neither Woodley (the Library Director) nor Fougstedt (the Assistant Library Director) were involved in the decision to ask Cloutier to leave the Library on October 29. (Fougstedt Aff. ¶ 14; Woodley Dep. 234). Callery only learned of the decision to ask Cloutier to leave when Gagnon asked her to accompany to deliver the news. (Callery Dep. 130-31).

14. Fall 2013 Surveillance
Meanwhile, on October 2, 2013, following the altercation with Woodley, Gagnon again requested that Sparks initiate surveillance of Cloutier. (City Def. SMF Ex. 60). Her request stated that Cloutier was not working and was "claiming a re-injury to the same body part (right shoulder)," and that surveillance should continue until "notified to stop." (Id. Ex. 60). Following that request, Absolute attempted to perform surveillance on October 19 and 28. (Id. Ex. 55). Absolute continued surveillance after Cloutier left the library, performing or attempting to perform surveillance on October 30 and 31, November 14 and 29, and [*35]  December 2 and 5, 2013. (Id.).
Among other things, the footage provided to the City depicts Cloutier in various public places, including supermarkets, a bookstore, a law office, and a bank. (Id.). Again, Cloutier is shown using her right arm to perform tasks, including opening her car door, carrying a large pet crate, lifting grocery bags, and petting a cat. (City Def. SMF Ex. 55 at 7249-51, 7255-56)
The footage also includes clips taken from outside of Cloutier's home where she lives with her mother. (Pl. Resp. to Absolute Def. SMF Ex. 41, 51, 56, 61).7 In each clip, the investigator is positioned inside his vehicle either parked across the street from the house, or driving by it. (Id.). In nine raw-footage clips, which average 12 seconds in duration, the investigator apparently zooms in on a window of Cloutier's house. (Id. Ex. 41; Id. Ex. 51; Id. Ex. 61). Often, the clips capture only closed blinds. (Id. Ex. 51 at Clip No. 580, 581; Id. Ex. 61 at Clip No. 3232; Id. Ex. 56 at Clip No. 2987; Id. Ex. 41 at Clip No. 0198).
The interior of the house is visible on two occasions. (Id. Ex. 51 at Clip No. 0542; Id. Ex. 61 at Clip No. 3233, 3234, 3235, 3236, 3237). On the first occasion, taken [*36]  during the prior period of surveillance on February 1, 2013, only a plant is visible. (Id. Ex. 51 at Clip No. 0542).
On the second occasion, on November 29, 2013, Nawoichik took five video clips in which he used the zoom function on his camera. He filmed the footage across the street from the house. (Id. Ex. 61 at Clip No. 3233). The complained-of footage depicts Cloutier's mother hanging Christmas decorations on the first floor of a front room. (Id. ¶ 97; Id. Ex. 61 at Clip No. 3233-37). Because of the lighting, the background behind Cloutier's mother is dark. (Id.) No furniture, decoration, or other items in the room are visible. The footage totals 54 seconds in duration, of which, the face of the mother is visible for 17 seconds. (Id. at Clip No. 3236-37). The picture window and Cloutier's mother's activities were clearly visible from public vantage points, including the street, which appears to be no more than a few feet from the window.
Cloutier was not aware of the video surveillance at the time it occurred. However, she contends that she felt aware that someone was following her on one occasion in December 2013. (Pl. Resp. to Absolute Def. SMF Ex. 11; Cloutier Dep. Vol. I 346-47). [*37]  She had dropped her mother off at a book store and continued to drive to a shopping plaza. (Cloutier Dep. Vol. I 346-47). As she was driving, she noticed a car that appeared to be following her. (Id.). Then, as she entered the parking lot of her destination, the car followed her to the lot, circled, and left again. (Id. 347).
In total, Absolute billed the City for 121.75 hours during which Nawoichik conducted or attempted to conduct surveillance of Cloutier. (Pl. Resp. to Absolute Def. SMF Ex. 165). That surveillance occurred over the course of 30 days scattered between November 2012 and December 2013. (Id.).
Cloutier first learned that surveillance footage had been taken of her around mid-December 2013, although she did not see the footage until some months later. (Cloutier Dep. Vol. I 320).

15. Purported Use of a GPS Device
Cloutier contends that defendants used a GPS device to track her vehicle in connection with their surveillance efforts. (Am. Compl. ¶ 153). She contends that four pieces of evidence support that claim. First, she points to Sparks's testimony that Absolute investigators occasionally use GPS devices during investigations. (Sparks Dep. 38). Second, she notes a charge for four [*38]  hours of surveillance on November 23, 2012, that is included in an invoice for other surveillance charges. (Absolute Def. SMF Ex. 14 at Absolute_000245). She contends that the surveillance charge is suspicious because there is no footage or report verifying that surveillance was conducted on that day. (Pl. Resp. to Absolute SMF ¶ 102; Sparks Dep. 181-82). Sparks could not explain the discrepancy between the charge and the lack of a report for that day. (Sparks Dep. 159). Third, she contends that Nawoichik was frequently able to locate her, even when she was at places distant from her home. Nawoichik testified that he was able to anticipate Cloutier's movements because she took similar routes in going to grocery stores and other places. (Nawoichik Dep. 167-68). Cloutier contends that she did not use only one grocery store, and instead that she frequented seven different stores on various occasions. (Cloutier Dep. Vol. I 331). She further contends that there were four exits from her house, and that she used different routes depending on her needs. (Id. 327-28). Fourth, she points to testimony by an expert she retained stating that certain reports appeared to be falsified because the timing appeared [*39]  to be inaccurate. (Settle Dep. 137-145). However, that expert also testified unequivocally that he did not see any direct or circumstantial evidence that Absolute used a GPS device to track Cloutier's movements. (Id. 135).
The Absolute defendants deny that a GPS device was used in performing surveillance on Cloutier. Sparks and Nawoichik both unequivocally stated under oath that no GPS device was used in the investigation. (Sparks Decl. ¶ 26; Nawoichik Dep. 119-20). No actual evidence of GPS tracking was produced. Sparks also stated that use of a GPS device would "always" be billed as a line-item on an invoice as an "investigative tool." (Sparks Dep. 182). No line item for an "investigative tool" was ever billed. (Absolute Def. SMF Ex. 14). Cloutier also testified that she never saw a GPS device on her car. (Cloutier Dep. Vol. I 329-30). The City did not request that a GPS tracker be used. (Gagnon Dep. ¶ 15). There were also numerous occasions in Absolute reports in which investigators did not know where Cloutier was. (City Def. SMF Ex. 55).

16. Events Following Cloutier's Departure from the Library
On November 13, 2013, Cloutier filed a second MCAD complaint that named the City, Lynch, O'Connor, [*40]  Callery, Gagnon, Woodley, and Fougstedt as defendants, but not Dr. Gilbert. (Id. Ex. 44 at CP 7775). That complaint alleges that Cloutier was harassed because of her shoulder injury, denied the opportunity to open library windows despite her breathing issues, and retaliated against for having filed the first MCAD complaint. (Id.).8
In April 2014, a proceeding was held before the DIA concerning Cloutier's claim for workers' compensation for the three-week period during which she was out of work following the altercation with Woodley. (City Def. SMF Ex. 39). The DIA ordered the City to pay Cloutier benefits for that period, and further stated that a decision concerning her claim for benefits for the period after October 30, 2013, was deferred. (Id.). Both sides appealed, but ultimately dropped their appeals and Cloutier was paid for the entire three-week period. (Pl. Resp. to City Def. SMF ¶ 136).
In June 2014, Cloutier applied to the Lowell Retirement Board to withdraw her retirement benefits. (Id. ¶ 140). Cloutier contends that her payment was delayed because the City did not indicate that she either was terminated or resigned, as it took the position that neither had happened. (Id.). [*41]  Ultimately, however, Cloutier was able to withdraw the funds. (Id.).
Around mid-June 2014, Cloutier began reviewing some of the surveillance footage taken by Absolute. (Cloutier Dep. Vol. I 389-390). She contends that after reviewing that footage she began to suffer emotional distress. (Id. 388). She testified that following her review of the footage she no longer felt safe in her home. (Id. 392). She made a few changes to her life, including parking her car in different locations, becoming more careful about using the blinds, checking underneath her car frequently, and posting "No Soliciting" and "Beware of the Dog" signs. (Id. 391). She testified that stress from the incident caused her to lose about fifteen pounds and gave her some difficulty sleeping. (Id. 392). However, she also testified that she did not experience any depression, was not diagnosed with anxiety, and never sought medical treatment or counseling for her emotional distress. (Id. 391-393).

C. Procedural Background
On August 15, 2014, Cloutier filed a complaint in Massachusetts Superior Court and withdrew her second MCAD complaint. On January 26, 2015, she voluntarily dismissed the state-court complaint.
Cloutier filed the original complaint in this matter [*42]  on June 24, 2015. It contained 21 counts against 10 named defendants (seven of whom were individuals sued in both their official and individual capacities) and 10 unnamed defendants. On December 14, 2015, the Court dismissed some of those claims, including those brought under the Americans with Disabilities Act for failure to file a right-to-sue letter with the complaint. On February 5, 2016, the Court granted plaintiff's motion for leave to file an amended complaint to provide the missing right-to-sue letter and motion for reconsideration of the Court's dismissal of the ADA claims (Docket No. 76).
As it stands, there are 19 remaining counts against two entity defendants, seven individual defendants in their individual and official capacities, one other individual defendant, and ten unnamed defendants:
• Count One — failure to accommodate in violation of Title I of the Americans with Disability Act (ADA) against the City;
• Count Two — disability discrimination in violation of Title I of the ADA against the City;
• Count Three — unlawful medical examination in violation of Title I of the ADA against the City;
• Count Four — disability discrimination by a public entity in violation of [*43]  Title II of the ADA against the City;
• Count Five — retaliation in violation of Title V of the ADA against the City;
• Count Six — failure to accommodate in violation of Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act against the City, Lynch, O'Connor, Callery, and Woodley in their official capacities;
• Count Seven — disability discrimination in violation of Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act against the City, Lynch, O'Connor, Callery, and Woodley in their official capacities;
• Count Eight — retaliation in violation of Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 against the City, Lynch, O'Connor, Callery, and Woodley in their official capacities;
• Count Nine — failure to accommodate in violation of Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 151B, §§ 4(16) against the City, Lynch, O'Connor, Callery, Gagnon, Woodley, Fougstedt, and Gilbert;
• Count Ten — disability discrimination in violation of Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 151B, § 4(16) against the City, Lynch, O'Connor, Callery, Gagnon, Woodley, Fougstedt, and Gilbert;
• Count Eleven — retaliation in violation of Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 151B, § 4(4) against the City, Lynch, O'Connor, Callery, Gagnon, Woodley, Fougstedt, and Gilbert;
• Count Twelve — violations under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 against the City, Lynch, O'Connor, Callery, Gagnon, Woodley, Fougstedt, Gilbert, and ten unnamed defendants;
• Count Thirteen — invasion of privacy [*44]  in violation of Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 214, § 1B against Lynch, O'Connor, Callery, Gagnon, Woodley, Fougstedt, Gilbert, Sparks, Absolute, and ten unnamed defendants;
• Count Sixteen — violations of the Massachusetts Civil Rights Act (MCRA) under Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 12, § 11(I) against Lynch, O'Connor, Callery, Gagnon, Woodley, Fougstedt, and Gilbert, in their individual capacities, and ten unnamed defendants;
• Count Seventeen — violations of the Massachusetts Equal Rights Act (MERA) under Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 93, § 103 against the City, Lynch, O'Connor, Callery, Gagnon, Woodley, Fougstedt, Gilbert, and ten unnamed defendants;
• Count Eighteen — civil conspiracy against Lynch, O'Connor, Callery, Gagnon, Woodley, Fougstedt, Gilbert, Sparks, Absolute, and ten unnamed defendants;
• Count Nineteen — intentional infliction of emotional distress against Lynch, O'Connor, Callery, Gagnon, Woodley, Fougstedt, Gilbert, Sparks, Absolute, and ten unnamed defendants;
• Count Twenty — interference with contractual or advantageous business relations against Lynch, O'Connor, Callery, Gagnon, Woodley, Fougstedt, and Gilbert; and
• Count Twenty-One — defamation against Callery and Gagnon.
The defendants have moved for summary judgment on all counts.

II. Legal Standard
The role of summary judgment is [*45]  to "pierce the pleadings and to assess the proof in order to see whether there is a genuine need for trial." Mesnick v. General Elec. Co., 950 F.2d 816, 822 (1st Cir. 1991) (quoting Garside v. Osco Drug, Inc., 895 F.2d 46, 50 (1st Cir. 1990)). Summary judgment is appropriate when the moving party shows that "there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). A genuine issue is "one that must be decided at trial because the evidence, viewed in the light most flattering to the nonmovant would permit a rational fact finder to resolve the issue in favor of either party." Medina-Munoz v. R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co., 896 F.2d 5, 8 (1st Cir. 1990) (citation omitted). In evaluating a summary judgment motion, the court indulges all reasonable inferences in favor of the nonmoving party. See O'Connor v. Steeves, 994 F.2d 905, 907 (1st Cir. 1993). When "a properly supported motion for summary judgment is made, the adverse party must set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 250, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986) (internal quotation marks omitted). The non-moving party may not simply "rest upon mere allegation or denials of his pleading," but instead must "present affirmative evidence." Id. at 256-57.

III. Analysis
The Court has been considerably hindered in its analysis by plaintiff's failure to brief most of the issues raised by defendants in their motions. As noted, plaintiff responded at great [*46]  length to defendants' statements of material facts. Her legal briefs, however, had substantial deficiencies.
In response to the Absolute defendants' motion for summary judgment, plaintiff did not make new legal arguments concerning the evidence developed on the summary judgment record, and instead simply incorporated by reference the arguments she made in opposition to the motion to dismiss. Analysis of a motion for summary judgment requires the application of a different standard applied to different facts than a motion to dismiss, and therefore the arguments made at the motion to dismiss stage were only of limited assistance.
Her brief in opposition the Lowell defendants' motion for summary judgment was even more perfunctory. Plaintiff filed a 20-page brief, in which she addressed only the disability-based claims.9 As to the other claims, her brief merely consisted of a list of headings, without any supporting text. Thus, as to eight of her claims, plaintiff's brief consisted entirely of blank spaces.
Nonetheless, plaintiff's failure to address those issues cannot be taken as a concession that summary judgment should be granted against her. Indeed, even if plaintiff had failed entirely [*47]  to oppose the motion, the Court would still be bound to decide it "on the merits based on the uncontroverted facts." Cordi-Allen v. Halloran, 470 F.3d 25, 28 (1st Cir. 2006). With that in mind, the Court proceeds to the merits.

A. Disability Claims

1. Scope of the Claims
Counts Two, Four, Five, Seven, Eight, Ten, and Eleven allege claims of disability discrimination, retaliation, and failure to accommodate under the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. § 12101, et seq.; the Rehabilitation Act, 29 U.S.C. § 701, et seq.; and Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 151B. Under the ADA, the term "disability" means,
with respect to an individual-
(A) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such individual;
(B) a record of such an impairment; or
(C) being regarded as having such an impairment . . . .
42 U.S.C. § 12102(1).
In opposing summary judgment, plaintiff contends that her claims are based on three separate disabilities: her vision impairment, her chronic asthma, and her shoulder injury. See Pl. Mem. in Opp. to City Def. Mot. for Summ. J. 7-10. However, at oral argument on the motion to dismiss, counsel for plaintiff stated that the disability claims in the complaint concerned only the asthma and vision impairment, not the shoulder injury. Specifically, she said the [*48]  following:
With regard to the adhesive capsulitis [of the shoulder] . . . we didn't concede that it wasn't a disability, we don't allege that it was a disability.10 The only disabilities that we allege are the vision impairment and the asthma. To the extent that [the shoulder injury] is in the complaint, it is simply to say that the defendants . . . potentially viewed the adhesive capsulitis and perceived it to be an impairment, but we don't allege any accommodations, issues with that or anything like that. Again, we don't allege it's a disability.
Transcript of Oral Argument on Mot. to Dismiss, Docket No. 55 at 48-49. That statement clearly disclaims the shoulder injury as a basis for claims under sections (A) ("a physical . . . impairment") and (B) ("a record of such an impairment") of the ADA definition. However, under a generous interpretation of counsel's statement, it does not disclaim allegations based on section (C) ("being regarded as having such an impairment").
Based on that disclaimer, plaintiff has waived the opportunity to assert a disability discrimination claim under theories of actual impairment or a record of impairment arising out of her shoulder injury. [*49] 11

2. Discrimination Claims — Counts Two , Four, Seven, and Ten
Where, as here, there is no direct evidence of discrimination, claims for discrimination on the basis of disability are subject to the burden-shifting framework established in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). See Ramos-Echevarría v. Pichis, Inc., 659 F.3d 182, 186-87 (1st Cir. 2011) (applying McDonnell-Douglas burden-shifting framework in ADA context); Rios-Jimenez v. Sec'y of Veterans Affairs, 520 F.3d 31, 40-41 (1st Cir. 2008) (applying McDonnell-Douglas burden-shifting framework in Rehabilitation Act context); Dichner v. Liberty Travel, 141 F.3d 24, 29-30 (1st Cir. 1998) (applying McDonnell-Douglas burden-shifting framework in Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 151B context).12
Under the McDonnell-Douglas framework, the plaintiff must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination. Ramos-Echevarría, Inc., 659 F.3d at 186-87. The elements that a plaintiff must prove to establish a prima facie case depend on the context of the claims and therefore "must be tailored to the given case." Rodriguez-Torres v. Caribbean Forms Manufacturer, Inc., 399 F.3d 52, 58 (1st Cir. 2005). Once the plaintiff makes a prima facie case under the relevant standard, the burden shifts to the employer to articulate a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the action. Ramos-Echevarría, Inc., 659 F.3d at 186-87. If the employer articulates such a reason, the burden shifts back to the employee to show that the employer's stated reason "is mere pretext cloaking discriminatory animus." Id. at 187.

a. Hostile Work Environment
Plaintiff first contends that she was subjected [*50]  to disability discrimination in the form of a hostile work environment. To succeed on a hostile-work-environment claim, a plaintiff must demonstrate "(1) she was disabled . . . , (2) she was subjected to uninvited harassment, (3) her employer's conduct was based on her disability; (4) the conduct was so severe or pervasive that it altered the conditions of her work and created an abusive work environment, and (5) the harassment was objectively and subjectively offensive." McDonough v. Donahoe, 673 F.3d 41, 46 (1st Cir. 2012); see also Prescott v. Higgins, 538 F.3d 32, 42 (1st Cir. 2008); see also Quiles-Quiles v. Henderson, 439 F.3d 1, 7 (1st Cir. 2006) (stating that to prove a hostile work environment, a plaintiff must show that his or her "workplace was permeated with discriminatory intimidation, ridicule, and insult that was sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of . . . employment and create an abusive working environment.") (quoting Harris v. Forklift Sys., Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21, 114 S. Ct. 367, 126 L. Ed. 2d 295 (1993)) (alterations omitted)). Among the factors relevant to that analysis are the "frequency of the . . . conduct; its severity; whether it is physically threatening or humiliating, or a mere offensive utterance; and whether it unreasonably interferes with an employee's work performance." Harris, 510 U.S. at 23. In addition, where the harassment is initiated by a non-supervisory co-employee rather than a supervisor, [*51]  a "plaintiff must demonstrate that the employer 'knew or should have known of the charged . . . harassment and failed to implement prompt and appropriate action.'" Forrest v. Brinker Int'l Payroll Co., LP, 511 F.3d 225, 230 (1st Cir. 2007) (quoting Crowley v. L.L. Bean, Inc., 303 F.3d 387, 401 (1st Cir. 2002)).
In opposing the motion for summary judgment, plaintiff has made a number of factual assertions without any citation to the record in her brief or statement of material facts. For example, she states that library employees "[c]onstantly" followed her throughout the library to monitor her activities, and removed fans from her desk and hid them. See Pl. Opp. to City Def. Mot. for Summ. J. 13-14. If there is evidence supporting those claims in the voluminous record, plaintiff has not identified it. Such unsubstantiated claims cannot be the basis for denying summary judgment. See Morales v. A.C. Orssleff's EFTF, 246 F.3d 32, 33 (1st Cir. 2001). The Court will limit its analysis to the evidence in the record that it has been able to identify.
Plaintiff points to the April 2011 electronic chat between Brassel and Hancock as a principal example of the intimidation and harassment that she was allegedly forced to endure. That claim was not asserted in the 2013 MCAD complaint, and instead, is at the heart of plaintiff's 2012 MCAD complaint, which remains pending. It appears, therefore, [*52]  that the claim has not been exhausted to the extent it depends on that incident. See Bonilla v. Muebles J.J. Alvarez, Inc., 194 F.3d 275, 278 (1st Cir. 1999).
In any event, even assuming the claim is properly before the Court, that evidence provides little, if any, support for her claim of a hostile work environment. Brassel and Hancock were lower-level employees, not plaintiff's supervisors. And when her supervisors became aware of the issue, the undisputed evidence is that they took prompt and appropriate action to address the conduct. See Wilson v. Moulison N. Corp., 639 F.3d 1, 8 (1st Cir. 2011) (finding, in analogous Title VII context, that a stern reprimand may be a sufficient remedial action and that an employer need not necessarily respond to "even serious harassment" by terminating or suspending the harassers). The City responded to the incident by having the City Manager issue an oral reprimand to Brassel and Hancock. The conduct was not repeated, and there is no evidence in the record that Brassel and Hancock said or did anything objectionable to plaintiff thereafter. The City apparently did not discipline the person who left a printout of the chat for plaintiff to see, but there is no evidence as to who that person was.
Furthermore, and perhaps more importantly, there is no evidence that the chat related [*53]  in any way to plaintiff's disabilities. Although the chat may have been in poor taste, "federal employment discrimination laws do not establish 'a general civility code.'" Quiles-Quiles, 439 F.3d at 7-8 (quoting Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Servs., Inc., 523 U.S. 75, 81, 118 S. Ct. 998, 140 L. Ed. 2d 201 (1998))). Instead, "an employee claiming harassment must demonstrate that the hostile conduct was directed at [her] because of a characteristic protected by a federal anti-discrimination statute." Id. at 7-8. Here, plaintiff has not presented sufficient evidence to create a material issue that the electronic chat concerned her disabilities. Although the chat refers to a vision-assistance machine, it is undisputed that the machine at issue was Brassel's (who was legally blind). And the content of the chat shows that the women were mocking plaintiff for being long-winded, not because of any protected characteristic.
Plaintiff's remaining evidence of alleged harassment is similarly thin. She identifies such perceived slights as the fact that City defendants "[d]emand[ed] to know [her] prognosis" and "unlawfully demanded doctor's notes." But there is no evidence in the record that such requests were made "incessantly," as plaintiff claims, or that they were made unreasonably. Disability-based accommodations for plaintiff were [*54]  in place at the library for many years. Among other things, she had a shoulder injury that allegedly required substantial accommodation; that injury was initially expected to last only a few weeks, but persisted for more than sixteen months. Under the circumstances, it was hardly improper for her employer to require periodic medical documentation as to her condition.13 Moreover, the City eventually obtained video evidence and advice from the City Physician suggesting that plaintiff was not as disabled as she claimed.14 That made the City's subsequent requests for medical substantiation all the more reasonable.
Plaintiff also points to occasional incidents in which she was asked to perform tasks that she felt violated her physician's work restrictions, such as answering the telephone using a headset, sitting at a public desk for more than two hours, or being asked to read "tiny print." To the extent those incidents involved her shoulder injury, she has waived her claim of disability discrimination. In any event, the undisputed evidence shows that when her managers requested that she perform tasks she felt her disability prevented her from doing, she often refused, apparently without reprisal. [*55]  And isolated requests to perform tasks that a Library Assistant would be expected to perform is not the type of relatively extreme conduct that qualifies as a hostile working environment. See id. at 7.
In short, the evidence, considered individually or as a whole, is not sufficient to prove "severe or pervasive harassment," based on a disability, that created an "abusive working environment." Id. Accordingly, the motion for summary judgment will be granted as to the claim of disability discrimination based on a hostile work environment.

b. Discriminatory Discharge for Shoulder Injury
Plaintiff next contends that she was improperly discharged in October 2013 on the basis of disability because of her shoulder injury. To make a prima facie case of disability discrimination on that basis, a plaintiff must show that she (1) is disabled within the meaning of the relevant statute; (2) is qualified to perform the essential functions of her job with or without a reasonable accommodation; and (3) was discharged in whole or in part because of her disability. See Jones v. Nationwide Life Ins. Co., 696 F.3d 78, 87 (1st Cir. 2012). Again, as noted, to the extent that she claims discrimination based on her actual shoulder injury, or her record of such an injury, the claims [*56]  have been waived.

(1) Whether Plaintiff Was Qualified to Perform the Essential Functions of Her Position
Defendants contend that plaintiff was no longer qualified to perform the essential functions of the Library Assistant position after injuring her shoulder in June 2012. After that injury, plaintiff was taken off public desk duty, pull list duty, and bin duty. She confirmed that she was unable to perform those tasks. Among other things, she refused to do bin duty without the assistance of another employee and refused to check in books or answer the telephone using protocols that were designed to allow her to perform those tasks with one arm. From July 2012 until she left the library approximately 16 months later in October 2013, she performed only data entry, calls, and other miscellaneous tasks.
An employee is "qualified" for a position if he or she "satisfies the requisite skill, experience, education and other job-related requirements of the employment position . . . and, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of such position." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m). "Essential functions" are defined to mean "the fundamental job duties of the employment position" not including [*57]  "marginal functions." Id. § 1630.2(n). ADA regulations provide a non-exhaustive list of factors to consider when analyzing whether a particular function is essential, including
(i) The employer's judgment as to which functions are essential;
(ii) Written job descriptions prepared before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job;
(iii) The amount of time spent on the job performing the function;
(iv) The consequences of not requiring the incumbent to perform the function;
(v) The terms of a collective bargaining agreement;
(vi) The work experience of past incumbents in the job; and/or
(vii) The current work experience of incumbents in similar jobs.
Id. § 1630.2(n)(3).
Those factors strongly support a finding that plaintiff's inability to perform public desk duty, pull list duty, and bin duty, in combination, constituted an inability to perform the essential functions of her job. The City defendants have provided sworn statements, not contradicted by plaintiff, from her supervisors and other Library Assistants describing those tasks as the "principal duties" of the position. The written job description posted at the time that plaintiff entered the position described the "essential duties" of a Library Assistant [*58]  position to be, among other things, "[p]erform[ing] all tasks related to circulation and inventory of library materials to users," "[p]erform[ing] routine acquisitions, cataloging, and processing tasks" and "[p]rovid[ing] reference and reader's advisory assistance to library users." Public desk duty, pull list duty, and bin duty are clearly encompassed within that description. In addition, the public desk duty shift alone was typically four hours in duration, and thus Library Assistants spent at least half of each day on that desk duty. In light of those factors, her inability to perform all three duties constituted an inability to perform the essential functions of the Library Assistant position.

(2) Whether Plaintiff Received a Reasonable Accommodation
Plaintiff contends that she could have performed those functions if she had been given appropriate assistance—that is, a reasonable accommodation.
Federal law imposes "an affirmative duty on employers to offer a reasonable accommodation to a disabled employee." Enica v. Principi, 544 F.3d 328, 338 (1st Cir. 2008) (quoting Calero-Cerezo, 355 F.3d 6, 19-20 (1st Cir. 2004)). Unlike other discrimination claims, a failure-to-accommodate claim "does not require that an employer's action be motivated by a discriminatory animus directed at the [*59]  disability." See Higgins v. New Balance Ath. Shoe, Inc., 194 F.3d 252, 264 (1st Cir. 1999). Therefore, the three-part McDonnell-Douglas burden-shifting scheme usually employed in summary judgment discrimination analysis is "inapposite" for such claims. Id. Rather, a plaintiff must show both that (1) "the proposed accommodation would enable her to perform the essential functions of her job," and (2) "at least on the face of things, it is feasible for the employer under the circumstances." Reed v. LePage Bakeries, Inc., 244 F.3d 254, 259 (1st Cir. 2001). If the plaintiff proves those elements, the burden shifts to the defendant to show "that the proposed accommodation is not as feasible as it appears but rather that there are further costs to be considered"—in other words, that it imposes undue hardship. Id.
Employers are required to engage in good faith in an "interactive process" with employees "to find the best means of accommodating [the] disability." Enica v. Principi, 544 F.3d at 338-39 (quoting Tobin v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 433 F.3d 100, 108 (1st Cir. 2005)). An employer "will not be held liable if it makes 'reasonable efforts both to communicate with the employee and provide accommodations based on the information it possessed.'" Id. at 339 (quoting Phelps v. Optima Health, Inc., 251 F.3d 21, 28 (1st Cir. 2001)).
The evidence as to whether plaintiff requested an accommodation for her shoulder injury, and whether the Library provided it, is mixed. There is some evidence that plaintiff [*60]  requested that other library workers take books out of bins and remove the rubber bands and slips in order to allow her to perform bin duty. There is no evidence, however, that she made a request for an accommodation concerning her pull list and public desk duties.
In any event, to the extent that plaintiff contends that she would have been qualified to perform the essential functions of her job if she had been given a reasonable accommodation for her shoulder injury, that claim must fail. Again, plaintiff has waived her right to assert a claim of disability discrimination based on the shoulder impairment under the "actual disability" and "record of" disability prongs. She is therefore limited to proceeding under the "regarded as disabled" prong. Federal regulations, however, provide that an employer "is not required to provide a reasonable accommodation to an individual who meets the definition of disability solely under the 'regarded as' prong." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.9(e). Plaintiff cannot now claim that she would have been qualified if she had been provided a reasonable accommodation, after having disclaimed all allegations that would have implicated the City's obligation to accommodate her shoulder impairment. [*61] 
Therefore, the motion for summary judgment will be granted as to plaintiff's claim of disability discrimination based on defendants' failure to accommodate her shoulder injury.

3. Failure-to-Accommodate Claims — Counts One, Six, and Nine
Plaintiff next contends that the library discriminated against her on the basis of disability by failing to accommodate her asthma and vision impairment. There is no dispute that she suffers from asthma and a vision impairment; the issue, again, is whether the library failed to provide a reasonable accommodation.

a. Asthma
Plaintiff contends that the City failed to accommodate her asthma by refusing to open the library windows. In the summer of 2013, plaintiff made repeated requests to have a custodian open windows in the library in order to help her breathe more easily. The parties dispute the extent to which she was permitted to have windows opened, and whether doing so would constitute a reasonable accommodation. See Calero-Cerezo, 355 F.3d at 23.
However, there is no dispute that plaintiff was permitted to work in the circulation office, where she could open a window whenever she needed to do so. Plaintiff has not identified any material way in which that action failed to satisfy [*62]  the library's responsibility to provide a reasonable accommodation. See 29 C.F.R. § Pt. 1630 App., Section 1630.9 (stating that a reasonable accommodation "does not have to be the 'best' accommodation possible, so long as it is sufficient to meet the job-related needs of the individual being accommodated"). Plaintiff does not contend that working in the circulation office prevented her from breathing easily. Instead, she contends that she preferred not to work in that office because doing so made her feel confined and prevented her from assisting patrons while not on desk duty. As to her claims of "confinement," there is no evidence that the space was unusually claustrophobic or unpleasant; it appears to be undisputed that it was a fairly normal office space. As to her claim that she could not assist patrons when not on desk duty, she has not provided any admissible evidence to support the contention that such assistance constituted an essential, or even marginal, function of her position.15
Anti-discrimination law requires only the provision of a reasonable accommodation, not the accommodation of one's choice. See Bryant v. Caritas Norwood Hosp., 345 F. Supp. 2d 155, 168-69 (D. Mass. 2004); Aka v. Washington Hosp. Ctr., 156 F.3d 1284, 1305, 332 U.S. App. D.C. 256 (D.C. Cir. 1998) ("an employer is not required to provide an employee that accommodation he requests [*63]  or prefers, the employer need only provide some reasonable accommodation") (quoting Gile v. United Airlines, Inc., 95 F.3d 492, 499 (7th Cir. 1996) (alteration omitted). Plaintiff has not put forth sufficient evidence to establish that the accommodation provided by the library was not reasonable. It appears that her breathing issues were addressed by working in the circulation office, and there is no evidence that she could not perform the essential functions of her job in that location.
In sum, plaintiff has not carried her burden to demonstrate that the library failed to reasonably accommodate her asthma. Accordingly, the motion for summary judgment will be granted as to that claim.

b. Vision Impairment
Plaintiff further contends that the library failed to accommodate her vision impairment by requiring her to read small print on hold slips and to work at a public desk for more than two hours at a time. Those claims were not brought in the 2013 MCAD complaint, and therefore have not been exhausted. See Bonilla, 194 F.3d at 278. In any event, the parties agree that such claims are subject to a three-year limitations period. See Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 151B, § 9 (2008); Andrews v. Mass. Bay Transit Auth., 872 F. Supp. 2d 108, 114-15 (D. Mass. 2012).16 There is no evidence in the record that plaintiff was required to work more than two hours consecutively at a public desk after 2009, [*64]  or that she was required to read small print on hold slips after May 2011. Plaintiff filed the complaint in this action in June 2015. Therefore, the claim for failure to accommodate plaintiff's vision impairment is also time-barred.
Accordingly, the motion for summary judgment will be granted as to that claim.

4. Retaliation Claims — Counts Five, Eight, and Eleven
Plaintiff's retaliation claims are subject to the McDonnell-Douglas burden-shifting framework. See Colburn v. Parker Hannifin/Nichols Portland Div., 429 F.3d 325, 335 (1st Cir. 2005).

a. Step One — Prima Facie Case
To make a prima facie case of retaliation, "a plaintiff must show that [1] she undertook protected conduct, [2] she suffered an adverse employment action, and [3] the two were causally linked." Noviello v. City of Boston, 398 F.3d 76, 88 (1st Cir. 2005).

(1) Whether Plaintiff Engaged in Protected Conduct
The first question is whether plaintiff engaged in "protected conduct." Plaintiff filed an MCAD complaint in 2012, which remained pending at all relevant times. She also wrote multiple letters accusing City employees of harassment and retaliation, and requested continuing accommodations. Under the circumstances, that is sufficient to establish the requirement of engaging in protected conduct.

(2) Whether Plaintiff Suffered Adverse Employment Actions
Plaintiff [*65]  contends that she suffered two adverse employment actions in retaliation for engaging in protected conduct: (1) that she was subjected to a hostile work environment and (2) that she was discharged. See Pl. Resp. to City Def. Mot. for Summ. J. at 17
As an initial matter, "the creation and perpetuation of a hostile work environment" can, under some circumstances, constitute an adverse employment action sufficient to satisfy the second prong of the prima facie case for retaliation claims. See Noviello, 398 F.3d at 89. The framework developed to analyze hostile-work-environment claims in the anti-discrimination context is "readily transferable to the retaliatory harassment context." Id. at 92. Therefore, "[j]ust as an employer will be liable for discrimination if it tolerates a [discriminatory] hostile work environment, it will be liable for retaliation if it tolerates severe or pervasive harassment motivated by the plaintiff's protected conduct." Marrero v. Goya of Puerto Rico, Inc., 304 F.3d 7, 26 (1st Cir. 2002).
Plaintiff's claim for retaliation based on a hostile work environment is based on the same evidence as her claim for discrimination based on a hostile work environment. The only analytical difference between those claims then is whether they were motivated by retaliatory, as [*66]  opposed to discriminatory, intent. Again, viewing the admissible evidence in the record in the light most favorable to plaintiff, there is insufficient evidence that the instances of harassment to which she points were so severe or pervasive that they "materially altered the conditions of her employment." Noviello, 398 F.3d at 92. Accordingly, summary judgment will be granted as to the claim that plaintiff was subjected to a hostile work environment in retaliation for protected conduct.
There is no dispute, of course, that she was removed from the library in October 2013, and that her removal constituted an adverse employment action.17

(3) Whether Plaintiff's Discharge Was Causally Linked to Protected Conduct
Under the third prong of the prima facie case, plaintiff must demonstrate that there was a causal link between her protected conduct and her discharge. For the purposes of summary judgment, the City defendants have conceded that the removal "might at a stretch demonstrate sufficient temporal proximity" to satisfy prong three. City Def. Mot. for Summ. J. at 37-38.

b. Step Two — Legitimate Reason
The burden then shifts to defendants to articulate a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the action. Rodriguez-Torres v. Caribbean Forms Manufacturer, Inc., 399 F.3d 52, 58 (1st Cir. 2005). The City [*67]  contends that plaintiff was discharged because her doctor had imposed restrictions on her work that precluded her from safely working at the library. That position is well-supported by the record. Shortly before she was discharged, Gagnon received a letter from her doctor stating that she could not lift anything, of any weight; that she could not use her right hand for gross grasping and fine motor tasks; and that she could only occasionally bend, squat, and climb stairs. Upon receiving that form, Gagnon discussed those restrictions with Dr. Gilbert, who opined that "there wasn't anything safe [plaintiff] could do in the workplace under her doctor's new restrictions." According to plaintiff's testimony, when she was asked to leave the library, she was told that the library could not accommodate her and "no work to offer her" in light of her limitations. In addition, she was contemporaneously given a letter explaining the decision that stated that her orthopedic surgeon recommended new restrictions under which she could not "even lift or push a book with either arm, as books weigh more than zero pounds" and informed her that she would "not be allowed to return to work at the City until [*68]  such time that [her] medical condition heals sufficiently to allow [her] to return to full unrestrictive duty or when the City can implement a reasonable accommodation." The City's stated reason, articulated here and at the time of the discharge, is sufficient to constitute a legitimate non-discriminatory reason for removing plaintiff from the library.

c. Step Three — Pretext
As the City defendants have stated a legitimate non-discriminatory reason for discharging plaintiff, "the presumption of discrimination drops from the case," Hodgens v. Gen. Dynamics Corp., 144 F.3d 151, 161 (1st Cir. 1998), and the burden shifts back to plaintiff to show that the reason is pretextual. See Lang v. Wal-Mart Stores E., L.P., 813 F.3d 447, 459 (1st Cir. 2016). In determining whether a stated reason is pretextual, the Court must consider, among other things, "the historical background of the decision; the specific sequence of events leading up to the challenged decision; departures from the normal procedural sequence; [and] any contemporary statements by members of the decisionmaking body." Hodgens, 144 F.3d at 168-69 (quoting Reno v. Bossier Parish Sch. Bd., 520 U.S. 471, 489, 117 S. Ct. 1491, 137 L. Ed. 2d 730, (1997)) (internal quotation marks and alterations omitted).
There is conflicting evidence as to whether the City's stated reason for the discharge—that the library was not safe for plaintiff in light of her new restrictions—was pretextual. [*69]  As the City points out, contemporaneous statements made by City employees verbally and in writing support its proffered reason. In addition, plaintiff has not pointed to any relevant statements by decision-makers that suggest an ulterior motive.
Nonetheless, some of the circumstances surrounding plaintiff's discharge suggest at least the possibility of pretext. At the time that plaintiff began a three-week period of leave in September 2013, she had been working for sixteen months subject to significant restrictions. She returned to the library on October 7, with a doctor's note recommending she continue working subject to the "same restrictions." Upon receipt of that note, Gagnon independently sought clarification from the issuing doctor concerning plaintiff's specific restrictions. It was only at that point, after Gagnon intervened, that the doctor responded with a work-status form stating that plaintiff could not lift anything of any weight. Gagnon then consulted with Dr. Gilbert about the restrictions in the second note. Dr. Gilbert concluded that, based on those restrictions, plaintiff could not even push a book with either extremity or do anything safely in the library. Plaintiff [*70]  was apparently not involved in procuring that second note. Indeed, she contends that she did not even know that a note had been issued until October 30, 2013, following her discharge. More than three weeks elapsed between the time that plaintiff returned to work and the time that she was discharged on October 29, 2013. During that period, she worked as she had been for the past sixteen months, without incident.
In addition, there is evidence to suggest that the City doubted the severity of plaintiff's September 2013 injury. Among other things, the City had received surveillance footage depicting plaintiff using both arms to perform tasks and carry objects, such as pet carriers and groceries, suggesting that she had overstated her initial injury. Dr. Gilbert had also opined that there was reason to suspect that plaintiff's 2012 shoulder injury was not as severe as she claimed. On October 2, 2013, Gagnon ordered surveillance to recommence following the September 2013 injury. That evidence suggests that the City not only had reason to, but actually did suspect that plaintiff's September 2013 injury was not so severe as to preclude her from safely performing any work in the library. That [*71]  suspicion (although arguably justifying some action on its own) undermines defendants' claim that plaintiff was discharged essentially for her own safety.
Taking the evidence in the record as a whole and drawing all inferences in her favor, plaintiff has put forth sufficient evidence to call into question whether defendants' stated reason for their action—that there was no work that she could safely perform in the library—was the real reason.
That finding does not end the inquiry. Under federal law, plaintiff must not only show that the stated reason was false, but also that "that retaliation was the real reason." Lang v. Wal-Mart Stores E., L.P., 813 F.3d 447, 459 (1st Cir. 2016) (quoting St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 515, 113 S. Ct. 2742, 125 L. Ed. 2d 407 (1993)) (alterations omitted).18 Close temporal proximity between an adverse action and protected conduct may give rise to an inference of retaliatory animus. See Hodgens, 144 F.3d at 168. Here, plaintiff had engaged in protected conduct in the time leading up to her discharge. Again, she had filed an MCAD complaint in 2012, written multiple letters accusing City employees of harassment and retaliation, and had requested continuing accommodations. Particularly relevant here, she also wrote a letter to the City Solicitor, O'Connor, which was received on October 23, 2013, accusing the City of ongoing [*72]  harassment and stating, "I hope the City is prepared to spend another $100,000 or more to defend against a second MCAD claim, which will name the law department and Human Resources as participants. . . . That may be a difficult thing to explain to the taxpayers in this election year." She was discharged six days later.
In light of the proximity in time of those events, as well as the circumstances surrounding the discharge, plaintiff has put forth sufficient evidence to create a triable issue as to whether the City defendants' stated reasons for the discharge were retaliatory. Accordingly, the motion for summary judgment will be denied as to the claim that plaintiff was discharged in retaliation for engaging in protected conduct.

d. Which Parties Are Proper Defendants
Plaintiff's retaliation claims were brought against various parties, and some of those claims have already been dismissed by the Court. As it stands, Count Five is brought against the City alone. Count Eight is brought against the City and against Lynch, O'Connor, Callery, and Woodley, in their official capacities. Count Eleven is brought against the City and against Lynch, O'Connor, Gagnon, Callery, Woodley, Fougstedt, [*73]  and Gilbert in their official and individual capacities.

(1) Callery, Woodley, and Fougstedt
There is no evidence that Callery, Woodley, or Fougstedt were involved in or influenced the decision to ask plaintiff to leave the library. According to the undisputed evidence, those individuals only learned of the decision after it had been made. Accordingly, summary judgment will be granted on Count Eight as to Callery and Woodley, and on Count Eleven as to Callery, Woodley, and Fougstedt.

(2) Dr. Gilbert
Summary judgment is also appropriate as to the retaliation claims against Dr. Gilbert. Generally, the exhaustion requirement of Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 151B requires that a plaintiff cannot add additional defendants to a civil action who were not named in an earlier MCAD charge. See Singleton v. Sinclair Broad. Grp., Inc., 660 F. Supp. 2d 136, 147 (D. Mass. 2009).19 Dr. Gilbert was not a party to the 2013 MCAD complaint. Accordingly, summary judgment will be granted on Count Eleven as to Dr. Gilbert.

(3) Remaining Defendants
Viewing the record in the light most favorable to plaintiff, it appears that summary judgment is not warranted with respect to the remaining defendants. Accordingly, the retaliation claims concerning plaintiff's discharge that survive summary judgment [*74]  are as follows:
(1) Count Five under the ADA as to the City;
(2) Count Eight under the Rehabilitation Act as to the City and as to Lynch and O'Connor in their official capacities; and
(3) Count Eleven under Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 151B as to the City and as to Lynch, O'Connor, and Gagnon in their official and individual capacities.

B. Massachusetts Equal Rights Act Claim — Count Seventeen
Count Seventeen alleges a claim under a provision of the Massachusetts Equal Rights Act ("MERA"), Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 93, § 103. The MERA provides for equal rights for people "regardless of handicap or age." Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 93, § 103. Plaintiff contends that claim is based on "the same facts" that give rise to her claims under Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 151B. See Transcript of Oral Argument on Mot. for Summ. J. 87; Pl. Mem. in Opp. to Mot. to Dismiss, Docket No. 50 at 56. It is well-settled, however, that Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 151B is the "exclusive state law remedy for employment discrimination complaints." Reidy v. Travelers Ins. Co., 928 F. Supp. 98, 106 (D. Mass. 1996), aff'd, 107 F.3d 1 (1st Cir. 1997). Therefore, "if a remedy under [Mass. Gen. Laws ch.] 151B is available to a plaintiff, [she] may not pursue a remedy under [Mass. Gen. Laws ch.] 93, § 103." Agin v. Fed. White Cement, Inc., 417 Mass. 669, 672, 632 N.E.2d 1197 (1994). The MERA claim is therefore preempted by Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 151B.
Accordingly, summary judgment will [*75]  be granted as to Count Seventeen.

C. Unlawful Medical Examination Claim — Count Three
Count Three alleges that the City required plaintiff to submit to an unlawful medical examination in violation of the ADA. The ADA provides that covered entities "shall not require a medical examination and shall not make inquiries of an employee as to whether such employee is an individual with a disability or as to the nature or severity of the disability, unless such examination or inquiry is shown to be job-related and consistent with business necessity." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(d)(4).
Under Massachusetts law, employees claiming workers' compensation benefits are required to submit to medical examinations by registered physicians after "receiv[ing] an injury, and from time to time thereafter during the continuance of the disability." Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 152, § 45.20 By ordinance, the City of Lowell has designated the City Physician as the person responsible for examining City employees who are injured at work. See Lowell, Mass., City Code ch. 50, § 6.
The undisputed evidence indicates that the medical examination performed by Dr. Gilbert on October 22, 2012, was both job-related and consistent with business necessity. As noted, the City is self-insured for worker's [*76]  compensation claims. It is undisputed that shortly after plaintiff injured her shoulder at work in June 2012, the City began providing her with benefits—in particular, paying for her physical therapy appointments and reimbursing her for mileage costs to attend appointments. Although no formal claim for workers' compensation had been filed, all parties treated the payments as workers' compensation benefits.21 Plaintiff herself referred to the payments as related to a workers' compensation claim at least twice. Furthermore, the letter sent by the City requesting plaintiff's attendance at the medical examination provided that the sanction for failure to appear was the possible suspension of workers' compensation benefits.
Here, plaintiff has failed to show that there is a disputed issue of material fact as to whether the medical examination was conducted for a proper purpose. Although plaintiff claims, in conclusory fashion, that the examination was pretextual, she has not submitted any actual evidence to that effect. Indeed, the only factual basis for that claim is the fact that she had not yet filed a formal workers' compensation claim. And she has not offered any evidence that the examination [*77]  was conducted in an improper or degrading manner or that it was excessively or unnecessarily intrusive.
Accordingly, the motion for summary judgment will be granted as to Count Three.

D. Invasion of Privacy Claim — Count Thirteen
Count Thirteen alleges a claim for invasion of privacy against all defendants concerning the use of surveillance. The Massachusetts Privacy Act prohibits "unreasonable, substantial or serious interference with [one's] privacy." Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 214, § 1B. The Act is most frequently invoked in cases where the plaintiff alleges public disclosure of private facts, but a plaintiff may also claim unreasonable intrusion "upon the plaintiff's 'solitude' or 'seclusion.'" Polay v. McMahon, 468 Mass. 379, 382, 10 N.E.3d 1122 (2014) (quoting Ayash v. Dana-Farber Cancer Inst., 443 Mass. 367, 382 n.16, 822 N.E.2d 667 (2005)).
Notwithstanding the statute's use of the disjunctive term "or," courts interpreting the Privacy Act have determined that the intrusion must be both "unreasonable, as well as either substantial or serious." Id. at 383. The Privacy Act "was not intended to prohibit serious or substantial interferences which are reasonable or justified." Schlesinger v. Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith, Inc., 409 Mass. 514, 518, 567 N.E.2d 912 (1991). Instead, to be actionable the invasion must be "highly offensive to the ordinary reasonable person." Ayash, 443 Mass. at 382 (quoting Restatement (Second) Of Torts § 652D, comment b (1977)) (alterations omitted). Generally, whether an intrusion satisfies that standard [*78]  is a question of fact to be decided by the jury. See Polay, 468 Mass. at 383.
In assessing whether defendants unreasonably intruded on plaintiff's privacy, the court must "balance the extent to which the defendant violated the plaintiff's privacy interests against any legitimate purpose the defendant may have had for the intrusion." Id. Other factors to be considered are "the location of the intrusion," "the means used," and "the frequency and duration of the intrusion." Id.

1. Whether the Surveillance Had a Legitimate Purpose
Defendants contend that the surveillance was legitimately conducted in order to investigate plaintiff's workers' compensation claim concerning her shoulder injury. It is well-settled that one legitimate motivation for the use of video surveillance is to investigate workers' compensation claims. See Digirolamo v. D.P. Anderson & Assocs., Inc., 1999 Mass. Super. LEXIS 190, 1999 WL 345592, at *2 (Mass. Super. May 26, 1999) (Gants, J.) (citing cases). Courts have recognized that such investigations may be necessary to "expos[e] fraudulent claims and . . . uncover fictitious injuries." See Joyce v. SCA/Howard Corp., 1984 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 21555 (D. Mass. 1984). Therefore, a person who seeks workers' compensation benefits cedes his or her expectation of privacy "to the extent of a reasonable investigation" of the claim. Id.
Plaintiff contends that the purpose of the surveillance could [*79]  not have been to investigate a workers' compensation claim, because she did not have a formal claim pending before the DIA at the time that the surveillance commenced. She argues that the surveillance therefore must have been motivated by a desire to harass her.22
As noted, Dr. Gilbert conducted a medical examination of plaintiff in October 2012 to investigate what all parties perceived to be a workers' compensation claim, or at a minimum an incipient claim. Dr. Gilbert concluded that there were "inconsistencies [in her] presentation and her complaints of pain." (Gilbert Aff. ¶ 9). The video surveillance was initiated in response to that finding. The surveillance was ordered by Gagnon, who is the City's Workers' Compensation Agent. The City hired an agency with which it had previously worked to investigate workers' compensation claims. Ultimately, the evidence from the video surveillance showed plaintiff using her right arm to conduct tasks, notwithstanding her claim of total disability.
There is, accordingly, uncontroverted evidence that the City had a legitimate motive to conduct the surveillance. Plaintiff's ability to use her shoulder was a subject of legitimate concern to the City. [*80]  Accordingly, there is no genuine issue of material fact as to whether the surveillance was conducted for a legitimate, non-harassing purpose.

2. Whether the Intrusion Was Unreasonable and Substantial or Serious
To determine whether the intrusion was unreasonable and substantial or serious, defendants' legitimate purpose must be weighed against the extent to which plaintiff's privacy was invaded. Plaintiff contends that three components of the surveillance were unreasonable and substantial or serious: the filming of her mother inside their home; the filming of her speaking with her physical therapist; and the purported use of a GPS device to track her movements.

a. Video Footage of Plaintiff's Mother
First, plaintiff contends that the video footage taken of her mother at home on November 29, 2013, constitutes an unreasonable invasion of plaintiff's privacy. There is no doubt that the right to privacy is the greatest in the home. See, e.g., Polay, 468 Mass. at 383-384. However, even in the home, that right is not absolute, and may be diminished when a person places herself "in certain contexts where [her] expectation of privacy is reduced." Schlesinger, 409 Mass. at 521.
Here, there is no dispute as to the contents of the video. The complained-of [*81]  footage depicts plaintiff's mother hanging Christmas decorations in front of a large picture window in a front room of her home. Unlike most activities that occur in a home, plaintiff's mother was engaging in an activity that was by its nature public. The activity was performed in front of a large window facing a public street. Presumably, one purpose of hanging decorations in the window was to make them visible to passersby.
Although the use of a zoom function could potentially heighten the seriousness of the invasion, there is no evidence that it did so here. Nawoichik's use of the zoom function on his off-the-shelf video camera did not allow him to capture any additional details that were not clearly visible from public vantage points. Plaintiff relies on dicta in a Massachusetts Superior Court case that purportedly created a bright-line rule that the use of "enhanced vision" to surveil a person in his or her home per se violates Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 214, § 1B. Digirolamo, 1999 Mass. Super. LEXIS 190, 1999 WL 345592, at *5 (Gants, J.). But even if the Court were to rely on the dicta from that case, it is not plainly inconsistent with the finding that there was no unreasonable and substantial or serious invasion of privacy here. The Digirolamo court distinguished between surveillance [*82]  using the naked eye and using "telescopic" or "telephoto" lenses. Id. at 3-4. While it is not clear whether the court's flat prohibition on such lenses would include the standard-issue zoom function used here, the court was clear in declaring that a person "has no reasonable expectation of privacy in what can be seen with the naked eye in plain view." Id. at 3. Here, again, the video footage plainly does not depict more than what would have been clearly visible from the street. See Finley v. Hartford Life & Acc. Ins. Co., 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 91950, 2007 WL 4374417, at *11 (N.D. Cal. Dec. 14, 2007) (finding that workers' compensation investigator's use of a zoom lens did not undermine the conclusion that there was no invasion of privacy because "the lens allowed the investigator to observe Plaintiff in more detail; it did not alter how much of her he could see, and there is no dispute that Plaintiff was visible with the naked eye").
Finally, it is true that the City had no reason to conduct surveillance of plaintiff's mother. Plaintiff, however, has no standing to assert a violation of any claim of invasion of the privacy of her mother. At a minimum, footage depicting plaintiff's mother in their shared home implicates plaintiff's privacy interests, if at all, far less than would footage of plaintiff herself.
This is [*83]  not a circumstance where video cameras were trained on plaintiff's home "on a continuous basis." Cf. Polay, 468 Mass. at 385 (invasion of privacy found when cameras were trained continuously on home). Nor is this a case where surveillance was conducted solely for the improper purpose of harassing or hounding the subject. Cf. Ellis v. Safety Ins. Co., 41 Mass. App. Ct. 630, 638, 672 N.E.2d 979 (1996) (invasion of privacy found when surveillance conducted for the purpose of racial harassment); RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF TORTS § 652B, comment d (1977). Instead, the complained-of footage captured 54 seconds of plaintiff's mother—not plaintiff—engaging in an activity in their shared home that was visible to the public, and that was intended to result in a decoration for the public to see. Plaintiff was unaware it was occurring.
According to the undisputed evidence, and balancing defendants' legitimate motivation against the extent of the invasion, the video footage in question was not an unreasonable and substantial or serious interference with plaintiff's right to privacy. Accordingly, summary judgment will be granted as to that claim.

b. Video Footage of Plaintiff's Physical Therapist's Office
Plaintiff next contends that defendants invaded her privacy by filming her during an appointment at her physical therapist's office. As noted, [*84]  that filming was conducted from the parking lot and through a second-floor window.
Again, the content of the video is undisputed. The only activity depicted is plaintiff talking to another woman; nothing else is visible. No sound from inside the building is audible. Plaintiff cannot be seen undergoing any medical or therapeutic procedures, performing exercises, or otherwise receiving treatment. She is wearing normal clothing, not a hospital gown or workout clothes. In addition, in moments where the camera zooms out, she remains clearly visible through the large window.
Under the circumstances, it is far from clear how plaintiff's presence before a window in her physical therapist's office is materially different from her presence at any other public location. Certainly the fact of the therapy was made known to the City; it was paying for the appointments. But even assuming that she had an enhanced expectation of privacy in a physical therapist's office when her appointments were being paid for by her employer, under the circumstances, no reasonable juror could find that the footage amounted to an unreasonable and substantial or serious invasion of privacy. See Wolfson v. Lewis, 924 F. Supp. 1413, 1420 (E.D. Pa. 1996) (watching or observing [*85]  a person in a public place, or taking a photograph of a person who can be observed from a public vantage point, is not generally an invasion of privacy) (quoting RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF TORTS § 652B, comment c, (1977)). Accordingly, summary judgment will be granted as to that claim.

c. GPS Tracking Device
Plaintiff finally contends that defendants invaded her privacy by placing a GPS device on her car to track her location. There is a substantial question as to whether the use of a GPS tracking device on a vehicle—if in fact one were used—would constitute an unreasonable invasion of privacy. See United States v. Jones, 565 U.S. 400, 413, 132 S. Ct. 945, 181 L. Ed. 2d 911 (2012).
Here, however, there is no actual evidence that such a device was used. Defendants have offered substantial evidence tending to show that no one used, or even requested the use of, a GPS tracking device. Plaintiff has offered no affirmative evidence of her own. Indeed, her own expert conceded that he did not see any direct or circumstantial evidence that a GPS device was used.
Instead of offering her own countervailing evidence, plaintiff has attempted to question the credibility of defendants' evidence. But a plaintiff cannot manufacture a genuine dispute of material fact "by relying on the hope that the jury will not trust the credibility [*86]  of the witness." McGrath v. Tavares, 757 F.3d 20, 28 n.13 (1st Cir. 2014) (quoting Sears, Roebuck & Co. v. Goldstone & Sudalter, 128 F.3d 10, 18 (1st Cir. 1997)). The purported holes plaintiff points to in defendants' evidence are not sufficient to create a genuine issue of material fact concerning whether a GPS device was used to track her movements. On the whole, and even drawing all reasonable inferences in plaintiff's favor, plaintiff's arguments to rebut defendants' evidence amount to little more than "[c]onculsory allegations, improbable inferences, and unsupported speculation" insufficient to establish a genuine dispute of material fact. Triangle Trading Co. v. Robroy Indus., Inc., 200 F.3d 1, 2 (1st Cir. 1999).
In summary, the motion for summary judgment will be granted as to the claim of unlawful invasion of privacy based on the video surveillance.

E. Section 1983 and Massachusetts Civil Rights Act Claims — Counts Twelve and Sixteen
Counts Twelve and Sixteen allege that defendants violated plaintiff's federal and state constitutional rights by conducting intrusive surveillance. See Transcript of Oral Argument on Mot. for Summ. J. 82. Count Twelve alleges a claim under the federal Constitution pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983 against all City defendants. Count Sixteen alleges a claim under the Massachusetts Declaration of Rights pursuant to the state-analog of § 1983, the Massachusetts Civil Rights Act ("MCRA"), Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 12, § 11I, against [*87]  the individual City defendants in their individual capacities.
It is well-settled that there is no supervisory liability under § 1983 and the MCRA. Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 676, 129 S. Ct. 1937, 173 L. Ed. 2d 868 (2009); Armstrong v. Lamy, 938 F. Supp. 1018, 1042 (D. Mass. 1996). A supervisor may be held liable only for his or her own acts or omissions, and for conduct or inaction that "amounted to a reckless or callous indifference to the constitutional rights of others." Barreto-Rivera v. Medina-Vargas, 168 F.3d 42, 48 (1st Cir. 1999)
Here, there is no evidence to indicate that any City defendant personally engaged in any conduct giving rise to a claim for a constitutional violation concerning the surveillance. All surveillance was conducted by Nawoichik, and (briefly) one other Absolute investigator. The only City defendant with any interaction with Absolute was Gagnon, who never spoke with or otherwise gave direct orders to Nawoichik. There is no evidence in the record that she ordered, participated in, or acquiesced to any conduct that was even arguably unconstitutional. Accordingly, the motion for summary judgment will be granted as to Counts Twelve and Sixteen.

F. Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress Claim — Count Nineteen
Count Nineteen alleges a claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress ("IIED") against all defendants. To prove a claim for IIED, a plaintiff [*88]  must show (1) that the defendant either intended to inflict emotional distress or knew or should have known that emotional distress was the likely result of her conduct; (2) that the conduct was extreme and outrageous; (3) that the conduct caused the plaintiff emotional distress; and (4) that the emotional distress was severe and of a nature that no reasonable person could be expected to endure it. See Agis v. Howard Johnson Co., 371 Mass. 140, 144-45, 355 N.E.2d 315 (1976). Massachusetts courts have cautioned that "[t]he standard for making a claim of intentional infliction of emotional distress is very high." Polay, 468 Mass. at 385.
Plaintiff contends that defendants' use of surveillance constituted "extreme and outrageous" conduct. Conduct is "extreme and outrageous" only if it is "so outrageous in character, and so extreme in degree, as to go beyond all possible bounds of decency, and to be regarded as atrocious, and utterly intolerable in a civilized community." Foley v. Polaroid Corp., 400 Mass. 82, 99, 508 N.E.2d 72 (1987) (quoting RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF TORTS § 46, comment d (1965)). Again, the use of surveillance was conducted for a legitimate purpose and recorded nothing more than could be seen in plain view from public vantage points. No reasonable juror could find that the surveillance conducted on plaintiff was the sort of "profoundly shocking" conduct necessary to prove [*89]  a claim for IIED. Conway v. Smerling, 37 Mass. App. Ct. 1, 8, 635 N.E.2d 268 (1994).
In addition, plaintiff has failed to produce sufficient evidence to raise a disputed issue of material fact that she suffered from significant emotional distress. To prove a claim for IIED, plaintiff must show that her distress was so severe "that no reasonable [person] could be expected to endure it." Tetrault v. Mahoney, Hawkes & Goldings, 425 Mass. 456, 466, 681 N.E.2d 1189 (1997). To demonstrate severe distress, plaintiff must produce testimony or medical evidence that she suffered severe emotional injury or anguish, exhibited psychiatric or physical symptoms of severity, or that her life was otherwise materially disrupted. See Kennedy v. Town of Billerica, 617 F.3d 520, 531 (1st Cir. 2010). "Mere 'emotional responses including anger, sadness, anxiety and distress' . . . are 'often not legally compensable.'" Id. at 530 (quoting Quinn v. Walsh, 49 Mass. App. Ct. 696, 706, 732 N.E.2d 330 (2000)). Plaintiff testified that she did not suffer from depression and was not diagnosed with anxiety after she viewed the footage. Although she states that she lost weight and made minor changes to her life, including putting up a "No Trespassing" sign and parking her car in different locations, those impacts are "too transient, too vague, and insufficiently severe" to raise a disputed issue of material fact that she suffered from severe emotional distress. Kennedy v. Town of Billerica, 617 F.3d at 531.
Accordingly, the motion for summary [*90]  judgment will be granted as to Count Nineteen.

G. Intentional Interference with Contractual Relations Claim — Count Twenty
Count Twenty alleges a claim for "intentional interference with contract or intentional interference with prospective business advantage" as to the individual City defendants. Although the complaint is not entirely clear, plaintiff's allegations appear to be directed to intentional interference with contractual relations ("IICR"). To state a claim for IICR under Massachusetts law, a plaintiff must show that (1) she had an advantageous relationship with a third party; (2) the defendant knowingly induced the third party to break the relationship; (3) the defendant's interference, in addition to being intentional, was improper in motive or means; and (4) the plaintiff was harmed as a result. See Rando v. Leonard, 826 F.3d 553, 556 (1st Cir. 2016).
While employed at the library, plaintiff was a member of a union and her employment was subject to a collective-bargaining agreement ("CBA"). Section 301 of the Labor Management Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. § 185(a), has been interpreted to preempt a state-law claim "if the resolution of [that] claim depends on the meaning of a collective-bargaining agreement." Flibotte v. Pennsylvania Truck Lines, Inc., 131 F.3d 21, 26 (1st Cir. 1997) (quoting Lingle v. Norge Div. of Magic Chef, Inc., 486 U.S. 399, 405-06, 108 S. Ct. 1877, 100 L. Ed. 2d 410 (1988)). "In practice, this test boils down [*91]  to whether the asserted state-law claim plausibly can be said to depend upon the meaning of one or more provisions within the collective bargaining agreement." Rogers v. NSTAR Elec., 389 F. Supp. 2d 100, 106 (D. Mass. 2005).
Here, plaintiff's claim is clearly preempted by § 301. First, plaintiff has not pointed to any evidence that defendants were acting outside the scope of their duties as supervisors at the relevant times. As agents of the City, defendants' relationship with plaintiff was governed by the CBA. See Magerer v. John Sexton & Co., 912 F.2d 525, 530-31 (1st Cir. 1990). Therefore, whether defendants were justified in their actions necessarily entails an interpretation of the CBA. See id. at 531; see also Acciavatti v. Professional Servs. Group, 982 F. Supp. 69, 76 (D. Mass. 1997). Cf. Craig v. Merrimack Valley Hosp., 45 F. Supp. 3d 137, 155-56 (D. Mass. 2014) (no preemption found for IICR claim where the parties had previously engaged in arbitration, obviating the need for the "court to engage in any interpretation of the collective bargaining agreement").
Accordingly, Count Twenty is preempted by § 301 of the Labor Management Relations Act, 29 U.S.C. § 185(a). Summary judgment will be granted as to that claim.

H. Defamation Claim — Count Twenty-One
Count Twenty-One alleges a claim for defamation against defendants Callery and Gagnon. Specifically, it alleges that defendants defamed her by escorting her as she gathered her things and left the library on October 29, 2013. Under Massachusetts [*92]  law, conduct may be defamatory if "a reasonable third person observing [the defendants'] conduct would have understood it to be defamatory." See Phelan v. May Dep't Stores Co., 443 Mass. 52, 58, 819 N.E.2d 550 (2004). To prove a defamation claim under Massachusetts law, a plaintiff must show (1) that the defendant made a statement concerning the plaintiff to a third party; (2) that the statement was defamatory such that it could damage the plaintiff's reputation in the community; (3) that the defendant was at fault in making the statement; and (4) that the statement either caused the plaintiff economic loss or is actionable without proof of economic loss. See Shay v. Walters, 702 F.3d 76, 81 (1st Cir. 2012).
Even viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to plaintiff, defendants' conduct—walking out of the library with plaintiff—is "ambiguous and open to various interpretations." See Phelan, 443 Mass. at 55. Plaintiff's mere belief that defendants' actions damaged her reputation, without more, is insufficient to create a material issue that defendants' conduct was defamatory. See id. In any event, plaintiff has not provided any evidence to show that she suffered economic loss as a result of defendants' alleged conduct nor that it is otherwise actionable.
Accordingly, the motion for summary judgment will be granted as [*93]  to Count Twenty-One.

I. Civil Conspiracy Claim — Count Eighteen
Count Eighteen alleges a claim for civil conspiracy against all defendants. That claim is based on a "substantial assistance" theory based on Section 876 of the Restatement (Second) of Torts. See Transcript of Oral Argument on Mot. for Summ. J. 44. Under that theory, plaintiff must prove an underlying tortious act. See Snyder v. Collura, 812 F.3d 46, 52 (1st Cir. 2016); Taylor v. Am. Chemistry Council, 576 F.3d 16, 34-35 (1st Cir. 2009). Plaintiff contends that defendants conspired to invade her privacy and commit IIED. As discussed above, summary judgment has already been granted in favor of defendants on Counts Thirteen, Nineteen, and Twenty. Therefore, plaintiff's claim for civil conspiracy necessarily fails.
Accordingly, the motion for summary judgment will be granted as to Count Eighteen.

IV. Conclusion
For the foregoing reasons, the Absolute defendants' motion for summary judgment is GRANTED.
The City defendants' motion for summary judgment is GRANTED in part and DENIED in part. Specifically, the City defendants' motion is denied as to the claims of retaliation arising out of plaintiff's discharge set forth in Count Five as to the City; Count Eight as to the City and as to Lynch and O'Connor in their official capacities; and Count Eleven as to the City and as to Lynch, O'Connor, and [*94]  Gagnon in their individual and official capacities. The City defendants' motion is otherwise granted.
So Ordered.
/s/ F. Dennis Saylor
F. Dennis Saylor IV
United States District Judge
Dated: July 12, 2017


End of Document

