Cobian v. Dorel Juvenile Group
United States District Court for the Central District of California
October 2, 2015, Decided; October 2, 2015, Filed
CV 15-01494 SJO (KKx)

Reporter
2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 200596 *; 2015 WL 13917211
Juan Cobian v. Dorel Juvenile Group, Inc. et al.
Counsel:  [*1] COUNSEL PRESENT FOR PLAINTIFF: Not Present.
COUNSEL PRESENT FOR DEFENDANT: Not Present.
Judges: S. JAMES OTERO, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: S. JAMES OTERO
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES - GENERAL

PROCEEDINGS (in chambers): ORDER GRANTING DEFENDANTS' MOTION TO DISMISS [Docket No. 12] ORDER DENYING DEFENDANTS' MOTION TO STRIKE [Docket No. 13]
This matter is before the Court on Defendants Chartwell Staffing Service's ("Chartwell") and Ameriwood Industries Inc.'s ("Ameriwood") (collectively, "Defendants") Motion To Dismiss Plaintiff Juan Cobian's ("Plaintiff") First Amended Complaint ("Motion To Dismiss"), filed September 4, 2015, and Defendants' Motion To Strike Punitive Damages ("Motion To Strike"), filed September 4, 2015. Plaintiff filed Oppositions to both Motions on September 22, 2015. Defendant filed a Reply on XX. The Court found this matter suitable for disposition without oral argument and vacated the hearing set for October 13, 2015. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 78(b). For the following reasons, the Court GRANTS the Motion to Dismiss and DENIES the Motion to Strike.
I. FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
A. Factual Background
Plaintiff's First Amended Complaint ("FAC") alleges the following. Chartwell is a corporation organized and existing [*2]  under the laws of the State of New York, and is primarily engaged in the business of providing temporary staffing to a range of different clients. Chartwell employed Cobian and placed him with Ameriwood as a forklift operator. (FAC ¶¶ 1-7, ECF No. 9.)
Plaintiff suffers from cataract's disease, a physical disability, as defined under the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (FEHA). (FAC ¶ 8.) He asked Ameriwood for 10-day leave starting around June 1, 2014 so that he could have surgery for his cataracts. (FAC ¶ 8.) Luis Torres, Plaintiff's supervisor, approved Plaintiff's leave. (FAC ¶ 9.) When Plaintiff attempted to return from leave, however, Ameriwood representatives, including Luis Torres, terminated Plaintiff's employment. (FAC ¶ 10.) Plaintiff claims he was fired for a pretextual reason, and that Ameriwood was looking to fill his position with a younger employee. (FAC ¶ 11.)
On June 29, 2015, Plaintiff filed a complaint with the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing (DFEH). The DFEH granted Plaintiff a right to sue letter. (FAC ¶ 12.) Plaintiff subsequently filed the instant action against Defendants in Sen Bernardino Superior Court. Defendants removed the action [*3]  to this court on July 27, 2015. (See Not. of Removal from Sen Bernardino Superior Court, ECF No. 1.)
Plaintiff's FAC lists seven causes of action for: (1) discrimination based on age disability in violation of FEHA; (2) failure to accommodate disability in violation of FEHA; (3) failure to engage in the interactive process to determine reasonable accommodation in violation of FEHA; (4) wrongful termination in violation of California public policy; (5) failure to prevent discrimination in violation of FEHA;(6) failure to grant leave to Plaintiff in violation of the California Family Rights Action (CFRA); and (7) retaliation and discrimination in violation of CFRA.
II. DISCUSSION
Rule 12, which provides for dismissal of a plaintiff's cause of action for "failure to state a claim on which relief can be granted," Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6), "must be read in conjunction with" Federal Rule Civil Procedure 8(a) ("Rule 8"). Ileto v. Glock Inc., 349 F.3d 1191, 1199-1200 (9th Cir. 2003). Rule 8 requires that "[a] pleading that states a claim for relief must contain . . . a short and plain statement of the claim showing that the pleader is entitled to relief." Rule 8(a)(2). Although the pleader is not required to plead "detailed factual allegations" under Rule 8, this standard demands "more than a sheer possibility that a defendant has acted unlawfully." [*4]  Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678, 129 S. Ct. 1937, 173 L. Ed. 2d 868 (2009) (citation omitted). Pleadings that contain nothing more than legal conclusions or "a formulaic recitation of the elements of a cause of action" are insufficient. Id. (citing Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 555, 127 S. Ct. 1955, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929 (2007)). "To survive a motion to dismiss, a complaint must contain sufficient factual matter, accepted as true, to 'state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face.'" Id. (quoting Twombly, 550 U.S. at 570). Where a complaint pleads sufficient facts "to raise a right to relief above the speculative level," a court may not dismiss the complaint under 12(b)(6). See Twombly, 550 U.S. at 555.
A. Discrimination Based on Age or Disability
To establish a prima facie case for discrimination based on age or disability under FEHA, Plaintiff has to show that he: (1) suffered from a disability, or was regarded as suffering from a disability; (2) could perform the essential duties of the job with or without reasonable accommodations, and (3) was subjected to an adverse employment action because of the disability or perceived disability. Sandell v. Taylor Listug, Inc., 188 Cal. App. 4th 297, 310, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 453 (Ct. App. 2010) (citation omitted).
Plaintiff's allegations do not meet any of the three prongs to show discrimination under FEHA. First, Plaintiff has not provided any details concerning his cataract condition and the results of his surgery to remedy the condition. [*5]  It is unclear if this condition would constitute a "disability" under the FEHA. Second, Plaintiff does not plead any facts to show that he was able to perform the essential duties of his job. Third, he only makes conclusory allegations that he was subject to an adverse employment action as a result of his age and his cataract condition. As such, Plaintiff's first cause of action is DISMISSED with leave to amend.
B. Failure to Accommodate Disability and Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process
Plaintiff alleges that Defendants did not make reasonable accommodations for his cataract condition nor did they engage in an interactive process to discuss Plaintiff's disability. (FAC ¶¶ 20-37.) Under California law, an employer is obligated "to make reasonable accommodation for the known physical or mental disability of an applicant or employee." Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(m). "Two principles underlie a cause of action for failure to provide a reasonable accommodation. First, the employee must request an accommodation. . . Second, the parties must engage in an interactive process regarding the requested accommodation and, if the process fails, responsibility for the failure rests with the party who failed to participate [*6]  in good faith." Gelfo v. Lockheed Martin Corp., 140 Cal. App. 4th 34, 54, 43 Cal. Rptr. 3d 874 (Ct. App. 2006).
The FAC relies on conclusory allegations, without offering facts that support either a claim of failure to accommodate or a claim for failure to engage in the interactive process. Plaintiff does not state whether he requested an accommodation from the Defendant nor does he discuss his disability after the cataract surgery. Plaintiff also does not specify what type of accommodation he would have required to continue his job. Accordingly, the Court DISMISSES Plaintiff's second and third causes of action, with leave to amend.
C. Wrongful Termination
Plaintiff next contends that Defendants wrongfully "terminated [his] employment in violation of important and well-established public policies, which are set forth, for example, in the Fair Employment and Housing Act." (FAC ¶ 39). To state a cause of action for wrongful termination in violation of public policy, Plaintiff must delineate the specific public policy of California that Defendants violated. The "constitutional or statutory provision must sufficiently describe the type of prohibited conduct to enable an employer to know the fundamental public policies that are expressed in that law." Sequoia Ins. Co. v. Superior Court, 13 Cal. App. 4th 1472, 1480, 16 Cal. Rptr. 2d 888 (1993).
Here, the FAC does not name a [*7]  public policy that Defendants violated, outside of the entirety of FEHA. This is too of broad an allegation to meet Rule 12(b)(6) requirements. The Court DISMISSES Plaintiff's fourth cause of action, with leave to amend.
D. Failure To Prevent Discrimination
FEHA provides that it is unlawful for an employer "to fail to take all reasonable steps necessary to prevent discrimination and harassment from occurring." Cal. Gov't Code § 12940. "[E]mployers are not liable for failing to take necessary steps to prevent discrimination, 'except where the [discriminatory] actions took place and were not prevented.'" Dep't of Fair Employment & Hous. v. Lucent Technologies, Inc., 642 F.3d 728, 748 (9th Cir. 2011) (quoting Trujillo v. N. Cnty. Transit Dist., 63 Cal. App. 4th 280, 73 Cal. Rptr. 2d 596, 602 (Ct. App. 1998)).
As noted supra, Plaintiff does not state a cause of action for discrimination under FEHA. Therefore, he cannot state a cause of action for failure to prevent discrimination. Plaintiff's fifth cause of action is DISMISSED with leave to amend.
E. Failure To Grant Leave Days to Plaintiff
The FAC also alleges that the Defendants did not grant leave to Plaintiff for his cataract surgery and recovery, in violation of the California Family Rights Act (CFRA). (FAC ¶¶ 52-62.) California Government Code Section 12945.2(a) requires that employers provide leave to certain employees for family care and medical leave:
[I]t shall be an unlawful employment practice for any [*8]  employer, as defined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (c), to refuse to grant a request by any employee with more than 12 months of service with the employer, and who has at least 1,250 hours of service with the employer during the previous 12-month period, to take up to a total of 12 workweeks in any 12-month period for family care and medical leave. Family care and medical leave requested pursuant to this subdivision shall not be deemed to have been granted unless the employer provides the employee, upon granting the leave request, a guarantee of employment in the same or a comparable position upon the termination of the leave.
Plaintiff's FAC fails to meet the requirements of the CFRA. He does not demonstrate that he spent more than 12 months in service with Defendants nor does he document that his work as a forklift operator mets the 1,250 hours requirement. Accordingly, Plaintiff's sixth cause of action is DISMISSED with leave to amend.
F. Retaliation and Discrimination
Plaintiff's seventh cause of action alleges that he was fired and discriminated, having requested leave under the CFRA. (FAC ¶¶ 63-70.) This cause of action necessarily requires that he show that he requested leave from Defendants and then that Defendants [*9]  took retaliatory action against Plaintiff. Because he does not carry his burden with respect to his claim that Defendants failed to grant him requested leave, the Court dismisses Plaintiff's seventh cause of action, with leave to amend.
G. Motion To Strike Punitive Damages
Defendants have also filed a Motion To Strike Plaintiff's claim for punitive damages. "[T]he function of a 12(f) motion to strike is to avoid the expenditure of time and money that must arise from litigating spurious issues by dispensing with those issues prior to trial. . . ." Sidney Vinstein v. A.H. Robins Co., 697 F.2d 880, 885 (9th Cir. 1983).
To sustain a claim for punitive damages, Plaintiff must show that Defendants were "guilty of oppression, fraud, or malice, express or implied . . . ." Cal. Civ. Code § 3294(a). The Court agrees with Defendants that the FAC does not plead facts that support punitive damages under California law. "The law does not favor punitive damages and they should be granted with the greatest caution." Beck v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 54 Cal. App. 3d 347, 355, 126 Cal. Rptr. 602 (Ct. App. 1976). Nevertheless, because the Court is granting Plaintiff leave to amend the FAC, the Motion To Strike is inappropriate at this stage. If Plaintiff chooses to amend his complaint, and the facts alleged still do not make out a case for punitive damages, then Defendants may renew the [*10]  Motion To Strike.
III. RULING
For the foregoing reasons, the Court GRANTS Defendant's Motion to Dismiss and DENIES Defendants' Motion To Strike.
"Dismissal without leave to amend is improper unless it is clear . . . that the complaint could not be saved by any amendment." Polich v. Burlington Northern, Inc., 942 F.2d 1467, 1472 (9th Cir. 1991). Under Rule 15(a) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, leave to amend "shall be freely given when justice so requires." The Court GRANTS Plaintiff ten days from the date of this Order to file a Second Amended Complaint. Defendant has ten days thereafter to file a response. Counsel for the parties must meet and confer in person prior to Defendant filing a third motion to dismiss.
IT IS SO ORDERED.


End of Document

