Cooley v. Valero Energy Corp.
United States District Court for the Southern District of Ohio, Eastern Division
March 20, 2012, Filed
Case No. 2:11-cv-526

Reporter
2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 40291 *
Christopher Cooley, Plaintiff, v. Valero Energy Corporation, et al., Defendants.
Counsel:  [*1] For Christopher Cooley, Plaintiff: Avonte Darius Campinha-Bacote, Campinha Bacote LLC, Columbus, OH.
For Valero Energy Corporation, Valero Marketing and Supply Company, Defendants: William R Post, LEAD ATTORNEY, Baker & Hostetler LLP, Columbus, OH; Melissa Dunlap Palmisciano, Columbus, OH.
For JATT Bros LLC, Defendant: David William Douglas, LEAD ATTORNEY, Columbus, OH.
For DT Stores LLC, Demir Tahiraj, Defendants: John Clooney Cahill, LEAD ATTORNEY, Nationwide Insurance Columbus Trial Division, Columbus, OH.
Judges: MICHAEL H. WATSON, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: MICHAEL H. WATSON
Opinion



OPINION AND ORDER
Plaintiff Christopher Cooley ("Plaintiff") sues Valero Energy Corporation ("VEC"), Valero Marketing and Supply Company ("VMSC"), JATT Bros. LLC ("JATT"), Pap Oil Company LLC ("Pap Oil"), DT Stores LLC ("DT Stores"), Demir Tahiraj, and John Does 1 and 2 (collectively, "Defendants") in connection with his attempt to enter a gas station with a service animal. Three Defendants, VEC, VMSC, and JATT, move to dismiss. ECF Nos. 12, 13, 17.

I. FACTUAL BACKGROUND
Plaintiff asserts the following facts. Plaintiff has vision and hearing impairments and relies on the assistance of a guide dog. Am. Compl. ¶ 3, ECF No.  [*2] 19. On May 6, 2011, Plaintiff and his sister were driving and stopped at "a Valero Gas Station" in Columbus, Ohio to buy gas and purchase coffee. Id. ¶ 14. Plaintiff walked into the gas station with his guide dog and was confronted by Demir Tahiraj, an employee who told Plaintiff to leave because pets were not allowed in the store. Id. ¶ 14. Plaintiff tried to explain to Mr. Tahiraj that the dog was a guide dog, not a pet. Id. Mr. Tahiraj did not listen and instead yelled at Plaintiff to get out. Id. Plaintiff again tried to explain his situation to Mr. Tahiraj, but Mr. Tahiraj continued to scream, threaten Plaintiff, and insist Plaintiff leave the store. Id. ¶ 15-16. Instead of leaving, Plaintiff pulled out his service identification card and walked to the back of the store to pour a cup of coffee. Id. ¶ 17. Mr. Tahiraj came after him, raised his fist as if to strike Plaintiff, but instead grabbed Plaintiff by the collar after Plaintiff's sister intervened. Id. ¶ 17; Mem. Opp. VMSC Mot. Dismiss 7, ECF No. 25. Mr. Tahiraj called the police, and Plaintiff called 9-1-1. Id. ¶ 18, Mem. Opp. VMSC Mot. Dismiss 7, ECF No. 25.
Plaintiff's complaint lists seven counts. In Count One, Plaintiff  [*3] alleges violations of Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), specifically 42 U.S.C. § 12182(a) and 28 C.F.R. § 36.104. In Count Two, Plaintiff alleges violations of Ohio Revised Code § 4112.02(G). Counts Three and Four allege the Ohio torts of battery and assault. Count Five alleges the Ohio tort of intentional infliction of emotional distress. Count Six alleges the Ohio tort of negligent infliction of emotional distress; Count Seven alleges the Ohio tort of negligent hiring, retention and/or supervision.
Plaintiff describes the relationship between Defendants as follows: VEC is the parent company of VMSC. Through VMSC, VEC enters into distributor agreements to market and sell Valero's products. VMSC has a franchise agreement with Pap Oil, which gave Pap Oil the right to distribute and sell Valero gasoline and other products and to use the Valero marks in selling those products. In return, Pap Oil can only distribute Valero gasoline and products to Valero-branded fuel dispensing stations that VMSC approves in writing. Pap Oil may designate sublicensees, and Plaintiff alleges JATT and/or DT Stores are sublicensees. JATT owns the premises on which the gas station is  [*4] located and rents those premises to DT Stores, which operates the gas station. Demir Tahiraj is DT Stores' incorporator, and John Does 1 and 2 were employees working at the time the incident occurred. Mem. Opp. VMSC Mot. Dismiss 89, ECF No. 25; Am. Compl. ¶¶ 4-11, ECF No. 19.
Defendants do not dispute this basic arrangement between the parties, but they do dispute the extent to which any agency or apparent agency existed between VEC and VMSC and the other Defendants.

II. VMSC'S MOTION TO DISMISS FOR LACK OF SUBJECT MATTER JURISDICTION
VMSC moves to dismiss Plaintiff's complaint with prejudice, or in the alternative moves for summary judgment. VMSC Mot. Dismiss, ECF No. 13. In responding, Plaintiff argues his claims survive either standard and argues throughout that there is a genuine issue of material fact. Pl. Resp. 19, ECF No. 25. Because both parties have briefed the issue as one for summary judgment and offered evidence outside the pleadings, the Court will treat VMSC's motion as one for summary judgment.

A. Standard of Review
Pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56(a), "[t]he court shall grant summary judgment if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material  [*5] fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a).
The Court may grant summary judgment if the opposing party fails to make a showing sufficient to establish the existence of an element essential to that party's case and on which that party will bear the burden of proof at trial. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986); see also Petty v. Metro. Gov't. of Nashville-Davidson Cnty., 538 F.3d 431, 438-39 (6th Cir. 2008).
When reviewing a summary judgment motion, the Court must draw all reasonable inferences in favor of the nonmoving party, who must set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue of material fact for trial, and the Court must refrain from making credibility determinations or weighing the evidence. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 150-51, 120 S. Ct. 2097, 147 L. Ed. 2d 105 (2000); Henderson v. Walled Lake Consol. Sch., 469 F.3d 479, 487 (6th Cir. 2006). The Court disregards all evidence favorable to the moving party that the jury would not be not required to believe. Reeves, 530 U.S. at 150-51. Summary judgment will not be granted if the dispute about a material fact is genuine, "that is, if the evidence is such that a reasonable  [*6] jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986); Barrett v. Whirlpool Corp., 556 F.3d 502, 511 (6th Cir. 2009). Thus, the central issue is '"whether the evidence presents a sufficient disagreement to require submission to a jury or whether it is so one-sided that one party must prevail as a matter of law."' Anderson, 477 U.S. at 251-52.

B. Discussion
VMSC argues the complaint fails to state a claim against it under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6). With respect to Plaintiff's ADA claim, VMSC argues Plaintiff has not alleged, and could not show even if he did allege, that VMSC owned, leased, or operated a place of public accommodation, as required under § 302 of the ADA. VMSC Mot. Dismiss 3, ECF No. 13. In support of its motion for summary judgment, VMSC offers the affidavit of David Parker, the Senior Vice President, Product Supply and Wholesale Marketing of VMSC, who swore VMSC does not own, lease or operate the gas station at issue or the property on which it is located. Parker Aff. ¶ 9, ECF No. 13-1.
Plaintiff responds that it is not suing VMSC for directly liability under § 12182(a) but rather is claiming vicarious  [*7] liability under theories of actual and apparent agency. Pl. Resp. Opp. 4, ECF No. 25. Plaintiff argues there are genuine issues of fact as to whether such actual or apparent agencies exist. Id. at 2.
A preliminary issue that the Court must decide, therefore, is whether § 12182(a) provides for vicarious liability.

i. The ADA Permits Vicarious Liability.
Plaintiff's federal claim is brought under § 302 of the ADA, which states:
No individual shall be discriminated against on the basis of disability in the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations of any place of public accommodation by any person who owns, leases (or leases to), or operates a place of public accommodation.
42 U.S.C. § 12182(a).
The Supreme Court of the United States has determined that common law agency and vicarious liability principles are presumed incorporated into federal statutes. Meyer v. Holley, 537 U.S. 280, 285, 123 S. Ct. 824, 154 L. Ed. 2d 753 (2003). Meyer involved interpretation of the Fair Housing Act ("FHA") which, like the ADA, was silent about vicarious liability. Id. at 285. The Supreme Court determined that actions brought under the FHA were essentially tort actions and reiterated  [*8] that "when Congress creates a tort action, it legislates against a legal background of ordinary tort-related vicarious liability rules and consequently intends its legislation to incorporate those rules." Id. (citation omitted). Vicarious liability between principles and agents is an example of such an ordinary background tort principle. Id.
The Sixth Circuit has not decided specifically whether vicarious liability applies to Title III of the ADA, but it has extended common law principles of vicarious liability to the Fair Credit Reporting Act ("FCRA") and Title I of the ADA. Jones v. Federated Finan. Reserve Corp, 144 F.3d 961, 965-66 (6th Cir. 1998) (finding vicarious liability based on apparent authority was consistent with Congress' intent behind the FCRA); Johnson v. City of Saline, 151 F.3d 564, 568 (6th Cir. 1998) (applying common law agency principles to determine whether plaintiff was an employee under Title I of the ADA). Important to the Sixth Circuit's decision in Jones was the principle that corporations can only act through their agents, and failure to allow vicarious liability would allow corporations to even wilfully violate the statute. Therefore, the Act's goal of  [*9] deterrence would be subverted without allowing apparent authority as a basis for vicarious liability. Jones, 144 F.3d at 966. Moreover, this Court has previously applied common law agency principles to federal statutes in the context of franchisor-franchisee relationships, though not under the ADA. Taylor v. Checkrite, Ltd., 627 F. Supp. 415, 416 (S.D. Ohio 1986) (determining whether franchisee was franchisor's agent in the FCRA and Fair Debt Collection Practices Act context).
With these principles in mind, the Court believes that vicarious liability can be applied to § 12182 of the ADA. Congress is presumed to have enacted § 12182 against a background of ordinary vicarious liability rules. Moreover, the purpose of the ADA was "to provide a clear and comprehensive national mandate for the elimination of discrimination against individuals with disabilities" by "invok[ing] the sweep of congressional authority . . . ." 42 U.S.C. § 12101. In enacting the ADA "Congress intended . . . to provide broad coverage." ADA Amendments Act of 2008, PL 110-325 (Sept. 25, 2008) (re-defining "disability"). There is nothing in the Act to suggest that applying vicarious liability would be inconsistent  [*10] with Congress' intent. Although subsection (a) prohibits discrimination by "any person" and does not define whether person covers corporations or entities, the Act refers to "entity" in subsection (b)(2)(A) and (b)(3). 42 U.S.C. § 12182(b)(2)(A), (b)(3). The Department of Justice further noted that a "private entity" can own, lease (lease to) or operate a place of public accommodation. 28 C.F.R. § 36.104. The Court is aware of only one circuit to have addressed whether § 12182 includes vicarious liability. Pona v. Cecil Whittaker's, Inc., 155 F.3d 1034, 1036 (8th Cir. 1998) did not extend principles of vicarious liability to § 12182. Pona was decided before Meyer, however. For the reasons discussed above, the Court finds that vicarious liability does apply to § 12182 of the ADA.

ii. A Genuine Issue of Material Fact Exists as to Whether Actual or Apparent Agency Exists.
VMSC argues that summary judgment must be granted on the issue of whether it is liable under theories of actual or apparent agency. Plaintiff argues the existence of agency (either actual or apparent) is a question of fact for the jury.
Under Ohio law,1 actual agency exists "where there is a consensual relationship between  [*11] the agent and principal." Brainard v. Am. Skandia Life Assur. Corp., 432 F.3d 655, 661 (6th Cir. 2005). An agency relationship can exist as to one purpose but not another. Id. at 662. "The test is whether 'the employer retain[ed] control, or the right to control, the mode and manner of doing the work contracted for.'" Beddia v. Goodin, 957 F.2d 254, 257 (6th Cir. 1992) (quoting Councell v. Douglas, 163 Ohio St. 292, 126 N.E.2d 597 (1955)). "The existence of a franchisor—franchisee relationship between persons does not in itself preclude the existence of a principal—agent relationship between them." Bricker v. R & A Pizza, Inc., 804 F. Supp. 2d 615, 623 (S.D. Ohio 2011) (internal citations and quotations omitted). On the other hand, a distributorship relationship, without more, will not create an agency relationship. Premier Bus. Group, LLC v. Red Bull of N. Am., Inc., Case No. 08—CV—01453, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 91647, 2009 WL 3242050 (Sept. 30, 2009). "To determine whether a principal-agent relationship exists, courts consider the same factors as in the absence of a franchisor—franchisee relationship." Id. at 623 (internal quotation omitted). Thus, the central question for actual agency is whether VMSC had control over DT Stores.  [*12] Typically, the question of an agency relationship is one of fact, rather than one of law. Brainard, 432 F.3d at 661.
VMSC argues it did not have control over individual gas stations and argues the franchise agreement between VMSC and Pap Oil specifically states it should not be construed as a contract of agency. Parker Aff. ¶ 7, ECF No. 13-1. VMSC also argues the franchise agreement is only between it and its distributor, Pap Oil; VMSC has no contractual relationship with JATT, DT Stores, or their respective employees. VMSC contends that the only supervisory authority VMSC has over sublicensees relates to retail pricing, advertising, and/or motor fuel dispensing practices. VMSC Mot. Dismiss 7, ECF No. 13; VMSC Reply 6, ECF No. 37.
Plaintiff asserts the clause disclaiming agency is not dispositive and cites other provisions of the franchise agreement, which Plaintiff argues shows VMSC retains control over sublicensees. Pl. Resp. 9-16, 20, ECF  [*13] No. 25. The Court agrees with Plaintiff that a clause disclaiming agency is not dispositive. See Agosto v. Leisure World Travel, Inc., 36 Ohio App. 2d 213, 216, 304 N.E.2d 910 (Ohio Ct. App. Tenth Dist. 1973).
Moreover, reasonable jurors could differ as to whether the franchise agreement retains VMSC control over important aspects of the operation of sublicensees, creating an actual agency relationship. For example, the franchise agreement states that the "'Valero' branded fuel dispensing stations" will be operated by Distributor (Pap Oil) "subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement." Franchise Agmt. ¶ B, ECF No. 13-1. Those terms acknowledge "VMSC's right to provide communications directly to its Dealer(s) regarding requirements for each Station as set forth in this Agreement ...." Id. ¶ 6. VMSC may issue directives and requirements concerning the use of Marks, with which sublicensees must "immediately comply." Id. ¶ 7(C). VMSC may also request "renovation and modernization of the Stations' premises ... to reflect the then-current specifications and image of the Valero brand." Id. If VMSC requests such renovations or modernizations, Pap Oil must either make or require its sublicensees to  [*14] make those changes within the time specified by VMSC and in a manner satisfactory to VMSC. Id.
Therefore, VMSC retained the right to communicate directly with sublicensees and to issue mandatory directives with respect to the use of the "Marks" and with respect to renovation and modernization of the sublicensees' gas stations. The language concerning renovation is not clearly limited to preclude requiring renovations and modernizations for compliance with the ADA, and limits the right only to changes to premises that reflect the "then-current specifications and image of the Valero brand." As such, it is subject to interpretation as to whether that provision allows VMSC to require renovation for compliance with the ADA, including adding handicapped parking spaces at the convenience stores, ramps, or allowance of guide dogs on the premises, when such compliance would fit within VMSC's current specifications or be required to maintain its current image. Based on the evidence presented, a reasonable jury could interpret the provision as granting VMSC such right of control over individual sublicensees.
Plaintiff also asserts apparent agency as a theory of liability. Even where no actual agency  [*15] relationship exists, Ohio law recognizes liability under the doctrine of apparent agency. "Under Ohio law a franchisor may be vicariously liable for a franchisee's tortious conduct under a theory of apparent agency or agency by estoppel...." Bricker, 804 F. Supp. 2d at 623. To prove apparent agency, a Plaintiff must show: (1) the principal held the agent out to the public as possessing sufficient authority to act on his behalf; and (2) the person dealing with the agent knew these facts and acting in good faith had reason to believe the agent possessed the necessary authority. Ohio State Bar Ass'n v. Martin, 118 Ohio St. 3d 119, 126, 2008 Ohio 1809, 886 N.E.2d 827 (2008) (construing apparent agency in franchisee—franchisor context). Apparent authority is therefore determined by the acts of the principal rather than the acts of the agent. Id.
VMSC argues that it is too far removed from DT Stores and/or Demir Tahiraj for the latter to be considered VMSC's agents. The Court does not agree with VMSC that the degree to which it is removed from DT Stores itself resolves the issue of apparent agency. The issue is whether VMSC held DT Stores out as its agent, regardless of what the actual relationship was. Moreover, because  [*16] apparent agency deals with whether the principal held another party out as its agent, whether VMSC actually had control over DT Stores and/or its employees pursuant to the franchise agreement is inapplicable to this analysis.
With respect to the first prong, there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Valero held out the gas station as its agent. Plaintiff argued a "Valero" sign was posted on the canopy over the gas pumps, the gas pumps themselves, and the sign displaying the gas prices. Plaintiff also provided the photos and has authenticated them in his affidavit.2 VMSC's argument that Valero does not appear on the convenience store is not well taken. A reasonable jury could find the signs near the gas pumps would lead a reasonable person to conclude that the convenience store associated with the pumps was also a Valero store.
VMSC  [*17] argues the signs are not enough to create an apparent agency. Under Ohio law, however, they are. Apparent agency applies when the apparent agent is permitted to use the principal's business or trade name. Broock v. Nutri/System, Inc., 654 F. Supp. 7, 10 (S.D. Ohio 1986) (quoting Agosto v. Leisure World Travel, Inc., 36 Ohio App. 2d 213, 304 N.E.2d 910 (Ohio Ct. App. Tenth Dist. 1973). The Ohio Supreme Court has specifically rejected VMSC's argument that the mere provision of corporate logos does not constitute a holding out for apparent agency purposes. Shaffer v. Maier, 68 Ohio St. 3d 416, 418, 1994 Ohio 134, 627 N.E.2d 986 (1994) (finding trademark signs sufficient to present question of apparent agency to jury in case involving aviation fuel industry). Even if VMSC were correct, Plaintiff presented evidence in addition to the signs. Plaintiff has presented evidence that the Valero website holds its franchisees out as its agents to the public, including that the website states Valero will sometimes pay to convert a gas station into a "Valero" branded gas station and touts the "courteous and friendly personnel" of its Valero Branded Locations.3 Plaintiff has created a genuine issue of material fact as to the first element of apparent  [*18] agency.
Plaintiff has also presented a genuine issue of material fact as to the second element of apparent agency. Plaintiff offered an affidavit stating that he could see the Valero signs and thought it was a good idea to stop for gas at that station. Cooley Aff. ¶ 4, ECF No. 25-1. Plaintiff further stated that it is his experience that larger corporations tend to train their employees on anti-discrimination laws and that he therefore feels safer patronizing such businesses. Id. ¶ 5. He stated he did not know the station was independently owned and did not see any sign indicating the convenience store was owned by any company other than Valero. Id. ¶ 9. Plaintiff has therefore created a genuine issue of material fact as to whether he believed Valero held the gas station, and its employee Mr. Tahiraj, out as a Valero agent and whether he believed Mr. Tahiraj had authority to make ADA reasonable accommodations decisions for Valero.4
With respect to violation of the ADA, Plaintiff has created a genuine issue of material fact as to both actual agency and apparent agency, and VMSC's motion for summary judgment is denied.

iii. VMSC Motion to Dismiss for Claims Arising Under Ohio Revised Code § 4112.02(G) and the Ohio Torts is Denied.
Having denied VMSC's motion for summary judgment with respect to ADA liability, the Court now turns to VMSC's remaining arguments. VMSC argues it is entitled to summary judgment with respect to Plaintiff's claim under Ohio Revised Code § 4112.02(G) because Plaintiff does not allege VMSC is a proprietor, employee, keeper or manager of a place of public accommodation.
The Ohio disability discrimination law states:
It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice:
...
For any proprietor or any employee, keeper, or manager of a place of public accommodation to deny to any person, except for reasons  [*20] applicable alike to all persons regardless of race, color, religion, sex, military status, national origin, disability, age, or ancestry, the full enjoyment of the accommodations, advantages, facilities, or privileges of the place of public accommodation.
Ohio Rev. Code § 4112.02(G).
VMSC has only argued it cannot be directly liable under Ohio law. Plaintiff has not argued direct liability, however. Pl. Resp. 4, ECF No. 25. Plaintiff argues that common law principles of vicarious liability apply to § 4112.02 and torts, including intentional torts. VMSC has not argued that vicarious liability cannot apply to § 4112.02 or the Ohio torts or otherwise cannot withstand a motion for summary judgment as to these claims. Instead, VMSC has argued only that no agency exists. As the Court has found the existence of agency to be a question for trial, summary judgment is denied with respect to Plaintiff's § 4112.02 and Ohio tort claims.

III. VEC'S MOTION TO DISMISS FOR LACK OF PERSONAL JURISDICTION
VEC argues this Court lacks personal jurisdiction over it. Plaintiff has the burden of proving personal jurisdiction. Theunissen v. Matthews, 935 F.2d 1454, 1458 (6th Cir. 1991). However, where the Court  [*21] rules on a 12(b)(2) motion based upon the written submissions and affidavits alone and does not conduct an evidentiary hearing, a plaintiff "need only make a prima facie showing of jurisdiction." Bird v. Parsons, 289 F.3d 865, 871 (6th Cir. 2002) (internal quotation omitted). In such circumstances, the burden on Plaintiff is relatively slight. Air Prod, and Controls, Inc. v. Safetech Intern., Inc., 503 F.3d 544, 549 (6th Cir. 2007). The Court must consider the facts alleged in the complaint in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, without weighing the contrary assertions of the moving party. Id.
Where a court has subject matter jurisdiction because of the existence of a federal question, such as here, personal jurisdiction exists over a defendant: (1) if the defendant is amenable to service of process under the forum state's long-arm statute; and (2) if the exercise of personal jurisdiction would not deny the defendant due process. Bird, 289 F.3d at 871.

A. Personal Jurisdiction Exists Under the Ohio Long-Arm Statute.
In pertinent part, the Ohio long-arm statute, Ohio Revised Code § 2307.382, provides:
(A) A court may exercise personal jurisdiction over a person who acts directly  [*22] or by an agent, as to a cause of action arising from the person's:
(1) Transacting any business in this state;
(2) Causing tortious injury by an act or omission in this state;
* * *
(C) When jurisdiction over a person is based solely upon this section, only a cause of action arising from acts enumerated in this section may be asserted against him.
Ohio Rev. Code § 2307.382.
Plaintiff argues that the Court has personal jurisdiction over VEC because VEC has direct sufficient contacts with Ohio, JATT and DT Stores have contacts with Ohio and are the apparent agents of VEC, and personal jurisdiction can be exercised over VEC because VMSC and another subsidiary, Valero Renewable Fuels Company, LLC, are alter egos of VEC. Pl. Resp. 2, ECF No. 26.
Under Ohio law, personal jurisdiction can be exercised over one who acts directly "or by an agent." Ohio Rev. Code § 2307.382. A threshold question, therefore, is whether DT Stores was VEC's agent (apparent or otherwise). See Lachman v. Bank of Louisiana in New Orleans, 510 F. Supp. 753, 759 (N.D. Ohio 1981) (analyzing apparent agency as basis for personal jurisdiction). The Court has already found that a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether  [*23] VMSC held out DT Stores as its apparent agent. The entity in this analysis is VEC, but the same reasoning applies because VEC is the parent company of VMSC. There is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether "Valero" held out DT Stores as its agent, and a reasonable jury could differ as to whether the agent was so held out by VMSC, VEC, or both.
Second, Plaintiff made a prima facie showing that the alleged actions of Mr. Tahiraj occurred in Ohio and created a tortious injury. Plaintiff's complaint alleges that Mr. Tahiraj works at the DT Store (which is located in Columbus, Ohio) and that the action occurred there. Am. Compl., ECF No. 19.
Last, the causes of action arise directly from the act causing a tortious injury and therefore meet the requirement of Ohio Revised Code § 2307.382(C). Thus, Plaintiff has made a prima facie showing of personal jurisdiction under Ohio's long-arm statute under an apparent agency theory.

2. Personal Jurisdiction Exists Under Principles of Due Process.
The relevant Due Process inquiry is "whether the facts of the case demonstrate that the non-resident defendant possesses such minimum contacts with the forum state that the exercise of jurisdiction would  [*24] comport with 'traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice.'" Theunissen, 935 F.2d at 1459 (quoting Int'l Shoe Co. v. State of Washington, 326 U.S. 310, 66 S. Ct. 154, 90 L. Ed. 95 (1945)). The Court may exercise personal jurisdiction over a non-resident defendant based on either specific or general jurisdiction. See Bird, 289 F.3d at 873. "General jurisdiction is proper only where 'a defendant's contacts with the forum state are of such a continuous and systematic nature that the state may exercise personal jurisdiction over the defendant even if the action is unrelated to the defendant's contacts with the state." Id. (quoting Third Nat'l Bank in Nashville v. WEDGE Group, Inc., 882 F.2d 1087, 1089 (6th Cir. 1989)). In contrast, specific jurisdiction is proper under circumstances "where a State exercises personal jurisdiction over a defendant in a suit arising out of or related to the defendant's contacts with the forum." Id. at 874 (quoting Helicopteros Nacionales de Colombia, S.A. v. Hall, 466 U.S. 408, 414 n.8, 104 S. Ct. 1868, 80 L. Ed. 2d 404 (1984)). Specific jurisdiction may be based on a single act. Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co. v. Tryg Intern. Ins. Co., Ltd., 91 F.3d 790, 794 (6th Cir. 1996). In this case, Plaintiff has not articulated  [*25] whether he attempts to establish general or specific jurisdiction, but the Court finds that Plaintiff has made a prima facie showing of specific jurisdiction.
In analyzing specific jurisdiction, the Court applies three criteria, derived from Southern Machine Co. v. Mohasco Indus., 401 F.2d 374 (6th Cir. 1968).
First, the defendant must purposefully avail himself of the privilege of acting in the forum state or causing consequence in the forum state. Second, the cause of action must arise from the defendant's activities there. Finally, the acts of the defendant or consequences must have a substantial enough connection with the forum state to make the exercise of jurisdiction over the defendant reasonable.
Theunissen, 935 F.2d at 1460 (internal quotations and citations omitted). In considering these three factors, the Court may consider the actions of VEC's apparent agents, and assuming for the determination of the motion to dismiss that DT Stores was an agent of VEC, "it follows that the minimum contacts with Ohio of the agent were also minimum contacts of the principal." Lachman, 510 F. Supp. 753, 760 (N.D. Ohio 1981). DT Stores availed itself of the laws of Ohio by doing business here.  [*26] Plaintiff's claim arises out of that business. These two prongs being met, "an inference of reasonableness arises" and "only the unusual case will not meet the third criteria." Air Prod., 503 F.3d at 554. DT Stores does not contest personal jurisdiction, and it is certainly reasonable to exercise jurisdiction over DT Stores. If DT Stores is VEC's agent, it is also reasonable to exercise personal jurisdiction over VEC.
Because Plaintiff has established a prima facie showing of personal jurisdiction under an apparent agency theory, the Court does not address Plaintiff's remaining arguments. VEC's motion to dismiss is denied.

III. JATT's MOTION TO DISMISS
JATT moves to dismiss Plaintiff's complaint for failure to state a claim under Rule 12(b)(6). JATT Mot. Dismiss 1, ECF No. 17. JATT's sole argument is that the complaint only alleges actions taken by John Does 1 and 2, who are employees of DT Stores, which is the entity that owns and operates the gas station. JATT argues that it is merely the landlord of the property, and the complaint does not contain allegations of wrongful conduct undertaken by JATT. Id. at 2. Therefore, JATT argues, Plaintiff's complaint fails to state a claim against  [*27] it. In response, Plaintiff argues § 12182(a) holds landlords liable. Pl. Resp. 5, ECF No. 21.
The Court agrees with Plaintiff. By its terms, § 12182(a) includes landlords. 42 U.S.C. § 12182(a) (imposing liability for discrimination by "any person who owns, leases (or leases to), or operates a place of public accommodation."). Further, the implementing regulations state:
Both the landlord who owns the building that houses a place of public accommodation and the tenant who owns or operates the place of public accommodation are public accommodations subject to the requirements of this part. As between the parties, allocation of responsibility for complying with the obligations of this part may be determined by lease or other contract.
28 C.F.R. § 36.201(b); see also Americans with Disabilities Act Title III Technical Assistance Manual Covering Public Accommodations and Commercial Facilities, at III-1.2000 (explaining that the allocation of responsibility for complying with the obligations is only effective as between the parties, and each remain fully liable for compliance with the ADA relating to the place of public accommodation). Direct landlord liability conforms to the legislative intent  [*28] as well. The Committee on the Judiciary stated with respect to the clarification that the prohibition against full and equal enjoyment applies to "any person who owns, leases (or leases to), or operates a place of public accommodation":
This amendment makes it clear that the owner of the building which houses the public accommodation, as well as the owner or operator of the public accommodation itself, has obligations under this Act. For example, if an office building contains a doctor's office, both the owner of the building and the doctor's office are required to make readily achievable alterations....
Similarly, a doorman or guard to an office building containing public accommodations would be required, if requested, to show a person who is blind to the elevator or to write a note to a person who is deaf regarding the floor number of a particular office....
The amendment also clarifies that entities which lease public accommodations are covered by the requirements of this title.
H.R. Rep. No. 101-485(111), at 55-56 (1990).
Plaintiff's complaint alleges JATT is the owner of the premises on which the gas station is located and leases the premises to DT Stores and/or Demir Tahiraj. Compl.  [*29] ¶ 6, ECF No. 19. This is sufficient to state a claim for direct landlord liability under the ADA.
Further, Plaintiff states vicarious liability against JATT using Ohio agency principles and alleges JATT actively solicits invitees to the gas station, provides fuel for DT Stores, and exercises control over DT Stores. These allegations are sufficient to state a claim for vicarious liability.
Consequently, JATT's motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim is denied.

IV. DISPOSITION
Defendants' motions to dismiss or for summary judgment are denied. The Clerk shall terminate ECF Nos. 12, 13, and 17.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
/s/ Michael H. Watson
MICHAEL H. WATSON, JUDGE
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT


End of Document

