Cortez v. Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc.
United States District Court for the Central District of California
June 10, 2019, Decided; June 10, 2019, Filed
CV 17-4787-GW(JPRx)

Reporter
2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 239158 *
Lucia Cortez v. Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc., et al.
Prior History: Cortez v. Chipotle Mexican Grill, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 238120 (C.D. Cal., May 7, 2018)
Counsel:  [*1] Attorneys for Plaintiffs: Matthew T. Bechtel.
Attorneys for Defendants: Kathleen J. Mowry.
Judges: GEORGE H. WU, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: GEORGE H. WU
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES - GENERAL

PROCEEDINGS: PLAINTIFF'S RENEWED MOTION FOR JUDGMENT AS A MATTER OF LAW AND MOTION FOR A NEW TRIAL [213]
The Court's Ruling is circulated and attached hereto. Further argument is held. For reasons stated on the record, Plaintiff's Motion is TAKEN UNDER SUBMISSION, and continued to June 13, 2019 at 8:30 a.m. Counsel will file possible dates by noon on June 11 if necessary.
Ruling on Motion for Judgment NOV and Motion for New Trial

I. Background
On March 28, 2019, Plaintiff Lucia Cortez moved for Judgment NOV and, alternatively, for a New Trial. See generally Motion for Judgment NOV and Motion for New Trial ("Motion"), Docket No. 213-1. The Court tentatively denied the Motion on all grounds except for as to a purported error in a jury instruction on Plaintiff's failure to engage in the interactive process claim ("Failure to Engage Claim"). See Minute Order in Chambers - (Tentative) Final Ruling on Motion ("Tentative Ruling"), Docket No. 220.1 On that remaining claim, the Court ordered the parties to submit supplemental briefing [*2]  and set a new hearing date to discuss the issues. See id. at 16-19.
Plaintiff raised two primary issues with the instructions for the Failure to Engage Claim. First, Plaintiff challenged the instruction that she must prove that she "requested" a reasonable accommodation to have initiated the interactive process. See Motion at 23-24 (emphasis added). In essence, Plaintiff argued that an employee's making a request is only one event that triggers the employer's burden to initiate the interactive process, and that the failure to instruct on the other possible triggers was error. Id. at 23-24. As support for this premise, Plaintiff wrongfully stated that the "request" requirement is not in the Judicial Council of California Civil Jury Instructions ("CACI") No. 2546. See Tentative Ruling at 16-17.
Second, Plaintiff asserted that the Court erred by not giving the following requested instruction:
When an employee is unable to perform the functions of his or her job due to a temporary or permanent disability, an employer is required to engage in a good faith interactive process before terminating the employee. The interactive process requires communication and good-faith exploration of possible [*3]  accommodations between the employer and employee with the goal of indentifying [sic] an accommodation that allows the employee to perform the job effectively. If the employee's disability and resulting limitations are not obvious, the employee must typically initiate the interactive process. The employer must initiate the interactive process when:
(1) an employee with a known physical or mental disability or medical condition requests reasonable accommodations;
(2) the employer becomes aware of the need for an accommodation through a third party or by observation; or
(3) the employer becomes aware of the possible need for an accommodation because the employee with a disability has exhausted leave under the California Family Rights Act, Family & Medical Leave Act, or Pregnancy Disability Act, and the employee or the employee's health care provider indicates that further accommodation is still necessary . . .
See Proposed Jury Instructions, Docket No. 160, at 76-77 (emphasis added). Plaintiff's proposed instruction was in-part adopted from Cal. Code Regs. tit. 2, § 11069 (b) ("Section 11069"), with the italicized portions not in the regulation.
In the Tentative Ruling, the Court recognized [*4]  that an employee's request of a reasonable accommodation is only one possible event that triggers when an employer must initiate the interactive process. See Tentative Ruling at 17-18 (citing Section 11069 and Featherstone v. S. Cal. Permanente Med. Grp., 10 Cal. App. 5th 1150, 1169, 217 Cal. Rptr. 3d 258 (2017)). However, the Court observed that CACI No. 2546 only includes the request requirement, and noted that Plaintiff did not direct the Court to any cases where a court gave jury instructions that incorporated Section 11069. See Tentative Ruling at 18. Further, the Court had questions as to whether Plaintiff's proposed instruction was proper, considering that it included language that was not from Section 11069. As such the Court order supplemental briefing and asked the parties to address three issues:
1. Is the request requirement in CACI No. 2546 incorrect in light of those situations delineated in [Section 11069] when an employer has the burden to initiate the interactive process?
2. Whether Plaintiff's proposed instruction was proper considering its delineated introductory language, which is not in [Section 11069], or apparently anywhere else?
3. If the Court erred, was the error harmless?
Tentative [*5]  Ruling at 17.
The parties filed their simultaneous supplemental and responsive briefs on May 23 and May 30, respectively. See Plaintiff's Supplement to Motion ("Plaintiff's Supplement"), Docket No. 222; Defendant's Supplemental Memorandum in Opposition to Motion (Defendants' Supplement"), Docket No. 221; Plaintiff's Response in Support of Motion ("Plaintiff's Responsive"), Docket No. 224; Defendants' Reply in Opposition to Motion ("Defendants' Responsive"), Docket No. 223. The Court will address the parties' arguments as they relate to the three questions the Court posed.

II. Analysis

A. CACI No. 2546
Plaintiff first argues that CACI No. 2546 is incorrect because of its failure to include the other events that trigger an employer's duty to initiate the interactive process, as delineated in Section 11069. See Plaintiff's Supplement 1-3. Defendants respond that Section 11069 is basically consistent with CACI No. 2546 because subparagraphs (1) and (3) both require the employee (or the employee's health care provider) to take some action prior to the employer's having to start the interactive process. See Defendants' Supplement at 3-4. More specifically, pursuant to subparagraph (1), an employee [*6]  with a known physical or mental disability or medical condition must "request[] reasonable accommodation." Section 11069(b)(1). And, pursuant to subparagraph (3), where an employee with a disability has exhausted leave, the employer must initiate the interactive process when "the employee or the employee's health care provider indicates that further accommodation is still necessary for recuperative leave or other accommodation." Section 11069(b)(3) (emphasis added). Subparagraph (3) continues that "[a]n employer's . . . offer to engage in the interactive process in response to a request for such leave does not violate California Code of Regulations, title 2, section 11091(b)(1) & (b)(2)(A)(1)., prohibiting inquiry into the medical information." Id. (emphasis added). Alternatively, Defendants argue that to the extent the regulation is inconsistent with CACI No. 2546, the Court should look to the statute underpinning the instruction, which states that an employer must engage in the interactive process "in response to a request for a reasonable accommodation by an employee." See Defendants' Supplement at 5 (quoting Cal. Govt. Code § 12940(n)).
As alluded to in the Court's Tentative Ruling, [*7]  there are clearly situations where an employer is obligated to initiate the interactive process even in the absence of an explicit request from the employee. See Featherstone, 10 Cal. App. 5th at 1169 ("Typically, the employee must initiate the process 'unless the disability and resulting limitations are obvious.'" (quoting Scotch v. Art Institute of Cal., 173 Cal. App. 4th 986, 1013, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d 338 (2009))). The footnotes to CACI No. 2546 do reference — albeit obliquely — that a court should modify the request requirement in the model jury instruction if the "employer perceives the employee to have a disability." Directions for Use, CACI 2546 (citing Gelfo v. Lockheed Martin Corp., 140 Cal. App. 4th 34, 61 n.21, 43 Cal. Rptr. 3d 874 (2006)). Footnote 21 in Gelfo states:
FEHA's reference to a "known" disability is read to mean a disability of which the employer has become aware, whether because it is obvious, the employee has brought it to the employer's attention, it is based on the employer's own perception — mistaken or not — of the existence of a disabling condition or, perhaps as here, the employer has come upon information indicating the presence of a disability.
Gelfo, 140 Cal. App. 4th at 61 n.21. Thus, in the abstract, [*8]  there could be scenarios where giving CACI No. 2546 without modification would be error. But, as mentioned in the Tentative Ruling, Plaintiff did not object to giving the instruction from CACI No. 2546 without an "obviousness" modification. See Proposed Jury Instructions, Docket No. 160, at 80.
The more difficult question is whether CACI No. 2546's request requirement already sufficiently covers the situation described in subparagraph (3) of Section 11069. The Court is inclined to conclude that it does not. The Court agrees with Defendants that, in a general sense, an employee is still required to take some action under subparagraph (3) to alert the employer of a need for an accommodation. However, the action that an employee is required to take pursuant to subparagraph (3) is not necessarily equivalent to the employee's "request[ing] that Defendant make [a] reasonable accommodation," as described in subparagraph (1) of Section 11069 or CACI No. 2546. There are a few potential differences between the actions that the employee must take. First, to invoke subparagraph (3) an employee must have already "exhausted leave." See Section 11069(b)(3). There is no such exhaustion requirement [*9]  under either subparagraph (1) or CACI No. 2546. Second, subparagraph (3) does not explicitly require the employee to "request" an accommodation; instead an employee need only "indicate" that "further accommodation is still necessary." The parties do not explore the difference between indicate and request, but in the Court's mind, a request for accommodation would be more concrete than an indication. If the Court accepts that Section 11069 accurately reflects the law, Plaintiff need not have requested a reasonable accommodation in order to get Defendants to start the interactive process.
As to Defendants alternative argument that Section 11069 is not in accordance with its enabling statute, the Court is skeptical. See Defendants' Supplement at 4-5. In effect, Defendants are asking the Court — in the context of a dispute over a jury instruction — to strike down a California regulation as inconsistent with its enabling statute. As support, Defendants direct the Court to general statements about administrative law, including that "a regulation does not trump an otherwise applicable statute unless the regulation's enabling statute so provides." Id. at 4 (citing  [*10] United States v. Maes, 546 F.3d 1066, 1068 (9th Cir. 2008) (citing generally Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Nat'l Res. Def. Coun., Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 842-843, 104 S. Ct. 2778, 81 L. Ed. 2d 694 (1984))). But, the Court would decline to find that Section 11069 is so inconsistent with its enabling statute that it should be disregarded as unlawful. California Government Code § 12940(n) provides:
For an employer or other entity covered by this part to fail to engage in a timely, good faith, interactive process with the employee or applicant to determine effective reasonable accommodations, if any, in response to a request for reasonable accommodation by an employee or applicant with a known physical or mental disability or known medical condition.
Cal. Govt. Code § 12940(n) (emphasis added). It would seem plausible to the Court that an agency interpreting the foregoing could conclude that an indication of necessity for further accommodations from an employee that has exhausted leave would constitute a request for reasonable accommodation. Moreover, if the Court were to accept Defendants' argument, it would also cast doubt on all of the California cases that conclude that the employer has the duty to initiate the interactive process where the employee's disability [*11]  is obvious. In Defendants' strict interpretation, those cases would be contrary to the statutory language.
In sum, the Court is inclined to conclude that CACI No. 2546 is an incomplete statement of the law applicable to Plaintiff's case.2

B. Plaintiff's Proposed Instruction
Turning to the proposed instruction, Plaintiff argues that it was necessary because "interactive process" is undefined and must be explained to a jury. See Plaintiff's Supplement at 3-4. Plaintiff then goes through the introduction to the proposed instruction3 sentence-by-sentence to explain the rationale(s) behind each statement. See id. Defendants, on the other hand, do not actually contest the legality of each sentence. Instead, they argue that the introductory language as a whole "is improper as it incorrectly states the law with regard to a 'triggering event' to engage in the interactive process that hinges upon the Plaintiff's termination." Defendants' Supplement at 6.
The Court would interpret Defendants' argument as mostly targeting the first sentence of the proposed instruction. To rephrase what it believes to be Defendants' position, Defendants assert [*12]  that the first sentence is misleading because it suggests that a pending termination — rather than an employee's request or the defendants' becoming aware of a need for accommodation — always triggers the interactive process requirement. Id. at 6; Defendants' Responsive at 3. The Court agrees that the first sentence of Plaintiff's proposed introductory instruction misstates the law. The proposed sentence read: "When an employee is unable to perform the functions of his or her job due to a temporary or permanent disability, an employer is required to engage in a good faith interactive process before terminating the employee." See Proposed Jury Instructions at 76. It is not necessarily true that an employer needs to engage in an interactive process with the employee before termination. As discussed throughout, the requirement to engage in an interactive process is only triggered under certain circumstances and is not reliant on a pending termination. As such, the Court would not have given Plaintiff's proposed first sentence. It likely would have been error to do so.
Further, the Court finds that Plaintiff's second sentence — about the goals of the interactive process — is a statement [*13]  of policy, rather than an instruction on the law. The Court would not have given this instruction for fear of confusing the jury. Plaintiff argues that said portion of the proposed instruction was supposed to tell the jury what the interactive process entails, but her proposed language fails to meet that suggested purpose. Instead, the language includes vague statements about "communication and good-faith exploration" that would probably require further instruction. Lastly, Plaintiff's drafted third sentence - that the employee must typically initiate the interactive process - is duplicative in light of CACI No. 2546's request requirement, and Plaintiff's proposed fourth sentence adopted from Section 11069.
The Court indicated to the parties at the time that it was finalizing jury instructions that it thought the introductory language was incorrect. The Court further alluded to its determination in the Tentative Ruling by asking the parties to address the issue. Nothing the parties argued in the supplemental briefing has changed the Court's initial determination that the introductory sentences were improper. As such, the Court would conclude that the language Plaintiff offered in the [*14]  introductory clause of the proposed instruction was incorrect, confusing, and redundant.
Nevertheless, the Court is inclined to conclude that it at least should have given Plaintiff's instruction to the extent it explained when the employer has the burden to initiate the interactive process. See Jones v. Williams, 297 F.3d 930, 934 (9th Cir. 2002) ("A party is entitled to an instruction about his or her theory of the case if it is supported by law and has foundation in the evidence."). In other words, the Court should have excised the first three sentences from Plaintiff's proposed instruction but given the instruction to the extent it traced Section 11069. While the Court does not believe that Plaintiff ever specifically asked the Court to modify the proposed instruction, the Court would nonetheless find that the CACI No. 2546 instruction given, without a Section 11069 instruction, was an incomplete and therefore inaccurate statement of the law in her situation.
Further bolstering the Court's conclusion is the way in which the final instruction (taken from CACI No. 2546) lays out the elements of the Failure to Engage Claim. The Court finds it misleading, at least in the present instance, [*15]  that the instruction separates the "known disability" and "request" elements of the claim. As put forth in the Final Jury Instructions, the second element of the Failure to Engage Claim was "Plaintiff had a disabling mental condition that was known to Defendant," and the third element was "Plaintiff requested that Defendant make reasonable accommodation for that condition . . ." See Final Injury Instructions, Docket No. 190, at 10. The instruction further defined when a disability comes "known" to a defendant: "A disability becomes 'known' to a defendant when the defendant actually becomes aware of it because . . . it is obvious to a reasonable observed . . . it is based on the employer's own perception." See id. But, as discussed above, when the disability in question is obvious, the plaintiff need not request a reasonable accommodation; instead, the employer has the obligation to initiate the interactive process. Therefore, in cases where a disability is "known" based on obviousness, the request requirement is superfluous.
In sum, the Court would conclude that, although most of Plaintiff's proposed instruction was improper, the Court should have given the portion of the instruction [*16]  that incorporated Section 11069. It's failure to do so resulted in an incomplete statement of the law being submitted to the jury.

C. Harmless Error
The question then becomes whether Plaintiff is entitled to a new trial on the Failure to Engage Claim.
An error in instructing the jury in a civil case requires reversal unless the error is more probably than not harmless. Because we presume prejudice where civil trial error is concerned, the burden shifts to the [party defending the verdict] to demonstrate that it is more probable than not that the jury would have reached the same verdict had it been properly instructed.
Clem v. Lomeli, 566 F.3d 1177, 1182 (9th Cir. 2009) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted).
Plaintiff claims that the error here was not harmless because the purpose of the interactive process is to explore accommodations and that if Shadix were confused about Plaintiff's condition, the interactive process could have cleared up any misunderstandings. Plaintiff's Supplement at 6. Defendants respond that any error was harmless because "[t]here was no medical evidence submitted to the jury that Plaintiff was disabled by pregnancy on either December 8 or December 15, [*17]  2016." Defendants' Supplement at 6. Alternatively, Defendants assert that they did initiate and engage in an interactive process with Plaintiff. Id. at 7.
The Court would find that Defendants have not met their burden of demonstrating that the error was harmless.
The jury stopped at the second question on the special verdict form for this claim, answering "No" to "[d]id Ms. Cortez request that Chipotle make reasonable accommodation for that [disabling mental] condition so that she would be able to perform the essential job requirements." See Special Verdict Form, Docket No. 191, at 7. The way the Court sees it, if it had instructed the jury on the situations in which the employer has the burden of starting the interactive process, the special verdict form would have been different. For example, if the second question also included language such as "did Plaintiff indicate that she needed further accommodation," the jury very well could have answered "yes" based on the evidence at trial. Namely, the undisputed fact that she asked Shadix for additional leave. Answering "yes," the jury would have continued on to the other questions on the verdict form, including whether Defendants "fail[ed] [*18]  to participate in a timely, good-faith interactive process with Ms. Cortez to determine whether reasonable accommodation could be made." See id.
As to Defendants' argument that there was no medical evidence that Plaintiff had a disability in December 2016, the Court would find that Defendants are overstating the record. The Court agrees, as it stated in the Tentative Ruling, that the jury could have concluded that Plaintiff was previously disabled but had recovered by December. However, there was also evidence in the record from which the jury could have concluded that Plaintiff still had a disability in December 2016.4 Plaintiff previously directed the Court to portions of her testimony in which she described that she would have had difficulties performing some functions of her job at the time she was terminated. See Cortez Tr, Docket No. 218-4., at 70:19-71:11. She told Shadix that she was suffering from stress and depression in December 2016. See Shadix Tr., Docket No. 217-5, at 118:3-5. There was also evidence that she had severe impairments in performing routine daily tasks and work tasks, see Trial Ex. 59, Docket No. 218-2, at p. 5, and that her psychiatrist, Dr. Adler, testified [*19]  that Plaintiff was "depressed most of the time and not able to do much," see Dr. Adler Deposition at 32:13-14, Docket No. 218-3. Thus, a jury could conclude that she had a qualifying condition at the time of her termination, or that she was perceived to have such a condition.
Regarding Defendants' alternative argument that they had initiated an interactive process, the Court would find that Defendants have not come close to satisfying their burden that it is more probable than not that a jury would have concluded that Defendants' participation was "timely" and in "good-faith." See Special Verdict Form at 7. The jury never reached the question, and the Court would find that there is disputed evidence in the record. Defendants' claim that they "were engaged in constant communication" with Plaintiff and "granted Plaintiff an additional week of leave to sort out what she wanted to do." See Defendants' Supplement at 7. However, despite Defendants' gloss on the evidence, the Court thinks a jury could review the record and conclude that the purported one-week extension was not made in good-faith because Defendants terminated Plaintiff before the end [*20]  of the week, after she had asked to return to work. See Shadix Tr., Docket No. 217-5, at 130-131. As one example, the day before her termination Plaintiff sent Shadix a medical document, which appeared to be a summary of one of Plaintiff's visits to her psychiatrist. See Trial Ex. 241, Docket No. 217-7. The document did not state that Plaintiff needed to be out of work, nor did it clear Plaintiff to return to work. See Shadix Tr., Docket No. 217-5, at 128:22-129-21. The next day, two days before the end of the purported week-long extension of leave, Shadix called Plaintiff and informed her that she had been terminated.5 See id. at 130:8-131:15. The Court thinks there is at least a question as to whether the obligation to engage in a good-faith interactive process required more from Shadix and Defendants. For instance, a jury could have concluded that Shadix needed to explain why the document was not sufficient and needed to give Plaintiff more time to try to get new documentation from the doctor — at least the full week he initially granted.
In sum, the Court would conclude that Defendants have not satisfied their burden of demonstrating harmless error.6

III. Conclusion
For [*21]  the foregoing reasons the Court would GRANT in part and DENY in part Plaintiff's Motion. To extent Plaintiff seeks a new trial on the Failure to Engage Claim, the Court would grant the Motion. In all other respects, the Court would deny the Motion for the reasons set forth in the Tentative Ruling.


End of Document

