Crisanto v. Graphic Packaging Int'l., Inc.
United States District Court for the Central District of California, Southern Division
December 9, 2019, Decided; December 9, 2019, Filed
Case No. SA CV 19-1482-DOC (JDEx)

Reporter
2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 226718 *; 2019 WL 7842447
ALBERTO CORTES CRISANTO Plaintiff, vs. GRAPHIC PACKAGING INTERNATIONAL, INC., Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Alberto Cortes Crisanto, an individual, Plaintiff: Jihad M Smaili, LEAD ATTORNEY, Smaili and Associates PC, Santa Ana, CA.
For Graphic Packaging International, Inc., a corporate entity form unknown, Defendant: John Andrew Schaffer, Fermin H Llaguno, Littler Mendelson PC, Irvine, CA.
For Thomas C Watts, Mediator (ADR Panel): Thomas C Watts, III, LEAD ATTORNEY, Thomas C. Watts Inc, Corona, CA.
Judges: DAVID O. CARTER, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: DAVID O. CARTER
Opinion



ORDER GRANTING DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT [20]
Before the Court is Graphic Packaging International, LLC's ("GPI" or "Defendant") Motion for Summary Judgment ("MSJ") (Dkt. 20). The Court heard oral arguments on December 9, 2019.

I. BACKGROUND
This case arises out of events related to Plaintiff's employment with GPI. See generally Complaint ("Compl.") (Dkt. 1). Plaintiff alleges several claims related to alleged disability discrimination, racial discrimination, retaliation, rest and meal break violations, and failure to pay adequate wages in violation of California labor laws. Id.

A. Facts1
GPI designs and manufactures packaging for commercial products. Plaintiff's Genuine Disputes of Material Fact ("GDF") (Dkt. 21-3) ¶ 1. GPI formerly [*2]  employed Plaintiff Alberto Cortes-Crisanto ("Plaintiff" or "Cortes") at its Irvine plant, first as a machine operator, and then as a forklift driver. Id. ¶ 2. Plaintiff identifies as Mexican-American. Declaration of Alberto Cortes-Crisanto ("Cortes Decl.") (Dkt. 21-1) ¶ 3. GPI requires all employees to acknowledge and adhere to certain safety policies labeled as "Safety Absolutes"-which Plaintiff acknowledged and signed multiple times through his employment with GPI. GDF ¶ 5. GPI employed Plaintiff as a machine operator from on or about January 4, 2016 to on or about March 2017, and as a forklift operator from on or about March 2017 to on or about March 2018. Id. ¶ 6. Plaintiff's direct supervisors during the relevant period included Jose Aguilar (before January 2018) and Jim Frassetto (after January 2018). Id. ¶ 7.
Plaintiff alleges that he developed a reputation for lodging workplace safety concerns related to his work as a forklift operator. Cortes Decl. ¶¶ 9-12. Plaintiff alleges that GPI began to retaliate against him by giving him unscheduled and unnecessary overtime. Id. ¶ 13. As a result of the retaliation, Plaintiff alleges experiencing anxiety, stress, insomnia, and depression, [*3]  which limited his ability to work. Id. ¶¶ 15-19. However, Plaintiff never saw a medical provider for these conditions and never received a formal diagnosis. GDF ¶ 20. Plaintiff then began asking for accommodations but was allegedly ignored. Cortes Decl. ¶¶ 21-24.
Plaintiff also alleges he was verbally and physically attacked by a Caucasian senior employee for taking a legally required meal break on March 6, 2018. Cortes Decl. ¶ 25. He alleges he was yelled and slapped in the face by the senior Caucasian employee. Id. On March 26, 2018 Plaintiff was terminated for allegedly violating safety protocol. Id. ¶¶ 31-32.

B. Procedural History
On June 6, 2019, Plaintiff filed the operative complaint in the Orange County Superior Court (Dkt. 1). On August 1, 2019, Defendant removed the action to this Court. Id. In the Complaint, Plaintiff brings the following nine claims:
(1) Discrimination in violation of Gov. Code §12940 ("FEHA");
(2) Failure to accommodate in violation of Gov. Code §12940(m);
(3) Failure to engage in interactive process in violation of Gov. Code §12940(n);
(4) Failure to prevent discrimination in violation of Gov. Code §12940(k);
(5) Retaliation in violation of Gov. Code §12940(h);
(6) Wrongful termination;
(7) Meal and rest [*4]  break violations;
(8) Failure to provide accurate pay records in violation of Cal. Labor Code §226;
(9) unfair competition in violation of California Business and Professions Code § 17200, et. seq. ("UCL")
Compl. ¶¶ 27-123.
On November 8, 2019, Defendant filed its Motion for Summary Judgment (Dkt. 20). On November 18, 2019, Plaintiff opposed Defendant's MSJ ("Opp'n") (Dkt. 21). On November 25, 2019, Defendant replied ("Reply") (Dkt. 22).

II. LEGAL STANDARD
Summary judgment is proper if "the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). Summary judgment is to be granted cautiously, with due respect for a party's right to have its factually grounded claims and defenses tried to a jury. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 327, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986); Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). A court must view the facts and draw inferences in the manner most favorable to the non-moving party. United States v. Diebold, Inc., 369 U.S. 654, 655, 82 S. Ct. 993, 8 L. Ed. 2d 176 (1992); Chevron Corp. v. Pennzoil Co., 974 F.2d 1156, 1161 (9th Cir. 1992). The moving party bears the initial burden of demonstrating the absence of a genuine issue of material fact for trial, but it need not disprove the other party's case. Celotex, 477 U.S. at 323. When the non-moving party bears the burden of proving the claim or defense, the moving party can meet its burden by pointing out that the non-moving party has failed to present any genuine issue of material fact as to an essential [*5]  element of its case. See Musick v. Burke, 913 F.2d 1390, 1394 (9th Cir. 1990).
Once the moving party meets its burden, the burden shifts to the opposing party to set out specific material facts showing a genuine issue for trial. See Liberty Lobby, 477 U.S. at 248-49. A "material fact" is one which "might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law . . . ." Id. at 248. A party cannot create a genuine issue of material fact simply by making assertions in its legal papers. S.A. Empresa de Viacao Aerea Rio Grandense v. Walter Kidde & Co., Inc., 690 F.2d 1235, 1238 (9th Cir. 1982). Rather, there must be specific, admissible, evidence identifying the basis for the dispute. See id. The Court need not "comb the record" looking for other evidence; it is only required to consider evidence set forth in the moving and opposing papers and the portions of the record cited therein. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(3); Carmen v. S.F. Unified Sch. Dist., 237 F.3d 1026, 1029 (9th Cir. 2001). The Supreme Court has held that "[t]he mere existence of a scintilla of evidence . . . will be insufficient; there must be evidence on which the jury could reasonably find for [the opposing party]." Liberty Lobby, 477 U.S. at 252.

III. DISCUSSION
Defendant argues Plaintiff's claims under FEHA and common law wrongful termination are preempted by the federal Labor-Management Relations Act ("LMRA"). Mot. at 22. Defendant next argues that even if the claims are not preempted, Plaintiff cannot establish (1) that he suffered from a disability; [*6]  (2) that his employer knew of any disability; (3) that he suffered any adverse employment action after engaging in protected activity; (4) that he was not allowed to take meal/rest breaks; and (5) that he could not easily determine the name and address of his employer through his pay stubs. Mot. at 12-21. In opposition, Plaintiff argues that there are issues of genuine dispute as to each of the claims and that the claims are not preempted by the LMRA. See generally Opp'n.

A. Preemption by the LMRA
Defendant argues that the LMRA preempts Plaintiff's claims under the FEHA and Plaintiff's common law wrongful termination claim. Mot. at 22-27. Defendant contends that Plaintiff's claims "are generally premised on Plaintiff's contention that GPI's stated reasons for termination were pretext for discrimination based on disability." Id. at 24. However, Plaintiff would have to directly challenge terms of the collective bargaining agreement ("CBA") he has with his union in order to show that he was not terminated for committing safety violations. Id. at 24-25. Plaintiff argues that this Court can give "attention" to the CBA without interpreting the agreement, and if a court is not "required" to interpret a CBA, then [*7]  there is no preemption under the LMRA. Opp'n at 7.
Section 301(a) of the Labor Management Relations Act of 1947, 29 U.S.C. § 185(a), provides:
"Suits for violation of contracts between an employer and a labor organization representing employees in an industry affecting commerce as defined in this Act, or between any such labor organizations, may be brought in any district court of the United States having jurisdiction of the parties, without respect to the amount in controversy or without regard to the citizenship of the parties."
The Supreme Court has articulated that "if the resolution of a state-law claim depends upon the meaning of a collective-bargaining agreement, the application of state law (which might lead to inconsistent results since there could be as many state-law principles as there are States) is pre-empted and federal labor-law principles . . . must be employed to resolve the dispute." Lingle v. Norge Div. of Magic Chef, Inc., 486 U.S. 399, 405-06, 108 S. Ct. 1877, 100 L. Ed. 2d 410 (1988). However, if "resolution of the state-law claim does not require construing the collective-bargaining agreement," there is no preemption. Id. at 407 (emphasis added).
In Lingle, an Illinois employee who was covered by a CBA that provided her with a remedy for discharge without "just cause" filed an action under state law against [*8]  her employer for discharging her for filing a worker's compensation claim. Id. at 401. The Supreme Court held that the state action was not preempted by the LMRA because, though the state law action may "involve attention to the same factual considerations as the contractual determination of whether Lingle was fired for just cause," the state-law claim did not require interpreting the agreement. Id. at 408. Overall, the Supreme Court explained that "§ 301 pre-emption merely ensures that federal law will be the basis for interpreting collective-bargaining agreements, and says nothing about the substantive rights a State may provide to workers when adjudication of those rights does not depend upon the interpretation of such agreements." Id. at 409.
Here, as in Lingle, Plaintiff brings state law claims against an employer for which "the same factual considerations as the contractual determination of whether [Plaintiff] was fired" for violating safety absolutes supported by the CBA will be addressed by the Court. Id. at 408. However, the adjudication of the state law claims at issue here do not "depend on the interpretation of [the CBA]" even if the CBA's "broad contractual protection against discriminatory-or retaliatory discharge [*9]  may provide a remedy for conduct that coincidentally violates state-law." Id. at 408, 412-13. Instead, Plaintiff argues that he was subject to discrimination and does not dispute any terms in the CBA. See Opp'n at 8. A claim that is defined and enforced under state law is routinely considered independent of any collective bargaining agreement. See, e.g., Ackerman v. W. Elec. Co., 860 F.2d 1514, 1517 (9th Cir. 1988) (finding that an individual's discrimination suit under FEHA is not preempted by the LMRA).
Defendant cites Audette v. International Longshoremen's and Warehousemen's Union to argue that if Defendant can defeat claims by providing a "legitimate nondiscriminatory reason" for termination or discipline, then the claim is preempted insofar as the CBA contemplates the legitimate reason for discharge that Defendants proffer in the case. Mot. at 25. However, in Audette, the Ninth Circuit found that a claim for breach of a settlement agreement where the "agreement specifically refers to CBA registration procedures and provides that disputes under the agreement will be resolved under the CBA's grievance procedure" is preempted because determining a breach of the agreement would require interpretation of the agreement. Audette v. Int'l Longshoremen's & Warehousemen's Union, 195 F.3d 1107, 1112 (9th Cir. 1999). That is not the case here. Accordingly, [*10]  Plaintiff's FEHA and common law wrongful termination causes of action are not preempted by the LMRA.

B. Plaintiff's Discrimination Cause of Action
Plaintiff's first cause of action alleges discrimination on the basis of disability and race. Compl. ¶¶ 27-42. Defendant argues that (1) Plaintiff cannot show he suffered from a disability and (2) GPI had a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for any adverse employment action. Mot. at 12-14. Plaintiff argues that he has a mental disability as defined by the FEHA, that he suffered discrimination because he is Mexican-American, and that Defendant had no legitimate purpose for the adverse actions. Opp'n at 9-14.
In order to defeat Defendant's motion for summary judgment on a discrimination claim:
[T]he employee must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination. If he does, the employer must articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the challenged action. Finally, if the employer satisfies this burden, the employee must show that the reason is pretextual either directly by persuading the court that a discriminatory reason more likely motivated the employer or indirectly by showing that the employer's proffered explanation is [*11]  unworthy of credence.
Zeinali v. Raytheon Co., 636 F.3d 544, 552 (9th Cir. 2011) (citations omitted).

a. Disability Discrimination
Defendant first argues that Plaintiff cannot establish a prima facie case because he cannot show he suffered from a disability as defined under the FEHA. Mot. at 13. Defendant points to Plaintiff's deposition, where he stated he never went to a medical provider because "it was not necessary" and that, at the time, he did not see his anxiety as a disability. Deposition of Alberto Cortes-Crisanto ("Cortes Depo.") (Dkt. 20-3) at 126:1-15. Plaintiff argues that he has suffered from a mental disability within the meaning of the FEHA because of his severe anxiety and stress and resulting heart palpitations due to his employment with GPI. Opp'n at 10.
A prima facie case of disability discrimination under FEHA requires a plaintiff to "present[] evidence that demonstrates, even circumstantially or by inference, that he or she (1) suffered from a disability, or was regarded as suffering from a disability; (2) could perform the essential duties of the job with or without reasonable accommodations, and (3) was subjected to an adverse employment action because of the disability or perceived disability." Sandell v. Taylor-Listug, Inc., 188 Cal. App. 4th 297, 310, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 453 (2010).
The FEHA prohibits discrimination [*12]  against individuals on account of a "physical disability, mental disability or medical condition." Cal. Gov. Code § 12920. "Physical disability" means "any physiological disease, disorder, condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss" that affects certain body systems and "[l]imits a major life activity." Id. § 12926(m)(1)(A)-(B). "Mental disability" means any mental or psychological disorder or condition . . . that limits a major life activity." Id. § 12926(j)(1).
Here, Plaintiff has not made a prima facie case of having a disability as defined under the FEHA. First, the only evidence Plaintiff proffers in support of his disability is his word (through declaration and deposition) that he suffers from anxiety, stress, and heart palpitations and a conclusory declaration from Desiree Rodriguez stating she observed "that he was suffering from fatigue, restlessness, and excessive worrying" that affected his sleep schedule and ability to perform daily activities. Declaration of Desiree Rodriguez ("Rodriguez Decl.") (Dkt. 21-2) ¶¶ 6-7. However, Plaintiff never sought medical attention regarding his disability, never received a formal diagnosis from a medical professional regarding his disability, and testified that "it was not necessary" [*13]  to see a medical provider. Cortes Depo. at 126:1-15.
Though not required to receive a formal diagnosis or seek treatment for a disability, where, as here, Plaintiff's only evidence of his disability is his declaration and a conclusory declaration from a witness, Plaintiff does not meet his burden to establish a prima facie case of disability discrimination under FEHA. Indeed, the evidence shows that Plaintiff did not view his symptoms as a disability, and that Plaintiff thought that his symptoms did not necessitate going to see a medical provider, contradicting any assertion that the alleged disability limits a major life activity. Id. Viewing the facts in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, Plaintiff does not provide "evidence on which the jury could reasonably find" in his favor on the issue of whether he suffered from a disability under FEHA. Liberty Lobby, 477 U.S. at 252. Accordingly, Defendant's Motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's claim for discrimination based on disability.

b. Racial Discrimination
To establish a prima facie case for racial discrimination the Plaintiff must "provide evidence that (1) he was a member of a protected class, (2) he was qualified for the position he sought or was [*14]  performing competently in the position he held, (3) he suffered an adverse employment action, such as termination, demotion, or denial of an available job, and (4) some other circumstance suggests discriminatory motive." Guz v. Bechtel Nat. Inc., 24 Cal. 4th 317, 355, 100 Cal. Rptr. 2d 352, 8 P.3d 1089 (2000).
Defendant does not contest that Plaintiff is a member of a protected class or that he was qualified for the position he was performing. However, Defendant argues that any alleged adverse employment action was for a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason. Mot. at 13-14. Plaintiff argues that he "was subjected to an adverse employment action in the form of a termination and assignment of 'unnecessary overtime" and that "there is evidence of [race based] discriminatory intent." Opp'n at 13. Plaintiff argues that the evidence of race-based discrimination includes the circumstantial evidence that Caucasian employees are not subject to the same scrutiny as non-Caucasian employees. For example, when two non-Caucasian employees were horseplaying at work both were terminated. Opp'n at 13. However, when Plaintiff was slapped in the face by a Caucasian employee, that employee was not terminated. Opp'n at 14.
Here, Plaintiff fails to meet his burden of establishing circumstantial [*15]  evidence suggesting a discriminatory motive. Guz, 24 Cal. 4th at 355. First, Plaintiff's only evidence of race-based discrimination is the circumstantial evidence that Caucasian employees are not subject to the same scrutiny as non-Caucasian employees based on one instance of non-Caucasian employees being disciplined for horseplay while Plaintiff's alleged attacker was not reprimanded for slapping him in the face. Again, Plaintiff's only evidence is his declaration stating he was slapped by a Caucasian employee and that previously non-Caucasian employees were terminated for horseplay. Cortes Decl. ¶¶ 25-27. Viewing the facts in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, such scant evidence is not sufficient to meet Plaintiff's burden to provide "evidence on which the jury could reasonably find" in his favor on this issue. Liberty Lobby, 477 U.S. at 252. Accordingly, Defendant's Motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's claim for race-based discrimination.

C. Plaintiff's Second, Third, and Fourth Causes of Action
Plaintiff alleges Defendant failed to accommodate his disability and failed to engage in an interactive process in violation of Cal. Gov. Code §12940(m), (n). California law declares it unlawful for an employer to "fail to make reasonable accommodation" [*16]  or "fail to engage in a timely, good faith, interactive process" for an employee with a known physical or mental disability. Cal. Gov. Code §12940(m), (n). Here, because the Court has found that Plaintiff has not presented evidence such that a reasonable jury could find Plaintiff suffered a disability, Defendant's Motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's second and third causes of action.
Plaintiff also alleges Defendant failed to prevent discrimination or harassment in violation of Cal. Gov. Code §12940(k). § 12940(k) makes it unlawful for an employer to "fail to take all reasonable steps necessary to prevent discrimination and harassment from occurring." However, here the Court has determined as a matter of law that Plaintiff has failed to demonstrate evidence to support a claim of discrimination based on disability or race. Accordingly, Defendant's Motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's claim of failure to prevent discrimination.2

D. Plaintiff's Fifth and Sixth Causes of Action
Defendant argues that Plaintiff cannot establish a prima facie case for retaliation/wrongful termination because he cannot prove he was subjected to an adverse employment action, and even if so, any adverse action was for a legitimate reason. Mot. at 16-17. Plaintiff argues he [*17]  was retaliated against for complaining about working conditions and for requesting an accommodation. Opp'n at 14. Plaintiff argues the adverse employment action includes being scheduled for "unnecessary overtime" and eventually being terminated for following safety protocols. Id. at 15-16.
To establish a prima facie case of retaliation, Plaintiff must prove he: (1) engaged in a protected activity; (2) was subjected to an adverse employment action; and (3) there exists a causal link between the protected activity and said action. Yanowitz v. L'Oreal USA, Inc., 36 Cal. 4th 1028, 1042, 32 Cal. Rptr. 3d 436, 116 P.3d 1123 (2005). Plaintiff argues that he engaged in the protected activity of reporting safety violations and requesting accommodations, was subjected to unnecessary overtime and termination, and alleges the adverse actions were in retaliation for his reporting. Assuming arguendo that Plaintiff engaged in protected activity, the Court finds that there is no genuine dispute of material fact as to whether Plaintiff was subjected to unnecessary overtime as an adverse employment action and there is no causal link between his termination and any protected activity.
There is no genuine dispute of material fact supporting Plaintiff's claim that he was subjected to unnecessary, excessive overtime [*18]  as an adverse employment action. Plaintiff alleges GPI retaliated against him by scheduling him for "unnecessary overtime." Cortes Decl. ¶ 13. Plaintiff's only evidence of this retaliation is his declaration and deposition testimony. However, Defendant has provided evidence that Plaintiff had the second lowest overtime totals out of his department in both 2017 and 2018. See Declaration of Christina Salas ("Salas Decl.") at Exh. M (Dkt. 20-5). Viewing the facts in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, Plaintiff has not provided "evidence on which the jury could reasonably find" in his favor on the issue of being scheduled for unnecessary overtime as an adverse employment action. Liberty Lobby, 477 U.S. at 252.
There is also no genuine dispute of material fact supporting Plaintiff's assertion that he was terminated as a result of reporting safety violations. Plaintiff alleges he made "several complaints to [his] supervisor Jose Aguilar." Cortes Decl. ¶ 12. Specifically, Plaintiff alleges he documented gouges on forklift tires, parking break violations, and "non-function" headlights. Id. ¶ 9. Again, Plaintiff's only evidence of these reports are his declaration and deposition testimony—he provides no documentary [*19]  evidence of these reports. Even assuming the reports were filed, Defendant argues that there was no retaliation against Plaintiff because Plaintiff was terminated for repeated safety violations. Mot. at 17; Reply at 11. Defendant provides evidence of three documented safety violations Plaintiff incurred while working at GPI as a forklift operator. Salas Decl. at Exh. I. The violations included driving recklessly, disorderly conduct, harassment, causing damage to company property, and a "near miss" incident where Plaintiff spilled a load while operating a forklift that landed in an area an employee would have been had the employee not left the area before the incident. Id.
On this evidence, Plaintiff has not established a prima facie case of retaliation for termination where Defendant has provided evidence of lawful termination based on three documented safety violations that Plaintiff incurred within a one-year period. Plaintiff's only evidentiary support of supposed retaliation is that he submitted several safety concerns to his supervisor who then changed his attitude toward Plaintiff. Cortes Decl. ¶ 12. Plaintiff has not even provided the reports that he alleges he submitted to the [*20]  Defendant, and Defendant denies any reports were ever made. Salas Decl. ¶ 15 ("There is no record of Plaintiff making a safety complaint."). Viewing the facts in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, Plaintiff has not provided "evidence on which the jury could reasonably find" in his favor on the issue of retaliation for submitting safety complaints. Liberty Lobby, 477 U.S. at 252. Accordingly, Defendant's Motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's retaliation claim. Because Plaintiff's wrongful termination claim is "tethered" to the alleged retaliation based on submitting safety complaints, Defendant's Motion is also GRANTED as to the wrongful termination claim.

E. Plaintiff's Seventh and Eighth Causes of Action

a. Meal and Rest Break Violations
An employer satisfies its obligation to provide meal and rest breaks when it "relieves its employees of all duty, relinquishes control over their activities and permits them a reasonable opportunity to take an uninterrupted . . . break, and does not impede or discourage them from doing so." Brinker Rest. Corp. v. Superior Court, 53 Cal. 4th 1004, 1040, 139 Cal. Rptr. 3d 315, 273 P.3d 513 (2012). However, an "employer is not obligated to police . . . breaks and ensure no work thereafter is performed." Id. "Under these standards, a plaintiff must show that [an] employer impeded, [*21]  discouraged or prohibited employees from taking required breaks." Silva v. AvalonBay Comtys., Inc., 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 194105, 2016 WL 4251600, at *10 (C.D. Cal. April 20, 2016).
Here, Plaintiff's only evidence of an alleged meal/rest break violation is his conclusory statement that he "estimate[s] that [he] missed 80% of rest breaks [and] 50% of [his] meal breaks" because he was "expected to complete [his] workload by missing or delaying" breaks. Cortes Decl. ¶ 33;Opp'n at 20-21. Plaintiff provides no evidence of why he believes this "expectation" existed. On the other hand, Defendant points to an absence of genuine dispute of material fact that (1) GPI has clear policies requiring breaks be provided; (2) Plaintiff never complained directly or indirectly about missing breaks; and (3) Plaintiff was never told that he could not take breaks. GDF ¶¶ 53-55. On these facts, Plaintiff cannot make a prima facie case that he missed breaks, much less that his employer failed to "relinquish control" over his activities. Brinker, 53 Cal. 4th at 1040. Viewing the facts in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, Plaintiff has not provided "evidence on which the jury could reasonably find" in his favor on the issue of meal/rest break violations. Liberty Lobby, 477 U.S. at 252. Accordingly, Defendant's Motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's meal/rest break [*22]  claims.

b. Failure to Provide Accurate Pay Records
Labor Code § 226(a) requires employers to keep accurate records and provide itemized wage statements every pay period that include "(8) the name and address of the legal entity that is the employer . . . . " Labor Code § 226(a). An employee may obtain statutory damages if he "suffer[s] injury as a result of a knowing and intentional failure by an employer to comply with" the requirements of § 226. Cal. Lab. Code § 226(e)(1). "An employee is deemed to suffer injury . . . if the employer fails to provide accurate and complete information . . . and the employee cannot promptly and easily determine from the wage statement alone . . . [t]he name and address of the employer . . . . " Id. § 226(e)(2)(B). To promptly and easily determine "means a reasonable person would be able to readily ascertain the information without reference to other documents or information." Id. § 226(e)(2)(C).
Plaintiff's eighth cause of action alleges GPI transitioned to another entity without "properly identifying the new legal entity on pay stubs." Compl. ¶ 114. Defendant argues that Plaintiff has provided no evidence that he could not "promptly and easily determine from the wage statement the name and address of the employer," even if [*23]  Defendant technically did not change the pay stub after transitioning. Mot. at 21. Plaintiff does not rebut this argument and provides no evidence that Plaintiff was not able to promptly and easily determine his employer despite the transition. Accordingly, Defendant's Motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's accurate pay records claim.

F. Plaintiff's Ninth Cause of Action
Plaintiff's ninth cause of action under the UCL is derivative of his other statutory claims. Compl. ¶¶ 117-123. Because all of Plaintiff's other claims failed to survive summary judgment, Defendant's Motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's UCL claim.

IV. DISPOSITION
For the foregoing reasons, the Court GRANTS Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment.
/s/ David O. Carter
DAVID O. CARTER
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE
DATED: December 9, 2019


End of Document

