D'Alessio v. Charter Communs., LLC
United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York
September 21, 2020, Decided
18-cv-2738 (NG) (LB)

Reporter
2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 173332 *
CONSTANCE D'ALESSIO, Plaintiff, - against - CHARTER COMMUNICATIONS, LLC, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Constance D'Alessio, Plaintiff: Julie Salwen, LEAD ATTORNEY, New York, NY USA; David Harrison, Harrison, Harrison & Associates, Ltd., Red Bank, NJ USA.
For Charter Communications, Llc, Defendant: Kimberley E. Lunetta, LEAD ATTORNEY, Morgan Lewis & Bockius, New York, NY USA; Joanne Wilcomes, Morgan Lewis & Bockius LLP, New York, NY USA.
Judges: NINA GERSHON, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: NINA GERSHON
Opinion



OPINION & ORDER
GERSHON, United States District Judge:
Constance D'Alessio sues her former employer, Charter Communications, LLC ("Charter") for failure to accommodate her disability and for retaliation under the Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act ("ADAAA"), §§ 42 U.S.C. 12101, et seq., and the New York City Human Rights Law ("NYCHRL"), N.Y. Admin. Code §§ 8-101, et seq.1 Charter, asserting that there are no issues of material fact, has moved for summary judgment on each claim. For the reasons set forth below, defendant's motion is denied in part and granted in part.

I. Factual Background
For purposes of this motion, the following facts are undisputed unless stated otherwise.
Plaintiff began working for Staten Island Cable, Charter's predecessor, in May 1998. She held various positions during her tenure with Charter; by the [*2]  time she left the company in 2017, she was a senior business analyst in Charter's IT department.
Plaintiff suffers from a degenerative spinal condition that makes walking, especially long distances, difficult. Her condition was exacerbated in 2012 by a car accident, for which she underwent surgery in 2013. Prior to her accident, plaintiff would frequently travel to other Charter locations as part of her job duties. After her surgery, plaintiff told her supervisor, Mike Skinner, that traveling was problematic because it caused her "a lot of discomfort and repercussions." D'Alessio Deposition ("Dep.") at 27. Although plaintiff did not request a specific accommodation, Charter required less travel of her after her surgery. Plaintiff also suffers from anxiety that she claims was exacerbated by the events giving rise to this lawsuit.
Prior to 2013, plaintiff would park in the front parking lot of the Staten Island facility where she was based and would use one of two handicapped spaces if needed. In 2013, however, Charter opened its Customer Payment Center, and employees were no longer allowed to park in the front parking lot. Plaintiff then began parking in the parking lot on the right side [*3]  of the building near the Technical Operations ("Tech Ops") entrance.
In 2016, Charter indicated that it was going to restrict parking in the Tech Ops parking lot to Tech Ops employees only. Michael Reis, the Facilities Coordinator at the Staten Island facility, distributed a diagram to all employees designating the Tech Ops lot for Tech Ops employees, and the back and left sides of the building for the remaining customer service employees. On February 15, 2016, plaintiff notified Mike Skinner of the new parking plan and requested that she be allowed to continue parking in the Tech Ops lot because it was closer to her work space and required her to walk a shorter distance than the handicapped spots in the other parking areas. In response to plaintiff's request, Mr. Skinner consulted with the facilities department and subsequently told plaintiff that changes to parking conditions were not "in process." Id. at 53 (internal quotation marks omitted).
On March 2, 2016, plaintiff contacted Mr. Skinner again because another parking map had been distributed, which plaintiff understood to mean that the parking plan would in fact be enforced, and she sought confirmation that she could continue to park in [*4]  the Tech Ops lot. Mr. Skinner spoke with the Tech Ops management team, the facilities management team, and human resources and was advised that there were no plans to change anything with respect to parking.
On March 16, 2016, plaintiff met with Mike Skinner and Amber Ottinger of Charter's human resources department to discuss the issue of her parking in the handicapped space on the Tech Ops side of the building. During that conversation, Ms. Ottinger told plaintiff that she could continue to park on the Tech Ops side of the building "until somebody said something." Id. at 37. Plaintiff testified, however, that she told Ms. Ottinger that "people were parking there and I couldn't always get a spot." Id. at 38. (This issue had only begun to occur in 2016, and plaintiff testified that, not only did she have difficulty parking in the handicapped spot, but she was often not able to find any spot close to the Tech Ops entrance.) In response to plaintiff's statement, Ms. Ottinger told her that "they don't monitor those parking spots," and Ms. Ottinger concluded that plaintiff did not require a reasonable accommodation because she had a New York handicap placard and could park in any handicapped parking spot. [*5]  Id. at 38, 40, 105. Ms. Ottinger did not have plaintiff fill out paperwork for a reasonable accommodation request. Mr. Skinner, in his deposition, denied that the issue of cars being parked in the spot reserved for handicapped drivers was raised during the March 2016 meeting. Skinner Dep. at 69.
Plaintiff subsequently went out on medical leave from the end of March 2016 through June 2016. Plaintiff testified that she took medical leave because of the:
[S]tress of coming in every day and not being able to park . . . . I felt like I had to constantly fight [for] what should have been freely given to me. I shouldn't have to fight for a parking space. And it became — it became like retaliatory. It felt like that there was constantly cars in the spot. I had brought it to the right people. There was nothing being done about it. There was no commitment to resolution. And it just became completely overwhelming.
D'Alessio Dep. at 32-33. Plaintiff stated that, although she had dealt with anxiety issues in the past, it was not until she began having parking issues at work that she began to suffer from panic attacks. When plaintiff returned from medical leave in June 2016, she continued having difficulty parking in [*6]  the Tech Ops handicapped spot, and, depending on the day, would also have difficulty parking in the other spots close to the door. Id. at 97-99.
In early 2017, there was a union strike. Kathleen Haag of Charter's human resources department testified that, because of the strike, Charter limited access to the Tech Ops entrance to only "technical field op employees and related department[s]" as a security measure. Haag Dep. at 27. Plaintiff's access to the Tech Ops entrance was shut off on April 27, 2017. On the same day, plaintiff emailed Mr. Skinner regarding what had occurred, and Mr. Skinner responded that, since plaintiff's "access to the side entrance is now restricted, we will review the concern with HR and determine what the next steps should be." Skinner Email of April 27, 2017. On April 28, 2017, plaintiff emailed Mr. Skinner and others stating, "[t]hanks Mike, just for clarification . . . I have never been able to park in the handicap spot that was discussed last year with human resources . . . . As discussed last year during our conversations with Amber Ottinger from Human Resources, I was told that the company would not police the use of the handicap parking spots on the property and [*7]  the handicap spots are perpetually taken with either company vehicles or co-workers vehicles without handicap plates . . . ." D'Alessio Email of April 28, 2017.
Mike Skinner spoke to human resources about plaintiff's situation. Mr. Skinner, plaintiff, and Megan Hulsey from Charter's human resources department then conferred by telephone on May 18, 2017. During that conversation, plaintiff was told that she could park in front of the building—the lot she parked in prior to 2013—in either of the two handicapped spots or in the no-longer-used "employee of the month" spot.
The next day, plaintiff parked in front of the building. Between May 18 and May 22, plaintiff testified, she had no problem finding a parking space in the front parking lot. Plaintiff submitted her resignation letter on May 22; she had been offered a job by another company. After submitting her resignation letter, but prior to her last day of work, plaintiff was told by building security that her car would be towed for being parked in the front customer parking lot. Plaintiff called Mike Skinner, who spoke to building security, and he was told that there was a "misunderstanding . . . between the security person and Connie," [*8]  and the "facilities people assured [Mr. Skinner] that, that would not occur again." D'Alessio Dep. at 120; Skinner Dep. at 66-68. After speaking to Mr. Skinner, plaintiff "did not hear anything else about this" and her car was not towed. D'Alessio Dep. at 120.
Other facts not discussed here appear in the Discussion section.

II. Legal Standard
Summary judgment is appropriate only where, considering "the record, including depositions, documents, electronically stored information, affidavits or declarations, stipulations (including those made for purposes of the motion only), admissions, interrogatory answers, or other materials," Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c), "the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law," Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). In determining whether there is a genuine issue of material fact, a court resolves all ambiguities and draws all justifiable inferences in favor of the non-moving party. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986).

III. Discussion

A. Failure to Accommodate
To establish a prima facie failure to accommodate claim under the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), a plaintiff must demonstrate that: "(1) plaintiff is a person with a disability under the meaning of the ADA; [*9]  (2) an employer covered by the statute had notice of his disability; (3) with reasonable accommodation, plaintiff could perform the essential functions of the job at issue; and (4) the employer has refused to make such accommodations." McMillan v. City of New York, 711 F.3d 120, 125-26 (2d Cir. 2013). The ADAAA altered the analysis of the first element by broadening the definition of disability. See Anderson v. Nat'l Grid, PLC, 93 F. Supp. 3d 120, 131 (E.D.N.Y. 2015). For purposes of this motion, Charter does not dispute that plaintiff was disabled under the federal and city laws. Once the plaintiff has established a prima facie case that a reasonable accommodation is available, the "defendant's burden of persuading the factfinder that the plaintiff's proposed accommodation is unreasonable merges, in effect, with its burden of showing, as an affirmative defense, that the proposed accommodation would cause it to suffer an undue hardship." Borkowski v. Valley Cent. Sch. Dist., 63 F.3d 131, 138, 139 (2d Cir. 1995).
"Courts apply the same standard for failure to accommodate cases under the ADA . . . and NYCHRL." Frilando v. New York City Transit Auth., 463 F. Supp. 3d 501, 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 70916, 2020 WL 1940313, at *7 (S.D.N.Y. Apr. 22, 2020) (internal quotation marks omitted). However, claims under the NYCHRL must be analyzed "separately and independently" from federal claims, and the NYCHRL's provisions are to be construed "broadly in favor of discrimination plaintiffs, to the extent that such a construction is reasonably [*10]  possible." Mihalik v. Credit Agricole Cheuvreux N. Am., Inc., 715 F.3d 102, 109 (2d Cir. 2013) (internal quotation marks omitted).
Here, as noted above, Charter does not dispute that plaintiff was disabled under the relevant laws. It also does not dispute that it was aware of her disability, nor that, with reasonable accommodation, plaintiff could have performed the essential functions of her job. Charter disputes only the fourth element—whether it refused to make a reasonable accommodation for plaintiff's disability.
Plaintiff presents two factual predicates for her failure to accommodate claim: she claims that her reasonable accommodation request in 2016 was denied; and she claims that, when Charter eventually proffered an accommodation in 2017, it was inadequate.2

a. 2016 Accommodation Request
As discussed under Factual Background, plaintiff was presented with two maps—one in February and one in March 2016—that indicated that she would not be able to continue parking in the Tech Ops parking lot. After receiving both maps, plaintiff contacted her supervisor, Mike Skinner, and requested that she be able to continue parking in the Tech Ops lot. A meeting was scheduled for March 16 between plaintiff, Mr. Skinner, and Amber Ottinger of Charter's human resources department [*11]  to discuss plaintiff's parking concerns.
Plaintiff testified that, during that conversation, she stated that she was having difficulty parking on the Tech Ops side of the building because other vehicles were parked in the handicapped spot—an issue that had started to occur only that year. D'Alessio Dep. at 33-34, 38, 72-73; D'Alessio Declaration ("Dec.") at ¶ 42-43. In response to this statement, plaintiff testified that Ms. Ottinger told her that Charter did not monitor or police the handicapped spot. Ms. Ottinger also told plaintiff that she could continue parking in the Tech Ops lot until told otherwise, and concluded that no reasonable accommodation was needed because plaintiff could use her handicap placard to continue parking there. Ms. Ottinger did not have plaintiff fill out paperwork for a reasonable accommodation request and Charter thereafter considered the matter to be resolved. After the meeting, plaintiff continued to use the Tech Ops lot but continued to encounter vehicles parked in the handicapped space, which affected her ability to park near the entrance to her office and avoid a painful walk to work. D'Alessio Dep. at 97-99.
The evidence proffered by plaintiff demonstrates [*12]  that plaintiff requested use of the Tech Ops handicapped spot as a reasonable accommodation for her disability and that she told Charter that she was sometimes not able to park there because other vehicles occupied the spot. The record evidence also confirms that the spot, and other nearby spots, were frequently occupied when plaintiff needed them, typically before 8:00 a.m., and often by Charter-affiliated vehicles that did not have a handicap placard. Id. at 126, 142; D'Alessio Email of April 28, 2017. The question is, then, did Charter deny plaintiff's reasonable accommodation request by allowing plaintiff to continue to park in the Tech Ops lot, but declining to do anything about the vehicles that prevented her from using the handicapped spot?
A jury could answer that question in the affirmative. It is fundamental that a "[r]easonable accommodation may take many forms, but it must be effective." Noll v. Int'l Bus. Machines Corp., 787 F.3d 89, 95 (2d Cir. 2015) (emphasis added); see US Airways, Inc. v. Barnett, 535 U.S. 391, 400, 122 S. Ct. 1516, 152 L. Ed. 2d 589 (2002) ("It is the word 'accommodation,' not the word 'reasonable,' that conveys the need for effectiveness."). A jury could find that, in order to grant plaintiff's reasonable accommodation request, Charter was required to ensure that the spot was available when plaintiff needed it and [*13]  that, by declining to do anything in this regard, Charter denied her reasonable accommodation request. In sum, plaintiff has satisfied the four elements of her prima facie case. And Charter, the burden now having shifted to it, has come forth with no evidence demonstrating that the requested accommodation was unreasonable or that it would have imposed an undue hardship. See Borkowski, 63 F.3d at 138-139.
Although, based on the above, it is evident that summary judgment should be denied, I will briefly address Charter's arguments to the contrary.
Charter, citing Noll, 787 F.3d at 98, claims that summary judgment should be granted in its favor because the accommodation it provided—allowing plaintiff to park in the Tech Ops lot, but declining to police the handicapped spot—was sufficient as a matter of law and relieved it of any obligation to pursue alternative accommodations. But Noll states that whether an accommodation is reasonable—and, as discussed, a reasonable accommodation must also be effective—is typically a question of fact. Id. at 94-95. Here, Charter offers no explanation as to why the accommodation it provided was effective other than its own saying so. And, unlike Noll, Charter's efforts to accommodate plaintiff in 2016 failed to go [*14]  beyond simply maintaining the status quo, which, according to plaintiff, she expressly stated was unsatisfactory at the March 2016 meeting and which continued to burden her up until her access to the Tech Ops door was revoked in April 2017. D'Alessio Dep. at 97-99. On this record, the effectiveness of Charter's proffered accommodation cannot be determined as a matter of law, but rather, must be submitted to the jury as a question of fact.
Charter also claims that there is no evidence that plaintiff let Charter's human resources department know that the Tech Ops handicapped spot was sometimes occupied. But plaintiff testified that she alerted Mr. Skinner and Ms. Ottinger to this fact during their March 2016 meeting. Although Mr. Skinner, in his deposition, denied that this issue was raised then, this means only that there is a factual dispute as to when Charter was first given notice that plaintiff was sometimes not able to use the spot.
Finally, Charter asserts that I should not consider the March 2016 events because they were not included in plaintiff's Amended Complaint ("AC"). This assertion borders on frivolous. The AC describes, in detail, the events that occurred in February and [*15]  March 2016 and these facts are incorporated by reference into the AC's discrimination counts. It is therefore of no moment that plaintiff did not specifically re-allege each of these allegations in the AC's "causes of action" section. Charter was given ample notice of plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim based on the March 2016 meeting, and cannot credibly argue that plaintiff is raising this claim "for the first time." Def.'s Reply at 7.
In sum, plaintiff has presented evidence demonstrating that Charter denied her reasonable accommodation request in March 2016. She has therefore satisfied each element of her prima facie case, and Charter has failed to come forth with evidence demonstrating that her requested accommodation was unreasonable or would have imposed an undue hardship, or that its proffered accommodation was effective as a matter of law. Accordingly, summary judgment must be denied under the ADA with respect to the 2016 accommodation request. Because summary judgment is not warranted under the ADA, summary judgment under the NYCHRL—which requires a more liberal construction—must also be denied.

b. The 2017 Accommodation
In addition to the 2016 accommodation request, plaintiff [*16]  argues that Charter's 2017 accommodation, where the company granted her the opportunity to park in the front parking lot because her access to the Tech Ops entrance had been revoked, was "inadequate" because Charter did not have her fill out formal paperwork and grant her a "formal" accommodation. Pl.'s Opp. at 18. But plaintiff does not dispute that she was able to use the spaces allocated to her in the front parking lot because they were not blocked by other cars as the handicapped space in the Tech Ops lot was. And plaintiff admitted in her deposition that, while she preferred to use the Tech Ops entrance, parking in the front lot was "sustainable." D'Alessio Dep. at 118. That the accommodation was not "formal" is of no significance in light of these statements. Accordingly, there is no basis to conclude that the 2017 accommodation was ineffective, and summary judgment will be granted under the ADA with respect to the factual claim that she was denied an accommodation in 2017. See Noll, 787 F.3d at 94 (summary judgment may be granted to the employer where the accommodation is "plainly reasonable").
The same result must be reached under the NYCHRL. Despite its more liberal standard, no reasonable juror [*17]  could conclude that defendant violated the NYCHRL as to the 2017 accommodation where, as here, the record demonstrates that the 2017 accommodation remedied the principal issue plaintiff faced when parking in the Tech Ops lot, and plaintiff herself indicated that the accommodation was satisfactory.

B. Retaliation
To make out a prima facie case of retaliation under the ADA, plaintiff must establish that: 1) she engaged in an activity protected by the ADA; 2) the employer was aware of this activity; 3) the employer took adverse employment action against her; and 4) a causal connection exists between the alleged adverse action and the protected activity. See Treglia v. Town of Manlius, 313 F.3d 713, 719 (2d Cir. 2002). "In the context of an ADA retaliation claim, an adverse employment action is an action that could well dissuade a reasonable worker from making or supporting a charge of discrimination." Wu v. Metro. Transportation Auth., 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 22641, 2020 WL 615626, at *13 (S.D.N.Y. Feb. 7, 2020) (internal quotation marks omitted). ADA retaliation claims require a but-for causal showing between the adverse action and the protected activity. Bailey v. Mount Vernon City Sch. Dist., 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 57602, 2020 WL 1528481, at *12 (S.D.N.Y. Mar. 30, 2020); see Univ. of Texas Sw. Med. Ctr. v. Nassar, 570 U.S. 338, 360, 133 S. Ct. 2517, 186 L. Ed. 2d 503 (2013) (Title VII's retaliation provision, which contains language similar to the ADA's retaliation provision, requires a but-for causal showing); Natofsky v. City of New York, 921 F.3d 337, 348-349 (2d Cir. 2019) (ADA discrimination claims require a showing of but-for [*18]  causation).
Under the NYCHRL, a plaintiff "need only show that [she] took an action opposing [her] employer's discrimination, and that, as a result, the employer engaged in conduct that was reasonably likely to deter a person from engaging in such action." Gorokhovsky v. New York City Hous. Auth., 552 F. App'x 100, 102 (2d Cir. 2014) (internal quotation marks omitted). However, the but-for causation standard does not apply to NYCHRL retaliation claims, Sass v. MTA Bus Co., 6 F. Supp. 3d 238, 247-248 (E.D.N.Y. 2014), and a plaintiff need only show that retaliation was "at least a partial motivating factor," Forrester v. Corizon Health, Inc., 752 F. App'x 64, 66 (2d Cir. 2018).
Here, plaintiff claims that she was subjected to a retaliatory hostile work environment. It is not disputed that such an environment can satisfy the adverse action requirement under the ADA. See Atencio v. United States Postal Serv., 198 F. Supp. 3d 340, 362 (S.D.N.Y. 2016). A retaliatory hostile work environment is also cognizable under the NYCHRL. See Bacchus v. New York City Dep't of Educ., 137 F. Supp. 3d 214, 246 (E.D.N.Y. 2015).
Finally, if plaintiff meets her burden and is able to establish a prima facie case of retaliation under the ADA, the burden then shifts to the defendant, which must articulate some legitimate, non-retaliatory, reason for its actions. See McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 802-804, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). If the defendant can satisfy this burden, plaintiff must then establish a genuine issue of material fact showing that defendant's non-retaliatory reason is mere pretext for an impermissible retaliatory motive. [*19]  See id. Under the NYCHRL, an employer may also offer legitimate, non-retaliatory reasons in response to plaintiff's prima facie case, and summary judgment is appropriate only "if 'the record establishes as a matter of law' that . . . retaliation 'play[ed] no role' in the defendant's actions." Ya-Chen Chen v. City Univ. of New York, 805 F.3d 59, 76 (2d Cir. 2015).
Plaintiff points to three incidents to demonstrate that Charter engaged in retaliatory harassment. First, plaintiff points to Charter revoking her access to the Tech Ops door in April 2017, which Charter claims was a strike security measure. Second, plaintiff claims, that after being told in 2016 that she could continue to park in the handicapped spot on the Tech Ops side of the building, she encountered Charter vehicles parked in the Tech Ops handicapped space as well as in other spaces close to the door. Finally, plaintiff references her interaction in May 2017 with the facility security supervisor who threatened to tow her car—even though plaintiff had been told she could park in the front lot.
With respect to Charter revoking plaintiff's access to the Tech Ops door, plaintiff cannot establish a prima facie case of retaliation because she cannot establish that retaliation was the but-for cause [*20]  of the revocation. The only causal basis plaintiff offers is the temporal proximity between her request for an accommodation in March 2016 and her losing access in April 2017. While temporal proximity alone can, at times, establish causation for a retaliation claim, a temporal gap of over a year is too attenuated to support a causal inference. Compare Zann Kwan v. Andalex Grp. LLC, 737 F.3d 834, 845 (2d Cir. 2013) (3-week period between complaint and termination was sufficient to establish causation), with Burkybile v. Bd. of Educ. of Hastings-On-Hudson Union Free Sch. Dist., 411 F.3d 306, 314 (2d Cir. 2005) (no causation found where more than a year passed between protected activity and adverse action for First Amendment claim). For this reason, plaintiff has failed to establish a prima facie case with respect to this incident under the ADA. And, despite the NYCHRL's more liberal standard, I find that plaintiff has failed to establish a prima facie case under the NYCHRL for the same reason. See Baldwin v. Cablevision Sys. Corp., 65 A.D.3d 961, 967, 888 N.Y.S.2d 1 (1st Dep't 2009) (four-month period between adverse action and protected activity insufficient to establish causal inference for NYCHRL claim).
Regarding the cars being parked in the handicapped spot in the Tech Ops parking lot, even if plaintiff could establish a prima facie case with respect to this incident, plaintiff has failed to establish an issue of material fact as to whether [*21]  defendant's non-retaliatory explanation is a pretext for a retaliatory motive. See Howard v. MTA Metro-N. Commuter R.R., 866 F. Supp. 2d 196, 205 (S.D.N.Y. 2011). Charter agrees that Tech Ops employees would occasionally park in the handicapped spot to load and unload materials because of its proximity to the building, and that they would typically do so early in the morning, before 8:00 a.m., which happened to be around the same time that plaintiff arrived at work. Reis Dep. at 38-39; Santiago Dep. at 26; D'Alessio Dec. at ¶ 40. Plaintiff herself acknowledges that, other than the cars being parked there, she has no reason to believe that this was retaliatory. She testified that she does not believe that anyone in Charter's human resources department retaliated against her by having people park in the handicapped spot. D'Alessio Dep. at 137-138, 163. There is also no evidence that human resources, or the employees who did park in the handicapped spot, were aware that plaintiff frequently arrived at work and needed the spot at that early hour. And, although plaintiff claims that she found more vehicles parked in the handicapped space, and other spaces close to the door, immediately after the March 2016 meeting, such temporal proximity is, in and of itself, insufficient [*22]  to defeat summary judgment at the pretext stage. See, e.g., Zann Kwan, 737 F.3d at 847.
As for the NYCHRL, the same result must be reached notwithstanding the statute's broad remedial purpose. As stated above, plaintiff acknowledged the lack of evidence demonstrating retaliatory animus, and district courts in this Circuit have concluded that, as with federal claims, temporal proximity alone is insufficient to defeat summary judgment at the pretext stage under the NYCHRL. See, e.g., Sivio v. Vill. Care Max, 436 F. Supp. 3d 778, 802 (S.D.N.Y. 2020); Borzon v. Green, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 109336, 2018 WL 3212419, at *14 n.32 (S.D.N.Y. June 29, 2018), aff'd, 778 F. App'x 16 (2d Cir. 2019); Rogers v. Bank of New York Mellon, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 107780, 2016 WL 4362204, at *22 (S.D.N.Y. Aug. 15, 2016); but see Williams v. Regus Mgmt. Grp., LLC, 836 F. Supp. 2d 159, 181 (S.D.N.Y. 2011) ("It is unclear whether sufficiently close temporal proximity, standing alone, would be sufficient under the NYCHRL"). I find that plaintiff has failed to meet her burden on summary judgment with respect to this incident under the NYCHRL.
Regarding plaintiff being told her car would be towed in May 2017, it bears repeating that plaintiff's car was never actually towed. After plaintiff reported the issue to Mr. Skinner, Mr. Skinner advised the security personnel involved, and the facilities department, that plaintiff was permitted to park in the front lot, and facilities personnel told Mr. Skinner that the situation was a misunderstanding that would not happen again. Skinner Dep. at 66-68. Significantly, like [*23]  plaintiff's access to the Tech Ops door being revoked, this incident occurred more than a year after plaintiff's accommodation request. Accordingly, as with the April 2017 revocation, this temporal gap is far too large to draw any causal inference, and, because there is no other evidence from which causation may be inferred, plaintiff cannot make the required but-for causal showing for her prima facie case under the ADA, see Burkybile, 411 F.3d at 314, or even meet the more lenient NYCHRL standard, see Baldwin, 65 A.D.3d at 967.
Even assuming plaintiff could establish a prima facie case under the ADA with respect to this incident, she has come forth with no evidence that would allow a jury to infer that defendant's proffered non-retaliatory reason, i.e., that this was essentially an honest mistake, is pretextual. The NYCHRL does not require a different result, because plaintiff's "failure to present a genuine issue of material fact regarding pretext dooms [this] claim[ ] under any standard." Melie v. EVCI/TCI Coll. Admin., 374 F. App'x 150, 154 (2d Cir. 2010).

IV. Conclusion
Summary judgment is denied as to plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim under the ADAAA and the NYCHRL regarding the 2016 accommodation request, but summary judgment is granted to defendant under the ADAAA and NYCHRL regarding the [*24]  2017 accommodation. Summary judgment is also granted to defendant as to plaintiff's retaliation claim under the ADAAA and the NYCHRL. To the extent that plaintiff has alleged a disability discrimination claim not grounded in a failure to accommodate, she has abandoned, and defendant's motion is accordingly granted, as to any such claim. See n.1, supra.
The parties are directed to prepare a pre-trial order as to the remaining claim, failure to accommodate based on the 2016 accommodation request, under the direction of Magistrate Judge Bloom.
SO ORDERED.
/s/ NINA GERSHON
United States District Judge
September 21, 2020
Brooklyn, New York


End of Document

