Dunderdale v. United Airlines, Inc.
United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois, Eastern Division
August 4, 2014, Decided; August 4, 2014, Filed
No. 12 C 04440

Reporter
2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 186098 *
MICHAEL DUNDERDALE, Plaintiff, v. UNITED AIRLINES, INC., Defendant.
Subsequent History: Affirmed by Dunderdale v. United Airlines, Inc., 807 F.3d 849, 2015 U.S. App. LEXIS 20981 (7th Cir. Ill., 2015)
Counsel:  [*1] For Michael Dunderdale, Plaintiff: Michael T. Smith, LEAD ATTORNEY, Michael T. Smith & Associates, Roselle, IL; Joshua D. McCann, Law Offices of Joshua D. McCann, Chicago, IL.
For United Airlines, Defendant: Marc R. Jacobs, LEAD ATTORNEY, Ashley Choren Workman, Seyfarth Shaw LLP, Chicago, IL.
Judges: Honorable Edmond E. Chang, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Edmond E. Chang
Opinion



Order
Plaintiff Michael Dunderdale brought this discrimination and retaliation action against United Air Lines, Inc. under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.1 R. 1, Compl. Dunderdale alleges that United violated the ADA by failing to reasonably accommodate his disability and retaliating against him for requesting reasonable accommodation.2 Id. at 5-8. United now moves for summary judgment [R. 45] on both claims. For the reasons discussed below, United's motion for summary judgment is granted.

I. Background3
Dunderdale has been employed by United, a commercial airline, since April 28, 1997, as a ramp serviceman. DSOF ¶ 1; Compl. ¶ 6. The terms and conditions of employment for the ramp serviceman position are governed by the Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA), negotiated between United and the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers (the "Union"). DSOF ¶ 6; PSOAF ¶ 1. Under Article X of the CBA, "[s]eniority plus the ability to satisfactorily perform the work required for the job in question shall govern all employees covered by this Agreement in preference of shifts, . . . [*3]  in the filling of full and part time vacancies, and in all promotions, demotion or transfers within or between classifications." R. 48-3, CBA at 39. In other words, the CBA requires United to place employees in positions based upon their seniority as long as they have the skill and ability to perform them.
United fulfills this requirement with a bidding system in which ramp servicemen bid on, and are awarded, work areas, shift assignments, and days off based on seniority. PSOAF ¶ 1. In some circumstances, ramp servicemen can also be assigned to certain "no-bid" positions without reference to seniority. Id. ¶ 4. Regardless of which area a ramp serviceman is assigned to, the general job description for a ramp serviceman includes the following job functions:
Load, stows, unloads mail, cargo and baggage from conveyor belts, carts, trucks and aircraft. Cleans; services aircraft interiors and removes, assembles, and installs passenger cabin supplies. Loads and unloads buffet and food supplies. Performs aircraft service duties including cleaning windshields, engine oil checks/servicing and deicing functions. Receives positions and dispatches aircraft. Operates and cleans various mechanical machines [*4]  and ramp equipment related to aircraft services such as radios, aircraft air conditioners, cargo and belt loaders, fork lifts, trucks, tractors, vans and related automotive equipment. Operates computers and printers to enter, access and manage aircraft load manifest data and instructions, color-coded baggage/transfer systems, aircraft fueling or other service information.
R. 48-4, Def.'s Exh. 16, Ramp Serviceman Job Description. Ramp serviceman job duties also include "the pulling, pushing of carts and containers; perform[ing] duties in walking, standing, bending, kneeling and stooping positions; lift[ing] freight, baggage and other heavy items — up to 70 pounds." Id.
In December 2002, Dunderdale injured his back while at work and could not work for thirteen months. DSOF ¶ 15. Dunderdale returned to work with no restrictions in February 2004, but injured his back again two weeks later. Id. He returned to work again in June 2005 with the following long-term work restrictions: no (a) lifting over 30 pounds, (b) bending, (c) kneeling, (d) stooping, or (e) driving United's equipment. R. 52-6, Pl.'s Exh. 6, Assessment of Functional Capabilities. Dunderdale's permanent work restrictions rendered him unable to [*5]  perform all of the duties provided in the ramp serviceman job description. DSOF ¶ 16.
United accommodated Dunderdale's work restrictions by allowing him to work in the Product Sort sub-area called the "Matrix," where Dunderdale stood or sat at a computer while a conveyor belt brought him bags to process and scan. Id. ¶¶ 16, 18, 20. At the time, assignment to the Matrix was open only to permanently restricted or disabled employees. PSOAF ¶ 3. To obtain a position in the Matrix, a permanently restricted employee would bid into Product Sort and was then automatically reassigned to work in the Matrix. Id. United ultimately determined that grouping the Matrix and Product Sort together for bidding purposes could lead to staffing inefficiencies. DSOF ¶ 21. So in either 2007 or 2010 (the parties dispute the year), United separated the Matrix from Product Sort for bidding purposes. Id. ¶ 22; PSOAF ¶ 19.
Even under the new system, Matrix bidding remained available only to restricted ramp servicemen until United implemented another change: starting with the May 2011 bid, the Matrix would be open to everyone—not just those on permanent restrictions. DSOF ¶ 24; PSOAF ¶ 19. When the May 2011 bid took [*6]  place, United's Supervisor of Performance and Labor Relations, Sheila Siggal, told Dunderdale that, under the new system where the Matrix was open to non-restricted employees, his seniority was insufficient to outbid enough other employees to obtain a position in the Matrix. DSOF ¶¶ 26-27; PSOAF ¶ 21. Accordingly, Siggal explained that Dunderdale would be placed on extended illness status (EIS), in which Dunderdale would continue to receive various benefits as a United employee (including health insurance and access to United's intranet) for up to three years. DSOF ¶¶ 27-28; 41; PSOAF ¶ 21. Dunderdale told Siggal that, apart from working in the Matrix, he believed that he could hold no-bid positions with Auditing, "Bulls-eye," and the Manpower Office.4 DSOF ¶ 32; PSOAF ¶ 31.But Dunderdale was informed that there were no openings for any of those positions, so the Matrix was the only place with positions that he could perform in light of his restrictions. DSOF ¶ 34; PSOAF ¶ 31. Dunderdale remained on EIS until October 2013, when his seniority was once again sufficient to hold a position in the Matrix and he was reinstated to that position. DSOF ¶ 61; R. 53, Pl.'s Response Br. at 11.
Dunderdale brought this suit against United in June 2012, alleging that United failed to reasonably accommodate him and retaliated against him in violation of the ADA. Compl. at 5-8. United moves for summary judgment as to both claims. R. 45, Mot. Summ. J. In his response brief, Dunderdale expressly "waives his ADA retaliation claim in order to focus solely on his failure to accommodate claim." Pl.'s Response Br. at 2 n. 1. Accordingly, United's motion for summary judgment is granted as to Count Four (retaliation) of the Complaint, and the only claim left for consideration is Count Three (failure to accommodate), discussed below.

II. Legal Standard
Summary judgment must be granted "if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). Rule 56 "mandates the entry of summary judgment, after adequate time for discovery and upon motion, against a party who fails [*8]  to make a showing sufficient to establish the existence of an element essential to that party's case, and on which that party will bear the burden of proof at trial." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). All facts, and any inferences to be drawn from them, must be viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Scott v. Harris, 550 U.S. 372, 378, 127 S. Ct. 1769, 167 L. Ed. 2d 686 (2007).

III. Analysis
Under the ADA, an employer must make "reasonable accommodations" to a disabled employee's limitations, unless the employer can demonstrate that to do so would impose an "undue hardship." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). Failure to make reasonable accommodations for a known disability constitutes unlawful discrimination. 42 U.S.C. §§ 12112(b)(5)(A), 12112(a). The Seventh Circuit has held that "[a]n employer is not obligated to provide an employee the accommodation he requests or prefers, the employer need only provide some reasonable accommodation." Malabarba v. Chicago Tribune, Co., 149 F.3d 690, 699 (7th Cir. 1998) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). To prevail on a failure-to-accommodate claim, "a plaintiff must show that: (1) [he] is a qualified individual with a disability; (2) the employer was aware of h[is] disability; and (3) the employer failed to reasonably accommodate the disability." EEOC v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 417 F.3d 789, 797 (7th Cir. 2005) (citation omitted).
United does not dispute that Dunderdale had a disability or that United knew of his disability. But [*9]  United contends that Dunderdale was not qualified to be a ramp serviceman after his injury because his physical restrictions rendered him unable to perform many of the job's essential functions: namely, bending, kneeling, stooping, driving equipment, and lifting up to seventy pounds. R. 46, Def.'s Br. at 6; see also 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8) ("The term 'qualified individual' means an individual who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds or desires."). In response, Dunderdale argues that (1) lifting up to seventy pounds was not an essential job function, and (2) by employing disabled workers in the Matrix, United proved that those employees could perform as ramp servicemen with accommodation. Pl.'s Response Br. at 9-10.
Dunderdale's first point is wrong because the record evidence shows only one reasonable conclusion: lifting seventy pounds is an essential job function of ramp servicemen. Essential job functions are "the fundamental job duties of the employment position the individual with a disability holds or desires," as opposed to the "marginal functions of the position." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n). For the purposes of the ADA, "consideration [*10]  shall be given to the employer's judgment as to what functions of a job are essential, and if an employer has prepared a written description before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job, this description shall be considered evidence of the essential functions of the job." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). United's written description of a ramp serviceman's job duties explicitly lists "lift[ing] freight, baggage, and other heavy items — up to 70 pounds." Ramp Serviceman Job Description. Specifically, a ramp serviceman must be prepared to stow and unload mail, cargo, baggage, and buffet and food supplies. Id. It is clear from this written description that heavy lifting pervades a ramp serviceman's job functions and is not merely a marginal function of the position. Moreover, a ramp serviceman must also be prepared to bend, kneel, stoop, and operate "fork lifts, trucks, tractors, vans, and related automotive equipment," see id.—job functions that Dunderdale also cannot perform, see Assessment of Functional Capabilities, and that he wholly fails to address. Altogether, Dunderdale's physical restrictions directly prevent him from performing many of the essential job functions of the ramp serviceman position without [*11]  accommodation; the question remains whether he could fulfill them with reasonable accommodation.
On that question, Dunderdale argues that he was a "qualified individual" because he and other disabled ramp servicemen not only could, but actually did, perform the essential job functions of a ramp serviceman with the accommodation of assignment to the Matrix. Pl.'s Response Br. at 10. Indeed, United kept Dunderdale on as a ramp serviceman for nearly six years after the start of his disability until it altered its Matrix bidding policy (and has since reinstated him to that position in his still-disabled state because he now has enough seniority to outbid others). DSOF ¶¶ 16-18, 25. Thus, Dunderdale has demonstrated that, with this particular accommodation, he could perform the job. The issue is whether accommodation by continued assignment to the Matrix was reasonable.
This issue moves the discussion to the third element of a failure-to-accommodate claim—that is, whether United failed to reasonably accommodate Dunderdale's disability. United argues that Dunderdale's failure-to-accommodate claim fails on this point because United reasonably accommodated him and, in any event, Dunderdale declined [*12]  United's offers to engage in an interactive process to discuss further reasonable accommodations. R. 46, Def.'s Br. at 2. Dunderdale argues, on the other hand, that he "was accommodated in the Matrix from April 2005 through April of 2011," but that United ceased accommodating him in 2011 when it opened Matrix bidding to all ramp servicemen for assignment by seniority. Pl.'s Response Br. at 14. Dunderdale further contends that United failed to provide reasonable accommodation by denying his requests for the no-bid positions of Bull's Eye, Auditor, Safety, and Manpower. Pl.'s Response Br. at 6, 11.
Turning first to Dunderdale's removal from the Matrix, it is undisputed that the CBA required work areas to be awarded to ramp servicemen by seniority. R. 50, Pl.'s Resp. DSOF ¶¶ 9-10. That requirement, however, had not been applied to the Matrix until a labor manager recommended that the Matrix be brought in line with the CBA. Specifically, United's Manager of Performance and Labor, Debra DiSantis, testified that she recommended the change to the Matrix bidding policy in part because "this particular area didn't follow the contract." PSOAF ¶¶ 22-23. In other words, allowing only disabled employees [*13]  to bid on the Matrix did not comply with the CBA requirement of assigning work on the basis of seniority.
The Supreme Court considered the interaction between the ADA and an employer's seniority system in US Airways, Inc. v. Barnett, 535 U.S. 391, 122 S. Ct. 1516, 152 L. Ed. 2d 589 (2002). In Barnett, a disabled airline employee lost his position in the mailroom when he was outbid by more senior employees. Id. at 394. The employee sued under the ADA, arguing that the airline should have accommodated him by simply allowing him to remain in the mailroom. Id. The airline argued, in turn, that disregarding its well-established seniority system would not have been a "reasonable" accommodation. Id. at 396. The Supreme Court generally agreed, summarizing its holding as follows:
In its question presented, U.S. Airways asked us whether the ADA requires an employer to assign a disabled employee to a particular position even though another employee is entitled to that position under the employer's "established seniority system." We answer that ordinarily the ADA does not require that assignment. Hence, a showing that the assignment would violate the rules of a seniority system warrants summary judgment for the employer—unless there is more. The plaintiff must present evidence of that "more," namely, [*14]  special circumstances surrounding the particular case that demonstrate the assignment is nonetheless reasonable.
Id. at 407.
Dunderdale acknowledges that, in light of Barnett, "under normal circumstances, a CBA does trump the ADA because it would normally be unduly burdensome for the employer to violate its contract." Pl.'s Response Br. at 15. But he argues that this case presents exactly the kind of "special circumstances" that the Supreme Court contemplated as the exception to the general rule: namely, that United did accommodate Dunderdale for thirteen years while violating its seniority system. Id. at 15. Thus, Dunderdale argues, it would not have been unduly burdensome for United simply to maintain the status quo. Id.
The Court disagrees. The CBA clearly requires a seniority-based work-assignment system, DSOF ¶ 9; PSOAF ¶ 1, and Dunderdale does not dispute the requirement. Upon the recommendation of its Manager of Performance and Labor, United amended its Matrix-bidding policy to conform to the required system. United was not, as Dunderdale suggests, see Pl.'s Response Br. at 15, obligated to wait for Union pressure or grievances to fulfill its employees' bargained-for expectations of seniority-based [*15]  work assignment. See Barnett, 535 U.S. at 403-05 (discussing importance of seniority to employee-management relations); Cochrum v. Old Ben Coal Co., 102 F.3d 908, 913 (7th Cir. 1996) ("An employer is not required to violate the provisions of a collective bargaining agreement to reassign a disabled employee pursuant to the ADA."). There is no reason to believe (and Dunderdale offers none) that United has seized upon a dubious interpretation of the CBA in order to terminate a reasonable accommodation for disabled employees. Indeed, not only is the CBA clear on this point, DiSantis also testified that she did receive questions and comments from the Union and non-disabled employees as to why those employees could not bid on the Matrix. PSOAF ¶ 23.
Dunderdale next argues that, even if continued assignment to the Matrix would have been unreasonable, United could have reasonably accommodated him with a less physically demanding no-bid position. Pl.'s Response Br. at 10. Specifically, Dunderdale contends that he made three requests for no-bid positions like Auditor, Bull's Eye, Safety, and Manpower Office, which he believes would not have required him to perform beyond his physical restrictions. Id. On each occasion, United informed Dunderdale that there were no openings in the [*16]  requested no-bid positions and that the Matrix was the only area left for him to work with his physical restrictions. Pl.'s Resp. DSOF ¶ 34.
The Seventh Circuit has made clear that "[a]n employer may be obligated to reassign a disabled employee, but only to vacant positions; an employer is not required to 'bump' other employees to create a vacancy so as to be able to reassign the disabled employee." Gile v. United Airlines, Inc., 95 F.3d 492, 499 (7th Cir. 1996). In addition, "[i]t is the plaintiff's burden to show that a vacant position exists for which [he] was qualified." Jackson v. City of Chicago, 414 F.3d 806, 813 (7th Cir. 2005) (citation omitted). Dunderdale does not argue, and has not provided evidence to suggest, that—contrary to United's representations—United actually had vacancies in the requested no-bid positions. Dunderdale had a chance in discovery to dig up evidence of vacancies, but he presents nothing in the summary-judgment filings to meet his burden to show that vacancies existed. And, in any event, Dunderdale admits that even employees assigned to these no-bid positions are occasionally pulled off of their lighter duties to "pull bags with other ramp servicemen." PSOAF ¶¶ 7, 10, 12, 14, 15, 17. Thus, Dunderdale has not shown that a vacant no-bid position existed, nor that he would have qualified [*17]  for one if it had.5
In short, Dunderdale's requested accommodations would have required United either to disregard the CBA's seniority provisions or to assign Dunderdale to a no-bid position that was not vacant and that would occasionally require him to perform tasks he is physically unable to perform. For the reasons stated above, either suggestion is unreasonable.6

IV. Conclusion
For all of these reasons, the Court grants [*19]  United's motion for summary judgment [R. 45] as to the two claims asserted by Dunderdale, specifically, Counts Three and Four of the complaint. The status hearing of August 20, 2014 is vacated. A separate AO-450 judgment shall be entered.
/s/ Edmond E. Chang
Honorable Edmond E. Chang
United States District Judge
DATE: August 4, 2014


End of Document

