EEOC v. Kalil Bottling Co.
United States District Court for the District of Arizona
September 21, 2009, Decided; September 22, 2009, Filed
No. CV 07-0488-TUC-BPV

Reporter
2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 151808 *
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Plaintiff, vs. Kalil Bottling Co., an Arizona corporation, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Plaintiff: Mary Joleen O'Neill, Sally Clifford Shanley, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission - Phoenix, AZ, Phoenix, AZ USA; P David Lopez, Tin-Tin Diana Chen, EEOC, Phoenix, AZ USA.
For Kalil Bottling Company, an Arizona corporation, Defendant: Diana Laura Kanon, James M Sakrison, Slutes Sakrison & Rogers PC, Tucson, AZ USA.
Judges: Bernardo P. Velasco, United States Magistrate Judge.
Opinion by: Bernardo P. Velasco
Opinion



ORDER
Presently pending before the court are cross-motions for Summary Judgment and Partial Summary Judgment by Plaintiff, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) and Defendant, Kalil Bottling Company, pursuant to Rule 56, Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
All parties in this case have consented to proceed, pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 636(c), before Magistrate Judge Velasco for all proceedings in this case, including trial and entry of final judgment, and to conduct all post-judgment proceedings, with direct review by the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals if an appeal is filed.
Regarding the Plaintiff's claims for Summary Judgment, the Magistrate Judge orders that Summary Judgment be DENIED on the issue of whether Gerald Nez was a qualified person with a disability at all relevant times and on the issue of [*2]  whether Defendant's affirmative defenses are factually and legally insufficient. Partial Summary Judgment is GRANTED on the issue of whether Nez was terminated purely because he failed a Department of Transportation medical examination.
In reference to the Defendant's motions for Summary Judgment, Summary Judgment is DENIED on the issue of whether Gerald Nez was disabled as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act and on the issue of intentionality.

STATEMENT OF FACTS
The EEOC is representing Gerald Nez, a type 2 insulin-dependant diabetic, who was discharged from his job with Kalil Bottling Company on or about February 1, 2004. Nez was hired by Kalil as a merchandiser in August 2004. (PSOF ¶ 4; DSOF ¶ 5, 8, 10). The position of merchandiser required that Nez drive his own Mazda pick-up truck to deliver soft drinks to retailers. (PSOF ¶ 4-5; DSOF ¶ 6-7). Nez's hiring was contingent upon passing a drug test and a Department of Transportation (DOT) physical exam. (DSOF ¶ 8). Nez was inadvertently administered a routine physical exam rather than the DOT exam. (DSOF ¶ 9). Nez passed the routine physical exam and was hired.(DSOF ¶ 10). In January 2005, Kalil realized that Nez had not [*3]  taken the correct physical exam. (DSOF ¶ 11). Nez was then requested to take the DOT physical. (PSOF ¶ 6; DSOF ¶ 11). Nez failed the DOT physical because he was an insulin dependant diabetic. (PSOF ¶ 10; DSOF ¶ 12). Being an insulin-dependant diabetic is an absolute preclusion from passing the DOT physical.(PSOF ¶ 13). Nez was then terminated from his position as a merchandiser with Kalil.(PSOF ¶ 11, 12). The reason for his termination was stated as "unable to pass required physical."(PSOF ¶ 12).
During his time with Kalil, Nez performed the duties of a merchandiser without incident.(PSOF ¶ 114). He drove his own small Mazda pickup and delivered soft drinks to retail stores. (PSOF ¶4-5). In the five month period that he worked for Kalil, Nez was given two pay raises. (PSOF ¶ 74, 75). Other than failing the DOT physical exam, Nez satisfied the essential functions of the merchandiser position. (PSOF ¶ 18).
As a result of his diabetes, Nez suffered from diabetic neuropathy, congestive heart failure, and hypertension. (PSOF ¶ 122, 123; DSOF ¶ 16).
Sometime during the early 1970's Kalil established a policy of requiring that all employees who would be driving either their own or a company [*4]  vehicle pass the DOT physical exam required for a commercial driver's license, regardless of the size of their vehicle, their individual medical history or their individual driving history. (PSOF ¶ 2, 95; DSOF ¶ 2). Kalil instituted the policy of requiring the DOT physical exam as part of group of changes in policy designed to reduce accidents and insurance costs.(PSOF ¶ 95; DSOF ¶ 3). Kalil's choice of the DOT test was not required by their insurance company or any federal, state or local ordinance. (PSOF ¶ 8, 92; DSOF ¶ 3, 4).

DISCUSSION
I. Standard of Review
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56(c) provides that a court may grant summary judgment if "the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). A party seeking summary judgment must identify those parts of the record that indicate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact. Celotex Corp. v. Caltrett, 477 U.S. 317 (1986); Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986); and Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986). Once the moving party has made this showing, the nonmoving party must designate which specific facts show that there is an issue for trial. Celotex, 477 U.S. at 324 (citing Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e)). The moving party is held to a strict [*5]  standard, and any doubts about the existence of a genuine issue of material fact will be resolved against it. Eastman Kodak Co. v. Image Technical Servs., Inc., 504 U.S. 451, 456, 112 S. Ct. 2072, 119 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1992).
Under Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e), in response to a properly supported motion for summary judgment, the opposing party "must set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." The inquiry performed by the trial court is to determine whether there are "any genuine factual issues that properly can be resolved only by a finder of fact because they may reasonably be resolved in favor of either party." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 250. For an issue to be "genuine," there must be evidence such that a "reasonable jury" could reach a verdict in favor of the nonmoving party. Id. at 248.
As to what may be properly considered a genuine issue of fact, "[w]hen a respondent to a motion for summary judgment submits proper affidavits by individuals with personal knowledge and other cognizable and significantly probative evidence, such that a reasonable juror drawing all inferences in favor of the respondent could return a verdict in the respondent's favor, the judge must treat that fact as genuinely at issue." United States v. Shumway, 199 F.3d 1093, 1103 (9th Cir.1999). Moreover, "[t]he possibility that other inferences could be drawn that would provide an alternate explanation for the [defendant's] [*6]  actions does not entitle them to summary judgment." Mendocino Environmental Center v. Mendocino County, 192 F.3d 1283, 1303 (9th Cir.1999). "The mere existence of a scintilla of evidence in support of the plaintiff's position will be insufficient; there must be evidence on which a reasonable jury could reasonably find for plaintiff." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, 477 U.S. 242, 252, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). The evidence of the nonmovant is to be believed, and all justifiable inferences are to be drawn in his favor. Id. at 248; Tokio Marine & Fire Ins. Co., Ltd. v. Kaisha, 25 F. Supp. 2d 1071, 1076-1077 (C.D. Cal. 1997). With these standards firmly in mind, the Magistrate Judge turns to the merits of Plaintiff's and Defendant's cross-claims.
II. Introduction
The EEOC alleges that Gerald Nez was a qualified disabled person under 42 U.S.C. § 12102(1) and that Kalil has violated Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) by employing a discriminatory job qualification standard and terminating the employment of Nez because he was an insulin dependant diabetic.
To qualify for relief under the ADA, the EEOC must show that Nez: (1) is a disabled person within the meaning of the statute; (2) is qualified, with or without reasonable accommodation, to perform the essential functions of the job held; and (3) suffered an adverse employment action because of his disability. Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 §2 et seq, 42 U.S.C.A. § 12101 et seq.
The EEOC has requested that the court find as a matter [*7]  of law that: (1) Gerald Nez was a qualified person with a disability at all relevant times; (2) Defendant terminated Nez purely because he failed a Department of Transportation medical examination; and (3) Defendant's affirmative defenses are factually and legally insufficient.
Kalil Bottling Company moves for summary judgment on the grounds that the employee, Gerald Nez, was not disabled as defined under the American with Disabilities Act (ADA) or, alternatively, for partial summary judgment on the issue of intentionality and asserts that any alleged discrimination was not intentional "disparate treatment" discrimination, but was "disparate impact" discrimination as the result of a policy that tends to screen out qualified individuals with disabilities.
III. Genuine issues of material fact exist as to whether Gerald Nez was a qualified person with a disability at all relevant times.

A. Nez was qualified for the position in question.
Nez was qualified for the position of merchandiser. The ADA defines a "qualified" individual as being an individual who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds or [*8]  desires. 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). Essential functions mean the fundamental job duties of the employment position and do not include the marginal functions of the position. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(1). In addition the individual must meet "the requisite skill, experience, education and other job-related requirements of the position." Bates v. United Parcel Service, 511 F.3d 974, 990 (9th Cir. 2007) (en banc).
The statute does not require that a person meet each of an employer's established 'qualification standards,' however, to show that he is "qualified." And, indeed, it would make little sense to require an ADA plaintiff to show that he meets a qualification standard that he undisputedly cannot meet because of his disability and that forms the very basis of his discrimination challenge."
Id. Although the plaintiff bears the ultimate burden of persuading the fact finder that he can perform the job's essential functions, if the "employer disputes the plaintiff's claim that he can perform the essential functions, he must put forth evidence establishing those functions. Id. (quoting EEOC v. Wal-Mart, 477 F.3d 561, 568 (8th Cir.2007)).
In Rohr v. Salt River Agric. Improvement & Power Dist., 555 F.3d 850, 862 (9th Cir. 2009), the Ninth Circuit found that if an employer used a qualification standard that tended to screen out an individual with a disability, the employer bears the burden of proving that the challenged standard is "job-related" [*9]  and "consistent with business necessity." "[A]n employer may not turn every condition of employment which it elects to adopt into a job function, let alone an essential job function, merely by including it in a job description.." Echazabal v. Chevron USA, Inc., 226 F.3d 1063, 1071 (9th Cir.2000).
As in Rohr, "this is not a case where an employer merely implemented the medical certification program required by a federal agency," Rohr, 555 F.3d at 863. The DOT physical is required by the DOT for a commercial driver's license for individuals wishing to drive vehicles in excess of 10,000 lbs or which are used to transport hazardous materials or more than 15 passengers. 49 C.F.R. § 350.105. Merchandisers with Kalil drive either their own vehicles or small Chevy Colorado pick-ups owned by Kalil which weigh less than 10,000 lbs. (PSOF ¶ 3). Kalil was not mandated by either the United States Department of Transportation or the Arizona Department of Transportation to adopt the DOT standards or to require Nez to pass a physical exam before he could be employed as a merchandiser. (PSOF ¶ 8). Kalil did not present any evidence which indicated that passing the DOT physical was essential to the position of merchandiser. The "Job Analysis" for the merchandiser position presented as evidence by Kalil lists [*10]  the "specific experience or skills required" as: drive own vehicle, able to lift 0-75 pounds and able to count cases; for licenses or certification required: drivers license, vehicle insurance, DOT physical-pass; and under "essential job functions": safe driving, stock shelves, keeping back stock right, and build displays. (Doc. 65, Ex. F).
Kalil does not dispute that Nez was qualified for the position of merchandiser except for his inability to pass the DOT physical. The DOT physical was not required by any federal, state or local statute and was voluntarily adopted by Kalil. The ability to pass the DOT physical is not an essential requirement of the merchandiser position. Since Nez met the essential requirements of the merchandiser position, he was a qualified individual under the ADA.

B. An issue of fact exists as to whether Nez was disabled as defined by the ADA.
In order to be disabled under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), the EEOC must show that, at the time of the adverse employment action, Nez suffered from a physical impairment that substantially limited him in one or more major life activities. 42 U.S.C.A. § 12102(1)1.
1. Nez suffered from a physical impairment.
There is no dispute that Nez's suffered from a physical impairment. Nez was an insulin-dependent diabetic at the time of his termination by Kalil. EEOC regulations define "physical impairment" as any condition affecting one or more of the following body systems: neurological, musculoskeletal, respiratory, cardiovascular, or endocrine. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2 Diabetes is a physical impairment because it affects the digestive, [*13]  hemic and endocrine systems. Rohr, 555 F.3d at 858. In Fraser v. Goodale, 342 F.3d 1032 (9th Cir. 2003), the court held that diabetes is a "physical impairment" under the ADA. In addition, Nez suffered from congestive heart disease and diabetic neuropathy.
2. Genuine issues of material fact exists as to whether Nez was substantially limited in a major life activity.
The EEOC alleges that Nez was substantially limited in the major life activities of eating, walking, breathing and insulin production. The EEOC has produced medical records, expert testimony and testimony from Nez's wife to establish the limitations that Nez suffered in the major life activities of eating, walking, breathing .and insulin production.
a. Major Life Activities
Under 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(i), major life activities are defined as "functions such as caring for oneself, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, and working." Walking and breathing are major life activities as a matter of law. In Fraser, 342 F.3d at 1040, the Ninth Circuit held that eating could be a major life activity and, specifically, that the dietary control necessitated by the diabetic condition affects the major life activity of eating. See also Rohr, 555 F.3d at 859.
The EEOC's contention that secreting insulin is a major life activity is [*14]  supported by Herman v Kvaerner of Philadelphia Shipyard, Inc., 461 F. Supp. 2d 332, 336 (E.D. Pa. 2006), where it was suggested that the secretion of insulin sufficient to process blood glucose was a major life activity as a matter of law. In Sutton v. United Air Lines, Inc., 527 U.S. 471, 483, 119 S. Ct. 2139, 144 L. Ed. 2d 450 (1999), however, the Supreme Court rejected a hypothetical premise wherein all diabetics are per se disabled, adding that those diabetics whose diabetes does not impair their daily activities should not be considered disabled under the ADA. Since all diabetics, by definition, lack sufficient insulin to process blood glucose, and are therefore substantially limited in terms of insulin production, it follows from this that the secretion of insulin can not be a major life activity as a matter of law.
b. Substantially Limited
Substantially limited means:
(I) Unable to perform a major life activity that the average person in the general population can perform; or
(ii) Significantly restricted as to the condition manner or duration under which an individual can perform a particular major life activity as compared to the condition, manner or duration under which the average person in the general population can perform the same major life activity.
29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j). In deciding whether Nez's impairment is substantially limiting we must consider the nature and severity [*15]  of the impairment, the duration or expected duration of the impairment as well as the permanent or long term impact of the impairment. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2. In addition, the effect of mitigating measures must be considered when determining whether an individual is disabled. "[I]f a person is taking measures to correct for, or mitigate, a physical or mental impairment, the effects of those measures-both positive and negative-must be taken into account when judging whether that person is 'substantially limited' in a major life activity and thus "disabled" under the Act." Sutton, 527 U.S. at 482.
The case law of the United States Supreme Court and the Ninth Circuit establishes that the determination of whether someone is disabled is a highly fact-intensive and individualized inquiry. See Sutton, supra, and Rohr, supra.
The definition of disability requires that disabilities be evaluated "with respect to an individual" and be determined based on whether an impairment substantially limits the "major life activities of such individual." 42 U.S.C.§ 12102(2). Thus, whether a person has a disability under the ADA is an individualized inquiry. Id. at 483. "The determination of whether an individual has a disability is not necessarily based on the name or diagnosis of the impairment the person [*16]  has, but rather on the effect of that impairment on the life of the individual." 29 C.F.R. pt. 1630, App.§ 1630.2(j). Determining the severity of impairment necessary to constitute a disability is a fact intensive inquiry and should be left to the trier of fact.
Although the EEOC has presented evidence that Nez was limited in the major life activities of breathing, walking, and eating, Kalil has produced testimony and medical records which argue that Nez was not limited beyond the limitations experienced by many people in the population. A genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether Gerald Nez was substantially limited in a major life activity.
IV. Gerald Nez was terminated because he failed to pass the DOT physical.
The EEOC asserts that Nez was terminated from his job as a merchandiser when he failed to pass the DOT physical which Kalil mandated for all employees whose job description included driving. Kalil rebuts this assertion and claims that when he failed the DOT physical Nez was offered a temporary job in their warehouse with the intention that he would retake the DOT exam in 30 days and pass it. Kalil contends that Nez walked off the warehouse job after a few days and was terminated due to "no call/no [*17]  show."
The "Claimant Quality Control Wage Verification" form that Kalil submitted to the Arizona Department of Economic Security in response to Nez's claim for unemployment benefits stated that "the reason for separation" was "unable to pass required physical." (PSOF 12, Ex. 15). According to the EEOC, the Internal Status Change form used by Kalil states that the reason for termination is: "Employee did not pass the required DOT physical." (PSOF 75). (This form is not included in the documents filed by the EEOC.) In answers to interrogatories, Kalil admitted that Nez was terminated for failure to pass the DOT physical exam. (Doc. 66-2, Ex. 1, ¶ 16).
Kalil contends that Nez was removed from his position as a merchandiser on January 26, 2005 and given a temporary job in the warehouse. Kalil presented time sheets showing that Nez was employed through January 31, 2005. The time sheets do not indicate that Nez was working in the warehouse. The employment position indicated on the time sheets is that of 'merchandiser.' Kalil admits that the change of status form dated February 1, 2005 indicates the separation date was February 1, 2005 and that the reason for the termination was "employee did [*18]  not pass required physical." The only evidence that Kalil presented that supports its contention that Nez was offered a temporary position in the warehouse is the deposition of Bob Nagore who contends that he offered Nez a temporary job in the warehouse beginning January 27, 2005. Other than Nagore's deposition, Kalil presented no evidence to prove that Nez was terminated for any reason other than failure to pass the DOT physical.
Insulin dependant diabetes is an absolute disqualification from passing the DOT physical exam. 49 C.F.R. §391.41(b)(3). A person is physically qualified to drive a commercial motor vehicle if that person "has no established medical history or clinical diagnosis of diabetes mellitus currently requiring insulin for control." Id. "[T]he FMCSA [Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration] has consistently held that a diabetic who uses insulin for control does not meet the minimum physical requirements of the FMCSRs. [Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations]. " Id.
Gerald Nez could not pass the DOT exam so long as he was an insulin using diabetic. Kalil terminated Nez from his job as a merchandiser due to his failure to pass the DOT physical exam. Kalil may or may not have offered Nez [*19]  a temporary position in the warehouse, but, if Nez's ability to retain a permanent position with Kalil, was dependant on passing the DOT physical, there was no possibility of Nez retaining his employment with Kalil.
Kalil has failed to produce evidence which would lead a reasonable finder of fact to believe that Nez was terminated for any reason other than failing to pass the DOT physical exam.
V. Not all of the defendant's affirmative defenses are factually and legally insufficient.
A. Kalil's affirmative defenses of laches, waiver and estoppel, statute of limitations and failure to state a claim on which relief can be granted are factually insufficient.
There is no factual evidence in the record to support Kalil's affirmative defenses of laches, waiver and estoppel, statute of limitations, and failure to state a claim on which relief can be granted.
B. Kalil has not waived the affirmative defenses of direct threat and business necessity by failing to include them in its Answer.
Although Kalil did not raise the affirmative defenses of direct threat and business necessity in its answer, the EEOC was not prejudiced by this failure because the defenses were raised in the Case Management Plan [*20]  and were clearly indicated as defenses which would be raised to the EEOC's allegations discrimination.
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 8(c) requires parties to raise every affirmative defense in the first responsive pleading. Defenses not so raised are deemed waived. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 8(c); Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b); Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(g). The Ninth Circuit has liberalized the requirement that defendants must raise affirmative defenses in their initial pleadings. See Magana v. N. Mariana Islands, 107 F.3d 1436, 1446 (9th Cir. 1997); Tokio Marine, 25 F. Supp. 2d at 1077. The determination of whether a defense has been waived is left to the discretion of the trial court. In re Kleinoeder, 54 B.R. 33, 35 (B.R.N.D. Ohio 1985). In determining whether a failure to raise a defense in the answer should constitute a waiver, the court considers: 1) the obviousness of the defense's availability, 2) the stage of the proceeding at which the defense is raised, 3) the time which has elapsed between the filing of the answer and the raising of the defense, 4) the amount of time and effort expended by the plaintiff in the case at the time the defense is raised, and 5) the prejudice resulting to the plaintiff which would result from allowing the defense to be asserted. In re Santos, 112 B.R. 1001, 1008 (9th Cir. BAP 1990).
Here the defenses were raised in the Case Management Plan and are specifically mentioned in 42 U.S.C.A. § 12112(b)(6) as possible defenses to an allegation of discrimination. In addition, the EEOC has raised [*21]  objections to these defenses in its motion for summary judgment, so is clearly aware and prepared to rebut these defenses. Since no prejudice to the EEOC will arise in permitting these affirmative defenses of business necessity and direct threat, the defendants should be allowed to plead these defenses.
1. Business Necessity
Genuine issues of fact exist as to whether Kalil's adoption of DOT physical examination for all drivers was motivated and justified by business necessity. An employer can defend against a disability discrimination claim under the ADA by relying on a qualification standard that "is shown to be job-related for the position in question and is consistent with business necessity." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(6). Under 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(6), the employer has the burden of proving that its discriminatory qualification standards satisfy the ADA's business necessity defense. Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, § 102(b)(6); § 12112(b)(6).
[W]hen an employer asserts a blanket safety-based qualification standard-beyond the essential job function-that is not mandated by law and that qualification standard screens out or tends to screen out an individual with a disability, the employer-not the employee-bears the burden of showing that the higher [*22]  qualification standard is job-related and consistent with business necessity, and that performance cannot be achieved through reasonable accommodation.
Bates, 511 F.3d at 992-993 (citing 42 U.S.C. § 12113(a)); see also Rohr, 555 F.3d at 862 (9th Cir. 2009). The "business necessity" standard is quite high, and "is not [to be] confused with mere expediency." Cripe v. City of San Jose, 261 F.3d 877, 890 (9th Cir. 2001) (citing Bentivegna v. United States Dep't of Labor, 694 F.2d 619, 621-22 (9th Cir.1982)). Furthermore, the employer must demonstrate that the qualification standard is necessary and related to "the specific skills and physical requirements of the sought-after position." Id. (citing Belk v. Sw. Bell Tel. Co., 194 F.3d 946, 951 (8th Cir.1999)).
The EEOC alleges that the DOT physical exam required by Kalil for the merchandiser position is not justified by business necessity since the test was designed by the DOT specifically for those driving vehicles in excess of 10,000 pounds or carrying more than 15 passengers or hazardous materials, while the merchandisers at Kalil drove small pick-up trucks of approximately 4000 pounds. Kalil defends its use of the DOT test as part of an overall plan instituted over 30 years ago to reduce accident and insurance premiums among its drivers. Kalil points to the reduction in accidents and insurance premiums which occurred after the adoption of this plan as justification for the business necessity of the DOT physical exam. [*23] 
Genuine issues of fact exist on the issue of whether the adoption of the DOT physical is justified by business necessity.
2. Direct Threat
Kalil has failed to present sufficient evidence to raise a question of fact as to whether Gerald Nez presented a direct threat to the safety of those around him. Under the ADA, the term direct threat means a significant risk to the health or safety of others that cannot be eliminated by reasonable accommodations. 42 U.S.C. § 12111(3). The factors to be considered when determining whether an individual poses a direct threat include:
(1) the duration of the risk;
(2) the nature and severity of the potential harm
(3) the likelihood that the potential harm will occur; and
(4) the imminence of the potential harm.
Echazabal, 336 F.3d at 1027-28. Before excluding an individual from employment as a direct threat, an employer must demonstrate that is has made an individualized assessment of the employee's ability to perform the essential functions of the job based on a reasonable medical judgment that relies on the most current medical knowledge and or the best available objective evidence. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(r). Because it is an affirmative defense, the burden of establishing a direct threat lies with the employer. Echazabal, 336 F.3d at 1027; Hutton v. Elf Atochem N. Am. Inc., 273 F.3d 884, 893 (9th Cir.2001); Nunes v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 164 F.3d 1243, 1247 (9th Cir.1999).
The risk must [*24]  be assessed based on the "objective, scientific information." Bragdon v. Abbott, 524 U.S. 624, 629, 118 S. Ct. 2196, 141 L. Ed. 2d 540 (1998). A subjective belief in the existence of a risk, even one made in good faith, will not shield the decisionmaker from liability. Id. In addition, an employer must gather "substantial information" about an employee's work history and medical status. Echazabal, 336 F.3d at 1028 (citing Nunes, 164 F.3d at 1248). The decision must be based upon "particularized facts using the best available objective evidence as required by the regulations." Id. (citing Lowe v. Ala. Power Co., 244 F.3d 1305, 1309 (11th Cir.2001); McGregor v. Nat'l R.R. Passenger Corp., 187 F.3d 1113, 1116 (9th Cir.1999)). Individualized risk assessment also requires consideration of relevant information about an employee's past work history. Echazabal, 336 F.3d at 1032; see Nunes, 164 F.3d at 1248; see also Mantolete v. Bolger, 767 F.2d 1416, 1423 (9th Cir.1985) (holding that, in assessing elevated risk to an employee under the Rehabilitation Act, the employer must "gather [and assess] all relevant information regarding the applicant's work history and medical history"); Anderson v. Little League Baseball, Inc., 794 F. Supp. 342, 345 (D. Ariz. 1992) (giving "great weight" to fact of disabled plaintiff's three years of service without incident in rejecting employer's direct threat defense).
Nez had a clean driving record and had performed his job safely and without incident for 5 months. Kalil performed no assessment of Nez's fitness for the merchandiser position other than the DOT physical exam. Kalil relied solely on the [*25]  report of the physical exam with no further investigation or individual assessment regarding the risk that Gerald Nez posed due to his diabetes. The information proffered by Kalil regarding Nez's non-compliance and subsequent medical history was obtained during discovery and after the fact of Nez's dismissal. It formed no part of the decision to dismiss Nez.
In addition, Kalil failed to provide Nez with a reasonable accommodation. Kalil did not offer Nez alternative, permanent job in a situation where he would not have posed a risk, such as in the warehouse.
Kalil has not presented facts sufficient to prove that Mr. Nez provided a threat to the safety of others, that they conducted an individualized assessment or that they provided a reasonable accommodation.
VI. Kalil is not entitled to summary judgment on the issue of intentionality.
Although Kalil did not show 'malice' or 'reckless indifference' in their allegedly discriminatory treatment of Gerald Nez, failure to act in good-faith to provide a reasonable accommodation for Nez's disability is a form of intentional discrimination.
The ADA defines "discriminate" as:
using qualification standards, employment tests of other selection criteria [*26]  that screen out or tend to screen out an individual with a disability...unless the standard, test or other selection criteria ...is shown to be job-related for the position in question and consistent with business necessity.
42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(6). The Civil Rights Act of 1991 established a three-tiered system of remedies for discriminatory conduct. 42 U.S.C. § 1981a(b)(1); Kolstad v. Am. Dental Ass'n, 527 U.S. 526, 547-548, 119 S. Ct. 2118, 144 L. Ed. 2d 494 (1999). Equitable remedies are available for disparate impact violations; compensatory damages for intentional disparate treatment; and punitive damages for intentional discrimination "with malice or with reckless indifference to the federally protected rights of an aggrieved individual." 42 U.S.C. § 1981a(b)(1).
The Civil Rights Act of 1991 limits compensatory and punitive damage awards to instances of "intentional discrimination" - that is, cases that do not rely on the "disparate impact" theory of discrimination. Id.; Kolstad, 527 U.S. at 534. Section 1981a(b)(1) further qualifies the availability of punitive awards: it provides that a court may award punitive damages to an ADA plaintiff upon proof that the defendant engaged in "a discriminatory practice or discriminatory practices with malice or reckless indifference to the federally protected rights of an aggrieved individual." Id. The "malice" and "reckless indifference" required [*27]  to support an award of punitive damages for violations of Title VII, refer not to egregiousness of the employer's conduct, but rather to employer's knowledge that it may be acting in violation of federal law. Civil Rights Act of 1964, §§ 701 et seq.; 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000e et seq.; 42 U.S.C. § 1981a(b)(1); Jones v. Rent-A-Center, Inc., 240 F. Supp. 2d 1167 (D. Kan. 2002). "Thus, the proper question is whether the employer engaged in the conduct alleged with the 'knowledge that it may be acting in violation of federal law.'" Kolstad, 527 U.S. at 535. "[A]n employer must at least discriminate in the face of a perceived risk that its action will violate federal law to be liable in punitive damages." Id. at 536. To be entitled to punitive damages the EEOC must prove that Kalil acted with knowledge that it might be acting in violation of federal law.
The Civil Rights Act of 1991 authorizes claims for compensatory damages, when the alleged discrimination is due to either the intentional violation of the ADA or an intentional failure to provide a reasonable accommodation to disability as required by the ADA. 42 U.S.C. § 1981a(a)(2). However, an employer has a complete defense to compensatory damages claims if it can demonstrate that it made good-faith efforts, in consultation with the claimant after having been informed that accommodation was needed, to make a reasonable accommodation [*28]  that would provide an equally effective opportunity without causing an undue hardship on the operation of the business. 42 U.S.C. § 1981a(a)(3). An employer does not have to accede to every accommodation demanded by an employee in order to have a valid good-faith defense to an ADA compensatory damages claim. 42 U.S.C. § 1981a(b)(1).
"Disparate-impact" claims, under the ADA, involve employment practices that are facially neutral in their treatment of different groups, but that in fact fall more harshly on one group than another and cannot be justified by business necessity. Raytheon Co. v. Hernandez, 540 U.S. 44, 124 S. Ct. 513, 157 L. Ed. 2d 357 (2003) on remand 362 F.3d 564; 42 U.S.C. § 12112. Kalil's policy of requiring all drivers to pass the DOT physical was facially neutral and applied across the board. Although drivers can fail the DOT physical for a multitude of reasons, insulin-dependant diabetes is an absolute bar to passing the test.
While the DOT test used by Kalil seems to create simply a disparate impact, the failure of Kalil to work with Nez to create a reasonable accommodation brings the allegedly discriminatory treatment into the realm of intentional discrimination. According to Kalil's own testimony, the only accommodation which Kalil offered to Nez was a temporary position in the warehouse contingent on his passing the [*29]  DOT physical in 30 days. There is no record of any attempt by Kalil to make reasonable, permanent accommodations to Nez's medical condition. However, there is also no evidence in the record that Nez requested an accommodation from Kalil. A genuine issue of fact exists as to whether Kalil made a good-faith effort to provide Nez with a reasonable accommodation.
VII. Conclusion
Material issues of fact exist and summary judgment should be denied on the issue of whether Gerald Nez was disabled as defined by the ADA, on the issue of intentionality, and on the Defendant's affirmative defense of business necessity. Partial Summary Judgment should be granted on the issue that Gerald Nez was terminated by Kalil for failing the DOT physical and lack of factual basis to the defendant's affirmative defense of direct threat.
Accordingly,
IT IS ORDERED Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment (Doc. No. 67) is GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART as follows:
(1) Summary Judgment is DENIED on the issue of whether Gerald Nez was a qualified person with a disability at all relevant times
(2) Summary Judgment is DENIED on the issue of whether Defendant's affirmative defenses are factually and legally insufficient. [*30] 
(3) Summary Judgment is GRANTED on the issue of whether Nez was terminated purely because he failed a Department of Transportation medical examination.
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment and/or Motion for Partial Summary Judgment (Doc. No. 64) is DENIED.
DATED this 21st day of September, 2009.
/s/ Bernardo P. Velasco
Bernardo P. Velasco
United States Magistrate Judge


End of Document

