EEOC v. Tyson Foods, Inc.
United States District Court for the Western District of Missouri, Central Division
May 3, 2011, Decided; May 3, 2011, Filed
Case No. 2:10-CV-04072-NKL

Reporter
2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 169754 *
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION, Plaintiff, v. TYSON FOODS, INC., Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Eeoc, Plaintiff: Melvin D Kennedy, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, St Louis, MO USA; Dayna F Deck, Eeoc, Kansas City, KS USA; Anne E Gusewelle, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Gateway Tower II, Kansas City, KS USA.
For Tyson Foods, Inc, Defendant: Anthony B Byergo, Nicholas J Walker, Ogletree, Deakins, Nash, Smoak & Stewart, PC-KC, Kansas City, MO USA.
Judges: NANETTE K. LAUGHREY, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: NANETTE K. LAUGHREY
Opinion



ORDER
Before the Court is the Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. # 78] filed by Defendant Tyson Foods, Inc. ("Tyson"). For the following reasons, the Court denies the motion.

I. Background1

A. Relevant Facts
Tyson is a corporation that produces chicken, beef, and pork products in facilities throughout the United States. Mark White is a former employee of Tyson's Sedalia, Missouri facility. The EEOC is the federal agency charged with the enforcement of Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") and is authorized to bring this action by Section 107(a) of the ADA, 42 U.S.C. § 12117(a).

1. White's Previous Employment with Tyson
White applied for a job as a maintenance worker in 1995. At the time of this application, White checked a box on the form that said, "Seizures/Epilepsy." White was hired [*2]  at Tyson in 1995, despite having made Tyson aware of his epileptic condition, and without any inquiry regarding whether his seizures were under control. White was fired in 1996 for testing positive for drugs.
White reapplied for a job as a maintenance worker in 1997. At the time of this application, White again checked a box on the form that said, "Seizures/Epilepsy." White was re-hired in 1997, despite having made Tyson aware of his epileptic condition, and without any inquiry regarding whether his seizures were under control. White quit his maintenance position with Tyson in 2000 to take a position with another company.
White reapplied for a job as a maintenance worker in October 2002. White was rehired despite the fact that some at Tyson knew he had epilepsy.
In December 2003, White passed out while working for Tyson. Nurse Pamela Johnson was called to the area where he was passed out. At the time of the incident, Johnson recorded the following: "He uses Dilantin for seizure disorder but feels he had a seizure leading to very short period of unconsciousness." [Doc. # 79, Ex. F.] The note further stated that White's supervisor would find a ride home for him and White was to bring a [*3]  medical release in order to return to work. Id. On December 9, 2003, White brought Tyson a note from his physician indicating that he could return to full duty without any restrictions. White's physician indicated that White had merely fainted. After receiving the physician's note, Tyson allowed White to go back to work. White quit his maintenance position with Tyson in 2005.

2. Tyson's New Post-Offer Health Assessment Policy
In 2006, Tyson adopted a new Post-Offer Health Assessment Policy. Pursuant to the policy, after extending an offer to an applicant, Tyson sends certain applicants to a physician for a medical examination to determine whether they can safely perform the essential functions of their prospective positions. Epilepsy is one of a few conditions that warrants a physician's referral and exam. In Sedalia, independent practitioners certified in occupational medicine assess the ability of potential employees with various medical conditions or limitations to work at Tyson.

3. White's 2008 Application
In early 2008, Randy Keith, Maintenance Manager at Tyson's Sedalia facility, called White and asked him to apply for an opening in the maintenance department. At the time of the [*4]  call, White had not applied for a job with Tyson. At the time Keith made this call, Tyson was aware that White had epilepsy, a seizure disorder. White applied only for the maintenance position. After speaking with Keith, White interviewed with Kenny Graham, Maintenance Superintendent, who offered White the position.
Following the offer of employment, White was sent to the nursing office to initiate the post-offer health assessment. White checked a box on the form that said "Seizures/Epilepsy." As before, the check-box did not give him the option of explaining his seizure activity, the type of seizures, whether the seizures were under control, or the dates of any seizure activity. The nurse never told White his epilepsy or seizures disqualified him from the maintenance position. Instead, the nurse indicated that everything was good and that she believed Mr. White had the job.
On May 15, 2008, White was sent to meet with Dr. Robert Thomas — the independent physician in the medical group that Tyson used in Sedalia for post-offer medical examinations. Dr. Thomas is a physician certified in occupational medicine. At the examination, Dr. Thomas learned that White had a history of seizures [*5]  and was still on seizure medication.
Dr. Thomas believed that seizure precautions were necessary since White was still taking seizure medication and could still have a seizure resulting in serious injury or death. Dr. Thomas believed that it was unsafe for White to work at heights of more than six feet off the ground and around hazardous environments — including high voltage equipment, burn hazards, and robotics. Dr. Thomas had toured the Sedalia plant, reviewed Tyson's job safety analysis for maintenance, evaluated other maintenance personnel, and was aware of the job requirements of those employed in the maintenance position.
White has acknowledged that the maintenance position regularly required him to climb ladders in excess of six feet and work around high voltage electrical and robotic equipment. He has also acknowledged that seizures cause him to lose complete consciousness, though he also stated that he had not experienced a seizure in 14 years. And while White confirmed that if he were to have a seizure working over six feet off the ground he could fall and injure himself, it is also undisputed that maintenance workers are required to use a harness if working at heights above [*6]  six feet. Finally, White has acknowledged that if he were to have a seizure while working on electrical equipment or robotics it could cause him serous injury.
Dr. Thomas told White that he was not going to approve him to work in the maintenance position. Following his examination of White, Dr. Thomas provided Tyson with a note stating:
As part of a post-offer preemployment evaluation, the nurses noted that he had a past medical history of having had seizures. They also had a history on record at the plant for having had a seizure episode while at the plant. He thought it was just a [fainting] episode while he was unconscious, but the nurses have it recorded as a seizure activity. The employee is on medication for the seizures and states he is very well controlled for them. He has also had jobs in maintenance at Tyson and other places and has even worked in carpentry doing roof work.
We cannot determine the status of his seizure activity and it is prudent that he be placed on seizure precautions while working with Tyson of Sedalia. Since he has applied for a job within the maintenance section, I reviewed the case with the nursing staff and the job description has him in the presence of [*7]  hazards which are not compatible with the standard seizure precautions. At this time, he is not qualified to perform the essential job functions at Tyson of Sedalia, having reviewed the job description within the maintenance section.
[Doc. # 79, Ex. N.]
Based on Dr. Thomas's determination that White could not safely perform the essential job functions of the maintenance position, Tyson informed White that it could not hire him in that position. The parties dispute the extent to which White and his wife attempted to send Dr. Thomas his personal medical records.
Although Dr. Thomas would not approve White for the maintenance position, Human Resource Manager Monica Reynolds and Nursing Manager Tamara Luchini told White that Tyson would send Dr. Thomas other open positions in the facility for his consideration. White did not apply for any other position at Tyson. However, White's application for the maintenance position resulted in his being automatically considered for twelve other open positions following Dr. Thomas's imposition of restrictions. After receiving the list of open positions, Tyson had Dr. Thomas come to the plant to watch what the individuals employed in these positions did [*8]  and whether White could safely perform the essential functions of the positions.
On September 25, 2008, following his visit to the plant to review the open positions, Dr. Thomas provided Tyson with a note stating: "I reviewed the jobs listed in the sheet provided by HR and upon reviewing these jobs previously with the safety department, it was found that these jobs are outside the limits of the recommendations for seizure precautions." [Doc. # 79, Ex. X.] In his deposition testimony, Dr. Thomas has indicated that there were jobs available that White would have been able to perform, except for the rotation requirement. Dr. Thomas also testified that one of the reasons for the requirement to rotate jobs is to avoid the development of severe carpal tunnel. After receiving the September 2008 note from Dr. Thomas, Tyson did not offer White any of these other positions.
Dr. Daniel Mattson has been designated as an expert by the EEOC. Dr. Mattson is an expert in neurology, specializing in diagnosis and treatment of epilepsy. Dr. Mattson is not an expert in occupational health, and he did not visit Tyson's facility or talk with anyone at Tyson regarding the work environment. In the past, Dr. [*9]  Mattson has placed seizure patients on height restrictions and restrictions regarding working around moving machinery or high voltage equipment. Dr. Mattson did not meet with White or White's physician. However, Dr. Mattson did review White's medical records.
Dr. Mattson provided an opinion to the EEOC that White was not restricted in any way and did not require any accommodations for the maintenance position. He reported that White's seizures were extremely well controlled. Nevertheless, Dr. Mattson would have expected Tyson to follow Dr. Thomas's instructions not to hire White.

B. Procedural History
On July 8, 2008, White filed a charge of discrimination with the EEOC which stated:
I applied for a position that was vacant in the maintenance department on or about May 10, 2008. I was sent for a health assessment on May 15, 2008, where the doctor asked me about five questions and then made some general assumptions about my ability to perform the duties of the job I was being considered for. As a result of his general assumptions about my disability, he placed me on restrictions that disqualified me for the position.
I believe that I have been discriminated against in violation of the Americans [*10]  with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended, by being denied employment because I have a record of disability and because I was regarded as being disabled.
[Doc. # 79, Ex. R.] White never filed another charge of discrimination after July 8, 2008.
On April 6, 2010, the EEOC filed this action against Tyson. The EEOC's Complaint asserts: "On or about May 19, 2008, Defendant Employer engaged in unlawful employment practice at its Sedalia, Missouri facilities, in violation of Section 102(b)(1) of Title I of the ADA, 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(1) by refusing to hire Mark White because of his disability." [Doc. # 1 at ¶ 8.] The EEOC prays for injunctive relief and damages.

II. Discussion
Summary judgment is proper "if the pleadings, the discovery and disclosure materials on file, and any affidavits show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). The moving party "bears the initial responsibility of informing the district court of the basis for its motion" and must identify "those portions of [the record] which it believes demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). If the moving party satisfies its burden, Rule 56(e) requires the non-moving party to respond [*11]  by submitting evidentiary materials that designate "specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 587, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986). In determining whether summary judgment is appropriate, a district court must look at the record and any inferences to be drawn from it in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). Summary judgment is not proper if the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the non-moving party. Id. at 248.
On this Motion for Summary Judgment, Tyson argues that the EEOC has failed to establish a prima facie case of discrimination and to show that Tyson's reliance on Dr. Thomas's medical opinion was a pretext. In order to establish a prima facie disability discrimination claim, the EEOC must prove that White:
(1) had a disability within the meaning of the ADA; (2) was qualified, with or without a reasonable accommodation, to perform the essential job functions of the position in question; and (3) suffered an adverse employment action because of his disability.
Lors v. Dean, 595 F.3d 831, 834 (8th Cir. 2010) (quoting McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 804, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973)). After a prima facie case of disability discrimination is established, the burden shifts to the employer to articulate some legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the employer's actions.  [*12] Id. If the employer articulates such a reason, the burden returns to the employee to show the employer's justification is a pretext. Id.

A. Whether White had a Disability under the ADA
The ADA defines the term "disability" as:
(A) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such individual;
(B) a record of such an impairment; or
(C) being regarded as having such an impairment.
42 U.S.C. § 12102(2). The EEOC does not claim that White is covered by the actual disability prong. Rather, the EEOC claims that Tyson unlawfully refused to hire White because of his record of epilepsy, and that Tyson regarded him as disabled.
The EEOC alleges that when White suffered seizures in the past — before they became controlled by Dilantin — they impaired major life activities such as walking, speaking, and seeing. In Shaver v. Independent Stave Company, the Eighth Circuit held that the plaintiff's epilepsy — before he underwent an operation replacing part of his brain with a metal plate — impaired major life activities such as speaking, walking, or seeing. 350 F.3d 716, 719, 721 (8th Cir. 2003). "He thus has a record of impairment." Id. Shaver cited Otting v. J.C. Penny, where the Eighth Circuit concluded that [*13]  an employee with epilepsy, which was not completely controlled by medication, was substantially impaired in the major life activities of speaking, walking, and seeing. 223 F.3d 704, 710-11 (8th Cir. 2000). The case that Tyson relies upon, Taylor v. Nimock's Oil Company, is distinguishable because the plaintiff's heart attack there was a temporary condition. 214 F.3d 957, 961 (8th Cir. 2000).
Here, White described his seizures as beginning with splitting headaches followed by a complete loss of consciousness. Mary White described watching her husband collapse, convulse and lose consciousness for several minutes during his seizures. After reviewing White's medical records, Dr. Mattson concluded that White "carries a longstanding history of seizure disorder." [Doc. # 81, Ex. 15.]
Thus, the Court cannot conclude as a matter of law that White had no record of a physical impairment that substantially limited one or more major life activity. For this reason alone, the EEOC has established a prima facie case that White fell within the ADA's definition of "disability." Therefore, at this stage the Court need not determine whether Tyson regarded White as having such an impairment.

B. Whether White was Qualified for the Maintenance Position
Defendant Tyson does not [*14]  argue that White lacked the skills to perform the maintenance job for which he applied. White had performed the essential functions of the maintenance job in the past, and Tyson twice rehired him for the position in 1997 and 2002. In May 2008, two of Tyson's maintenance managers interviewed White and recommended him for the maintenance position.
However, Tyson argues that White posed a direct threat to himself, and thus was not qualified for the maintenance position under EEOC regulations interpreting the ADA. In arguing that White posed a direct threat to himself, Tyson relies on Chevron USA, Inc. v. Echazabal, 536 U.S. 73, 122 S. Ct. 2045, 153 L. Ed. 2d 82 (2002). There, while upholding the EEOC regulation, Justice Souter explained its relationship to the ADA:
[T]he Act creates an affirmative defense for action under a qualification standard "shown to be job-related for the position in question and . . . consistent with business necessity." Such a standard may include "a requirement that an individual shall not pose a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals in the workplace," § 12113(b), if the individual cannot perform the job safely with reasonable accommodation, § 12113(a). By regulation, the EEOC carries the defense one step further, in allowing an employer to screen [*15]  out a potential worker with a disability not only for risks that he would pose to others in the workplace but for risks on the job to his own health or safety as well . . . .
536 U.S. at 78.
That EEOC regulation provides:
Direct Threat means a significant risk of substantial harm to the health or safety of the individual or others that cannot be eliminated or reduced by reasonable accommodation. The determination that an individual poses a "direct threat" shall be based on an individualized assessment of the individual's present ability to safely perform the essential functions of the job. This assessment shall be based on a reasonable medical judgment that relies on the most current medical knowledge and/or on the best available objective evidence. In determining whether an individual would pose a direct threat, the factors to be considered include:
(1) The duration of the risk;
(2) The nature and severity of the potential harm;
(3) The likelihood that the potential harm will occur; and
(4) The imminence of the potential harm.
29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(r).
Tyson suggests that its reliance on Dr. Thomas's medical judgment comported with this regulation. Tyson cites to non-binding cases outside the context of 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(r) to argue that the Court [*16]  should not second guess Dr. Thomas's medical judgment. Yet to prevail in asserting this affirmative defense, Tyson must show that its determination that White posed a direct threat to himself was — as a matter of law - "based on a reasonable medical judgment that relies on the most current medical knowledge and/or on the best available objective evidence." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(r).
In Chevron USA, Inc. v. Echazabal, the Supreme Court explicitly declined to provide a bright line reasonableness rule under the EEOC regulation:
Reasonableness does not turn on formalism. We have no occasion, however, to try to describe how acutely an employee must exhibit a disqualifying condition before an employer may exclude him from the class of the generally qualified. This is a job for the trial courts in the first instance.
536 U.S. at 86 n.6 (citation omitted). The Supreme Court also recognized that the EEOC regulation disallows "sham protection, through demands for a particularized enquiry into the harms the employee would probably face." Id. at 86.
Here, whether an individualized assessment of White was based on a reasonable medical judgment that relied on the most current medical knowledge or the best available objective evidence remains a genuine [*17]  issue of material fact. Tyson appears to concede that Dr. Thomas's medical judgment did not rely on the most current medical knowledge. [Doc. # 83 at 28.] Indeed, the EEOC notes that Dr. Thomas relied on twenty-year-old articles and received his neurology training in the late 1970s. Rather, Tyson argues that "the only objective evidence provided to the employer at the time it made its employment decision was Dr. Thomas's opinion that White could not safely perform the essential functions of the open positions at Tyson's facility." [Doc. # 83 at 28-29.] However, having argued that its assessment was based on Dr. Thomas's medical judgment, the relevant question is whether Dr. Thomas's medical judgment was based on the best available objective evidence. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(r) ("This assessment shall be based on a reasonable medical judgment that relies on the most current medical knowledge and/or on the best available objective evidence.").
White has testified that when he met with Dr. Thomas, he "tried to get him to check, to do something besides ask me questions," and that Dr. Thomas "didn't want to hear" about White's personal physician. [Doc. # 79, Ex. B at 19.] Mary White has also testified that she contacted [*18]  Dr. Thomas to try to provide White's medical records, but that offer was rejected. Defendant Tyson argues that the EEOC has failed to demonstrate what medical records White's wife would have provided, and that, regardless, additional information would not have changed Dr. Thomas's opinion. The latter argument suggests that Dr. Thomas's medical judgment was not based on the best available objective evidence. And Dr. Mattson — who did review White's medical records — reported that White's seizures were extremely well controlled and that White could safely perform the job requirements. Dr. Mattson also opined that, when Dr. Thomas evaluated White, "it would have been prudent to obtain medical records from Mr. White's treating physicians at that time which would have confirmed the very long time since his last seizure and that the aforementioned spell was felt to be non-epileptic." [Doc. # 81, Ex. 15 at 4.]
Viewing this evidence in the light most favorable to the non-movant, the Court cannot conclude as a matter of law that Tyson has established the affirmative defense that its individualized assessment was based on a reasonable medical judgment that relied on the most current medical knowledge [*19]  or the best available objective evidence. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(r). Such questions of reasonableness are properly resolved by the jury. Moreover, considering the conflicting medical testimony, it would not be proper for the Court to resolve here the underlying factual question of whether White posed a direct threat to himself.

C. Whether there was an Adverse Employment Action Because of White's Disability
Defendant Tyson argues that (1) the only adverse employment action at issue is its decision not to hire White in a maintenance position in May 2008, and (2) Tyson did not base its May 2008 decision on White's disability but rather on Dr. Thomas's medical judgment.

1. The Adverse Decision at Issue
The EEOC suggests that Tyson's September 2008 decision not to offer White any alternative positions also constituted an adverse employment decision based on White's disability. Tyson argues that even if an EEOC lawsuit may encompass not only the allegations in the charge but also any allegations that reasonably grow out of its investigation, the EEOC is still limited to the claims pled in its Complaint. Here, Tyson is correct.
Pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 8(a)(2), a complaint must present "a short and plain statement of the claim showing that [*20]  the pleader is entitled to relief." The purpose of a short and plain statement is to provide defendants with "fair notice of what the . . . claim is and the grounds upon which it rests." Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 545, 127 S. Ct. 1955, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929 (2007) (citation omitted).
Here, the EEOC's Complaint asserts only that: "On or about May 19, 2008, Defendant Employer engaged in unlawful employment practice at its Sedalia, Missouri, facilities, in violation of Section 102(b)(1) of Title I of the ADA, 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(1) by refusing to hire Mark White because of his disability." [Doc. # 1 at ¶ 8.] The Complaint alleges no other instance of a violation of the ADA. On the eve of trial, having never requested to amend the pleadings, the EEOC may not put forth new theories of liability beyond the scope of its Complaint. The EEOC has not provided Tyson with fair notice of such an alternative theory relating to an employment decision taken four months after the decision targeted in the Complaint.

2. Whether the May 2008 Decision not to Hire White was Because of his Disability
Defendant Tyson also argues that the undisputed evidence indicates that its decision not to hire White was based on Dr. Thomas's refusal to clear him for work, not on White's disability per se. However, the relevant question [*21]  here is whether White "suffered an adverse employment action because of his disability." Lors, 595 F.3d at 834. "Any credible evidence tending to establish that an employer acted adversely to an individual 'on account of' his disability will suffice to provide an inference of discrimination for purposes of summary judgment." Lowery v. Hazelwood School Dist., 244 F.3d 654, 658 (8th Cir. 2001) (quoting Allen v. Interior Constr. Servs., 214 F.3d 978, 982 (8th Cir. 2000)).
Unlike in Lowery, for example, Tyson has pointed to no evidence of poor job performance by White or any other reason unrelated to his record of epilepsy to deny him the maintenance position. Although Tyson attempts to position Dr. Thomas as the intervening cause of its decision not to hire White, Dr. Thomas's decision itself was based solely on White's record of epilepsy, and the evidence indicates that Tyson sent White to Dr. Thomas based solely on his record of epilepsy.
Thus, it appears relatively clear that Tyson — after receiving medical advice from Dr. Thomas — discriminated against White based on his record of epilepsy. It may be that such discrimination was not illegal, but rather the rational prevention of a direct threat based on a reasonable medical judgment. However, that question hinges on whether the medical judgment was in fact reasonable. As discussed above, [*22]  considering the evidence in the light most favorable to the non-movant, the Court cannot make such a determination as a matter of law.

D. Pretext
Similarly, Tyson argues that even if the EEOC established its prima facie case of discrimination, it cannot rebut Tyson's legitimate basis for its decision with evidence of pretext. According to Tyson, the inability to safely perform the essential functions of a position is a legitimate reason for the adverse employment decision. Tyson argues that there is no evidence that Tyson's decision not to hire White was based on anything other than Dr. Thomas's medical opinion.
After a prima facie case of disability discrimination is established, the burden shifts to the employer to articulate some legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the employer's actions. Lors, 595 F.3d at 834. If the employer articulates such a reason, the burden returns to the employee to show the employer's justification is a pretext. Id. Tyson cites the following language from Wilking v. County of Ramsey:
[W]hen an employer articulates a reason for discharging the plaintiff not forbidden by law, it is not our province to decide whether that reason was wise, fair, or even correct, ultimately, so [*23]  long as it truly was the reason for the plaintiff's termination. . . .
153 F.3d 869, 873 (8th Cir. 1998) (internal quotations and citations omitted). In Wilking, the Eighth Circuit wrote:
Even assuming that Wilking established a prima facie case, she has not presented sufficient evidence from which a jury could conclude that she was discharged because of her depression. The County explains that it discharged Wilking because of her poor performance, and not her depression. . . .
Id.
Here, unlike in Wilking, Defendant Tyson has not articulated a reason for refusing to hire White which the Court can conclude at this stage was not forbidden by law. As discussed above, the question of whether Dr. Thomas's medical judgment — itself based on White's record of epilepsy — was reasonable cannot be determined as a matter of law on these facts. Therefore, the burden does not shift to Plaintiff to prove pretext on this summary judgment.

III. Conclusion
Accordingly, it is hereby ORDERED that Defendant Tyson's Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. # 78] is DENIED.
/s/ Nanette K. Laughrey
NANETTE K. LAUGHREY
United States District Judge
Dated: May 3, 2011
Jefferson City, Missouri


End of Document

