EEOC v. Hiland Dairy Foods Co., LLC
United States District Court for the Western District of Oklahoma
October 21, 2022, Decided; October 21, 2022, Filed
NO. CIV-21-0483-HE

Reporter
2022 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 241103 *; 2022 WL 19404191
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION, Plaintiff, vs. HILAND DAIRY FOODS COMPANY, LLC, Defendant.
Prior History: EEOC v. Hiland Dairy Foods Co., LLC, 2022 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 241106 (W.D. Okla., Oct. 20, 2022)
Counsel:  [*1] For Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Plaintiff: Patrick J Holman, LEAD ATTORNEY, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission-OKC, Oklahoma City, OK USA; Jennifer L Arendes, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission-ST LOUIS, St Louis, MO USA; Joshua C Stockton, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Oklahoma City, OK USA.
For Hiland Dairy Foods Company LLC, Defendant: Abigail B Schwab, PRO HAC VICE, Hesse Martone, St. Louis, MO USA; Andrew J Martone, Hesse Martone, St. Louis, MO USA; Angela K Scott, PRO HAC VICE, Hesse Martone, P.C., St. Louis, MO USA; Benjamin J Oxford, Secrest Hill Butler & Secrest, Tulsa, OK USA.
Judges: JOE HEATON, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: JOE HEATON
Opinion



ORDER
Plaintiff Equal Employment Opportunity Commission asserts that defendant Hiland Dairy Foods Company violated the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") when it rescinded a conditional offer of employment to Bryan Berry for a Cooler Loadout position. The offer was withdrawn after Mr. Berry failed the vision screening portion of his pre-employment physical examination. Both parties have moved for summary judgment as to liability on the failure to hire claim.
Summary judgment is appropriate "if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material [*2]  fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed.R.Civ.P. 56(a). "A genuine dispute as to a material fact exists when the evidence, construed in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the non-moving party." Carter v. Pathfinder Energy Servs., Inc., 662 F.3d 1134, 1141 (10th Cir. 2011) (quotations and citation omitted). "Only disputes over facts that might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law will properly preclude the entry of summary judgment." Anderson v. liberty Lobby, Inc.,477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986).
It is undisputed that Mr. Berry was born with a vision impairment which effectively renders him legally blind and which significantly impacts his ability to recognize or distinguish between different colors. It is also undisputed that, in 2013, Mr. Berry applied for and was granted Social Security Disability Insurance benefits due to his vision condition.
In 2017, Mr. Berry applied for a job at defendant's Norman dairy plant. Defendant conditionally offered Mr. Berry a Cooler/Loadout job, which requires workers to pull various products using "loadout" sheets and load the orders onto trucks for delivery. Defendant's products are differentiated using different colors, which is one means of identifying the various products. Defendant's [*3]  offer of employment was contingent in part on Mr. Berry passing a pre-employment physical.
The physical exam was conducted at the Norman Regional Occupational Health ("NROH") clinic. The exam form indicates that Mr. Berry did not meet the physical requirements of a "Dairy Plant Worker" because of his "visual acuity — safety concern." Doc. #69-9, p. 8. Defendant contends that Mr. Berry's job offer was rescinded because of concerns that he could not safely and efficiently perform the essential functions of the Cooler/Loadout position. It is undisputed that Mr. Berry's vision impairment was the reason defendant rescinded the job offer.
To succeed on its failure to hire claim, plaintiff must establish that Mr. Berry was disabled within the meaning of the ADA, that he was qualified — with or without reasonable accommodations — to perform the essential functions of the position sought, and that he was not hired because of his disability. Osborne v. Baxter Healthcare Corp., 798 F.3d 1260, 1266 (10th Cir. 2015).
As to plaintiff's motion, defendant contends material issues of fact remain as to whether Mr. Berry was disabled within the meaning of the ADA and whether he could perform the essential functions of the Cooler/Loadout job with reasonable accommodations. The [*4]  court agrees with defendant that genuine issues of material fact remain.
As an initial matter, it is less than clear what the essential functions of the Cooler/Loadout position actually were. The essential functions provided to NROH for use in evaluating Mr. Berry were for the position of "Dairy Plant Worker" which presumably would include the Cooler/Loadout position. Doc. #69-9, p. 6. In addition to various tasks related to maintaining or performing dairy product production duties and related physical requirements, the most relevant essential function applicable to Mr. Berry is: "Must keep work area safe and clean and work in a safe and efficient manner. Must be able to follow both written and verbal instructions, perform basic mathematics, and fill out written daily reports." Further, the "Essential Job Functions Assessment" for the position does not even call for an evaluation of visual acuity. Doc. #69-9, p. 7.
Notwithstanding that ambiguity, defendant has offered evidence that the essential functions of the Cooler/Loadout position included the ability to quickly and accurately read loadout sheets and to identify products by their color. Its representatives have also testified, however, [*5]  that Cooler/Loadout workers are not directed to work at any particular pace, Doc. #75-4, p. 6, nor are they subject to any mandatory quotas as to the number of orders that must be filled in any given time-period. Doc. #75-5, pp. 8-9. There is also evidence that defendant's products can be identified by information other than their colors, including identification based on their labels. Doc. 75-7, p. 2. The court concludes that a genuine dispute of material fact remains as to whether the ability to identify products by color was an essential function of the Cooler/Loadout position.
A question of fact also remains as to whether Mr. Berry would be able to perform the essential functions of the position with reasonable accommodations. It is plaintiff's burden to show that he would be able to perform the essential functions of the job. Mason v. Avaya Communs., Inc., 357 F.3d 1114, 1119 (10th Cir. 2004). At the time of his interview, Mr. Berry was unable to read a loadout sheet as required by the job. Plaintiff, however, argues that he would be able to read the loadout sheet with a reasonable accommodation. At the summary judgment stage, the plaintiff must demonstrate that the proposed accommodation appears reasonable on its face. Id. at 1122. If the plaintiff does [*6]  so, defendant can present evidence of its inability to accommodate which the plaintiff must then rebut. Id. "Whether an accommodation is reasonable under the ADA is a mixed question of law and fact." Id.
The court concludes that plaintiff has failed to establish as a matter of law that a reasonable accommodation exists which would permit Mr. Berry to perform the Cooler/Loadout job as expected by defendant. Defendant's evidence is sufficient to raise a material question of fact as to whether the various proposed accommodations were reasonable under the circumstances.
Because genuine issues of material fact remain as to whether Mr. Berry would be able to perform the essential functions of the Cooler/Loadout position with reasonable accommodations, plaintiff's motion for summary judgment will be denied.1
As to defendant's motion, it contends plaintiff's claim is barred by the doctrine of judicial estoppel. In his application for Social Security Disability Insurance, Mr. Berry stated that he was disabled and unable to work because of his disability. Relying on Cleveland v. Policy Mgmt. Sys. Corp., 526 U.S. 795, 119 S. Ct. 1597, 143 L. Ed. 2d 966 (1999), defendant contends that plaintiff should not be [*7]  permitted to argue that Mr. Berry can now perform the essential functions of the job he applied for. However, there are "many situations in which an SSDI claim and an ADA claim can comfortably exist side by side." Id. at 803. Notably, the ADA defines a qualified individual as one who can perform the essential functions of a job with reasonable accommodations while the SSDI decision does not take into account any possible reasonable accommodations. Id. Nonetheless, plaintiffs cannot ignore prior assertions of the inability to work, rather they "must proffer a sufficient explanation" for why prior SSDI assertion does not negate the ADA claim. Id. at 806.
The EEOC contends it is not estopped from asserting Mr. Berry is a qualified individual because it did not make the inability to work assertion claim in the SSDI application. Plaintiff, however, is essentially arguing Mr. Berry's case on his behalf. The court agrees with the Fourth Circuit's reasoning that "[t]he proper question is whether the conflict between claimant's disability application and his claim to be a qualified individual under the ADA presents a genuine issue of material fact." E.E.O.C. v. Greater Baltimore Med. Ctr., Inc., 477 Fed. Appx. 68, 74 (4th Cir. 2012). Thus, the "EEOC has the same factual burden as would Mr. [Berry] [*8]  pursuing his own ADA claim in federal court." Id.
Here, Mr. Berry's SSDI application was based on his vision impairment disability. The SSA made the determination that he was legally blind and awarded an initial monthly payment of $339.00 in 2013. He continues to receive disability payments. Plaintiff does not dispute Mr. Berry's SSDI statements. Rather, they note that the ADA claim here is based on Mr. Berry's vision impairment being compensated for with reasonable accommodations. Mr. Berry's SSDI statements are not inherently in conflict with plaintiff's contention here that he is a qualified individual if granted reasonable accommodations. Thus, again, a fact question remains as to this fundamental question. Therefore, defendant's motion for summary judgment will be denied.
Plaintiff's and defendant's Motions for Summary Judgment [Doc. Nos. 67 and 69] are DENIED.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
Dated this 21st day of October, 2022.
/s/ Joe Heaton
JOE HEATON
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

