EEOC v. LHC Group, Inc.
United States District Court for the Southern District of Mississippi, Southern Division
August 9, 2013, Decided; August 9, 2013, Filed
CAUSE NO. 1:11CV355 LG-JMR

Reporter
2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 191595 *
EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION, PLAINTIFF v. LHC GROUP, INC., d/b/a GULF COAST HOMECARE, DEFENDANT
Subsequent History: Affirmed in part and reversed in part by, Remanded by EEOC v. LHC Group, Inc., 773 F.3d 688, 2014 U.S. App. LEXIS 23295 (5th Cir. Miss., Dec. 11, 2014)
Prior History: EEOC v. LHC Grp., 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 191857 (S.D. Miss., Feb. 5, 2012)
Counsel:  [*1] For Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Plaintiff: C. Emanuel Smith, Julie Steptoe Bean-Federal Gov, Maneesh Varma - Federal Gov, Marsha Lynn Rucker, Ylda Marisol Kopka, EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION - Birmingham, Birmingham, AL; Harriett F. Johnson, EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION - Jackson, Jackson, MS; Steven Lee Murray - Federal Gov, U.S. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION-Birmingham, Birmingham, AL.
For LHC Group Inc., doing business as Gulf Coast Homecare, Defendant: Jennifer Graham Hall, Jon Randall Patterson, BAKER, DONELSON, BEARMAN, CALDWELL & BERKOWITZ, PC - Jackson, Jackson, MS; Zachary B. Busey, BAKER, DONELSON, BEARMAN, CALDWELL & BERKOWITZ, PC - Memphis, Memphis, TN.
Judges: LOUIS GUIROLA, JR., CHIEF UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: LOUIS GUIROLA, JR.
Opinion



MEMORANDUM OPINION AND ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
BEFORE THE COURT is the Motion [201] for Summary Judgment filed by the defendant, LHC Group, Inc., d/b/a Gulf Coast Homecare in this ADA employment discrimination case. The Motion has been fully briefed, and the parties' arguments and evidence have been carefully reviewed by the Court. Because the Court finds no question of material fact in regard [*2]  to the plaintiff's claims of employment discrimination, the defendant's Motion will be granted and this case dismissed.

Background
The EEOC brings this discrimination case pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. § 12112 et seq., on behalf of Kristy Sones, alleging that her previous employer, LHC Group, Inc., discriminated against her on the basis of her disability - epilepsy - when it denied her a reasonable accommodation and terminated her employment.
According to the allegations of the amended complaint, Sones began working for LHC Group at its Picayune, Mississippi, facility in November 2006. In March 2009, she was promoted to a Team Leader position. On May 26, 2009, Sones experienced an epileptic seizure at work. Upon her return to work a few days later, Sones requested some assistance performing some of her job duties, because she would have minor memory problems for a few days. She alleges that LHC Group refused her request for assistance. Approximately one month later, on June 24, 2009, LHC Group terminated Sones' employment. Sones alleges that she was told that she was a liability to the organization and that "because of your seizures, we think it's best to let you go." (Am. Compl. [*3]  4-5, ECF No. 2).
LHC contends it is entitled to summary judgment because Sones cannot show evidence that she was denied a reasonable accommodation or terminated because of her disability.

Summary Judgment Standard
Summary judgment is proper if "the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a); see also Carrizales v. State Farm Lloyds, 518 F.3d 343, 345 (5th Cir. 2008). The mere existence of some alleged factual dispute between the parties will not defeat an otherwise properly supported motion for summary judgment; there must be an absence of any genuine issue of material fact. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 247-48, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). An issue is "material" if its resolution could affect the outcome of the action. Burrell v. Dr. Pepper/Seven Up Bottling Grp., Inc., 482 F.3d 408, 411 (5th Cir. 2007). "[A]nd a fact is genuinely in dispute only if a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the non-moving party." Fordoche, Inc. v. Texaco, Inc., 463 F.3d 388, 392 (5th Cir. 2006).
The moving party bears the initial burden of informing the court of all evidence demonstrating the absence of a genuine issue of material fact. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). Only when the moving party has discharged this initial burden does the burden shift to the non-moving party to demonstrate that there is a genuine issue of material fact. Id. at 322. If the moving party fails to meet this burden, then it is not entitled to summary judgment, [*4]  and no defense to the motion is required. Id. "For any matter on which the non-movant would bear the burden of proof at trial ..., the movant may merely point to the absence of evidence and thereby shift to the non-movant the burden of demonstrating by competent summary judgment proof that there is an issue of material fact warranting trial." Transamerica Ins. Co. v. Avenell, 66 F.3d 715, 718-19 (5th Cir. 1995); see also Celotex, 477 U.S. at 323-25. To prevent summary judgment, "the non-moving party must come forward with 'specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial.'" Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 587, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986) (quoting former Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e)).
When considering a motion for summary judgment, the court must view the evidence in the light most favorable to the non-movant and draw all justifiable inferences in favor of the nonmovant. Envtl. Conservation Org. v. City of Dallas, Tex., 529 F.3d 519, 524 (5th Cir. 2008). The court must review all of the evidence in the record, but make no credibility determinations or weigh any evidence; disregard all evidence favorable to the moving party that the jury is not required to believe; and give credence to the evidence favoring the non-moving party as well as to the evidence supporting the moving party that is uncontradicted and unimpeached. Moore v. Willis Indep. Sch. Dist., 233 F.3d 871, 874 (5th Cir. 2000). However, the non-movant cannot avoid summary judgment simply by presenting "conclusory allegations and denials, speculation, [*5]  improbable inferences, unsubstantiated assertions, and legalistic argumentation." TIG Ins. Co. v. Sedgwick James of Wash., 276 F.3d 754, 759 (5th Cir. 2002); Little v. Liquid Air Corp., 37 F.3d 1069, 1075 (5th Cir.1994) (en banc).

The Summary Judgment Evidence
Kristy Sones testified in her deposition that she was employed by LHC for two periods. (Sones Dep. 25-26, ECF No. 201-15). The second period, beginning in 2006, is at issue in this case. She was hired as a field nurse, on a PRN (as needed) basis. Her status later changed to full-time. She estimated that as a field nurse, she spent "probably a couple hours" of her eight hour day driving to make patient visits. (Id. at 33). She agreed that an essential function of her job as RN, whether she was a field nurse or Team Leader, was to travel to patient locations via car or public transportation. (Id. at 160).
Sones testified that in March 2009, Jennifer Taggard, the Director of Nursing, decided to move Sones to the Team Leader position. Sones was interested in the position because she would be in the office rather than in the field. She described the Team Leader duties as: scheduling the field visits for her team, entering visit data into the computer, communicating with doctors when problems arose in the field, and filling in for absent field nurses. She trained with two other nurses [*6]  who had Team Leader training and experience, and also sat down at the computer twice with Taggard.
Sones testified that after her seizure, she stopped by the office on June 1, 2009, to discuss her medical condition with Taggard and Taggard's supervisor, Thressa Guchereau. Sones brought a copy of LHC's job description for Team Leader that her physician, Dr. Mitchell, had reviewed and marked "I agree with above, no driving x 1 year, no working on ladder." (Sones Dep. Ex. 6 at 9, ECF No. 201-15). They discussed the limitations imposed by Dr. Mitchell to the extent that they established that Sones would get a ride to work with her next door neighbor, who was her Team Leader Assist. (Sones Dep. 60, ECF No. 201-15). Sones did not ask for accommodation of her job duties, but the week after she returned to work she asked for extra help with the computer from Taggard. Sones testified that Taggard did not respond to her request, but just walked away. Sones testified that she specifically wanted help remembering "how to use the programs. And even the passwords and things, I had to remember those all over again." (Id. at 64).
On Sunday June 7, Sones had to take call, which required her to visit six patient [*7]  homes. Her mother drove her to those homes -- an arrangement that Guchereau approved. Sones was not feeling well, she was "very tired, because they were still trying to adjust my medicines." (Id. at 68). She testified she was having trouble staying awake that day.
Sones testified that on June 19, 2009, Taggard and Guchereau spoke to her about her orientation to Team Leader. They established a deadline of July 31 for completion of Sones' orientation, and for her to improve her skills. Sones testified that "[t]here were just a couple of things that I was still having some issues with, as far as putting some things in the computer." (Id. at 48).
Sones testified that on June 24, Taggard called her into her office. Guchereau was already there, and there was another woman on the phone. The woman on the phone told her that "we're going to have to let you go, because you're a liability to our company." (Id. at 74).
Jennifer Taggard testified that Sones was never promoted to the Team Leader position. She was being cross-trained to give her "an idea of the processes in the office and to have PRN coverage if we had a team leader out. But it was not a promotion." (Taggard Dep. 37, ECF No. 201-23). At the beginning of May, Taggard [*8]  sent an email with the subject: "Welcome Team C." In the body, Taggard wrote, "It is with great excitement that I welcome Team C to our office. Kristy Sones will be filling the team leader role. Beverly Blevins will be the clerk/data entry. Please welcome them. They will begin here in the office Monday morning." (Id. at 66-67).
Taggard conducted weekly meetings with Sones to "give her some feedback and to allow her to ask questions" regarding her Team Leader duties. (Id. at 68-69). Her documentation of those meetings includes notes of errors, rudeness with field nurses, and disorganization. (Id. at 69-74). Taggard did not recommend that Sones be terminated, and she was not involved in the termination decision. (Id. at 91). Guchereau told her the reason Sones was being terminated was for job performance, specifically, the items discussed with Sones at her weekly meetings. (Id. at 91-92).
Guchereau testified that she was the Administrator when Sones began her last period of employment with LHC in 2009.1 (Guchereau Dep. 66, ECF No. 201-16). According to Guchereau, Sones was not promoted to Team Leader, but began cross training for the position. (Id. at 66-67, 68-69). Sones was chosen because "she was willing to do the cross training and not take the position just, [*9]  you know, keep her current position, work in the field, and cross train in the office." (Id. at 67). In June 2009, Sones "still had the role as a field nurse and, yes, she was working in the office as a team leader in training." (Id. at 70). In order to train Sones, Guchereau gave Sones the Team Leader job description, an "orientation grid," allowed Sones to observe other Team Leaders and "personally gave her one-on-one training with the computer." (Id. at 71-72).
When asked whether Sones demonstrated any deficiencies during her Team Leader training, Guchereau responded, "her computer skills, deficiencies in multitasking, deficiency in documenting report [sic] from the field and communicating it properly in the record and to the physician. Errors were made where patients were not seen correctly." (Id. at 72). Guchereau testified that ninety days is the standard length for Team Leader training, but that "it was decided before the end of ninety days that [Sones] was unable to fulfill the responsibilities of the performance of a team leader." (Id. at 75). Guchereau did not recommend that Sones be terminated, but that the Team Leader [*10]  position she was training for "be open to someone that could fill it." (Id. at 167).
One of the Team Leaders who helped train Sones was Kayla Wormser. She testified that Sones sat with her for at least a week. (Wormser Dep. 38, ECF No. 201-19). When asked whether she ever came to the conclusion that Sones could acquire the necessary skills to become a team leader, Worser testified "I did not believe that she could in my time with her, no. . . . She struggled a lot, like I mentioned before, with her computer skills. And she struggled with the OASIS part of it, and she just seemed to be having a hard time grasping the role completely." (Id. at 34-35).
Another Team Leader, Melissa Adelfio, testified that she helped train Sones, although "I didn't specifically train her. It wasn't like my duty to train her, but she would come sit by my desk and I would show her some stuff together." (Adelfio Dep. 25, ECF No. 222). When asked whether she believed Sones was "progressing appropriately and acceptably as a Team Leader," Adelfio answered "I would automatically say yes, but I wasn't her supervisor. I didn't check behind her." (Id. at 39).
A field nurse who worked on Sones' team, Amy Lee, testified that Taggard and Guchereau had [*11]  a meeting with her to ask if she was having any problems or difficulties with Sones. Lee testified that she told them that Sones was fulfilling her role as Team Leader. (Lee Dep. 31-32, ECF No. 201-20). Lee also testified that after Sones came back to work following her seizure, Sones could not perform her duties as a field nurse because Sones "was very sedated. She didn't think real clearly. She had a hard time focusing, and there were some patients who complained." (Id. at 24). Lee testified that she told Taggard about a patient that Sones treated on the day she was on call:
I did let [Taggard] know because the patient Kristy saw Sunday, I saw on Monday. And the woman, she clearly said, Something was wrong with her. She was as sweet as can be, but please don't send her back here. And because the patient made such an emphatic statement, I felt that they needed to know that that was not a safe situation to put a nurse in, and that she — they definitely did not need to send her back to that same house.
(Id. at 24-25).
Lolanda Brown is the LHC Director of Human Resources. She testified that she was involved in the decision to terminate Sones. (Brown Dep. 13, ECF No. 201-17). She first became aware of Sones [*12]  when either Taggard or Guchereau contacted her about their desire to train Sones for the Team Leader position, "in preparation for potential growth with their facility. Or a need, just for back-up purposes." (Id. at 18-20). According to Brown, the plan was for Sones to continue to see patients as a visiting nurse, and on certain days be in the office for cross training. (Id. at 20).
Brown testified that as director of Human Resources, her role is to assist managers whenever they're having employee concerns. In this particular incident it was performance concerns. And I communicated with her leaders there at the facility regarding the performance issues, guided them through a performance improvement process. When her performance did not improve as needed, we decided then to end her employment and her role in the organization.
(Id. at 13). Brown testified there were several incidents that led to the decision to terminate Sones. First, Sones had someone driving her to patient homes, which Brown stated was a violation of HIPPA. (Id. at 34). Second, the patient care incidents began to escalate - "the frequency increased where patient care was really being affected." (Id. at 35). Third, there were patient complaints regarding Sones' care [*13]  when she was in the homes. (Id.).
Brown described the decision-making process as "we review the facts and review the incidents that have occurred, and we make a decision together. [Guchereau and Taggard] can't make the decision solely on their own." (Id. at 38).
We did review the fact that she did have a seizure, the fact that we did get her physician to review her job description to identify what she could and could not do related to the central job functions. We reviewed the fact that she could not climb or drive for a year. And that those were the restrictions that we were dealing with . . . We actually thought about placing her back into the registered nurse, the RN position. . . . With the restrictions she was not able to function in a visiting nurse role.
(Id. at 39-41).
They made the decision to terminate Sones at this time, but first met with her to discuss their concerns. (Id. at 46). Brown testified that they wanted to know from her if she wanted to take some personal time off, "and it was specifically related to the fact that we noticed an increase in the errors," but Sones was not interested in taking personal time off. (Id. at 47-49).
A week after this meeting, Brown participated by telephone in a meeting to terminate [*14]  Sones. Brown's description of the conversation during the meeting was that,
in general we shared with [Sones] that we have been attempting to improve her performance in the team leader role over the last several weeks, and we have not seen a noted improvement. Therefore we're at the point where we're deciding that we're going to have to end her role as a team leader. We shared with her that, you know, if she did not have the driving restriction that we would have moved her over into the RN role. And that today would end up being her last day of employment.
(Id. at 55).

Analysis
The review of the summary judgment evidence above establishes that Sones offers no direct evidence that she was discriminated against because of her disability. Accordingly, the Court applies the McDonnell Douglas, Title VII burden-shifting analysis. McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). See Hammond v. Jacobs Field Servs., 499 F. App'x 377, 380 (5th Cir. 2012). Under this framework, the EEOC must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination. Hammond, 499 F. App'x at 380. If it succeeds, then LHC must articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse employment action. Id. If LHC meets its burden, then the burden of production shifts back to the EEOC to show that LHC's proffered reason was a pretext for unlawful discrimination. [*15]  Id. A prima facie case coupled with a showing that the proffered reason was pretextual will usually be sufficient to survive summary judgment. Id.

EEOC's Prima Facie Case of Disability Discrimination
The EEOC's prima facie case requires a showing of discrimination by establishing that: 1) Sones is disabled or regarded as disabled; 2) she is qualified for the job; 3) she was subjected to an adverse employment action on account of her disability; and 4) she was replaced by, or treated less favorably than, non-disabled employees. McInnis v. Alamo Comm. Coll. Dist., 207 F.3d 276, 279-80 (5th Cir. 2000). For the purposes of this Motion, LHC does not dispute that Sones has a disability, but does argue that Sones cannot show that she was qualified for the field nurse position, or that she was replaced by, or treated less favorably than, nondisabled persons.

A. Field Nurse or Team Leader
As a preliminary matter, the Court must address the issue of what position Sones held at LHC. She testified that she received a promotion to Team Leader. The email sent by Taggard could be construed to support Sones' testimony. On the other hand, all of the supervisory personnel, including Taggard, testified that Sones had not been promoted to the position, but was merely in training [*16]  while holding a field nurse position. The Court cannot weigh this contradictory evidence, and therefore the issue of Sones' position at LHC is a question of fact. However, the Court concludes below that Sones was not qualified for either the field nurse or team leader position. Accordingly, Sones' position at LHC is not a question of material fact, because its resolution will not affect the outcome of this action.

B. Qualified Individual
The analysis of this case begins with the second prima facie element - whether Sones was qualified for an RN job at LHC. "To avoid summary judgment on whether he is a qualified individual, [the employee] needs to show 1) that he could perform the essential functions of the job in spite of his disability or 2) that a reasonable accommodation of his disability would have enabled him to perform the essential functions of the job." Turco v. Hoechst Celanese Corp., 101 F.3d 1090, 1093 (5th Cir. 1996). Additionally, "an individual is not qualified for a job if there is a genuine substantial risk that he or she could be injured or could injure others, and the employer cannot modify the job to eliminate that risk." Chandler v. City of Dallas, 2 F.3d 1385, 1393 (5th Cir. 1993) (internal quotations marks and citation omitted).

i. Field Nurse
LHC contends that Sones was not qualified for the [*17]  field nurse position for two reasons. First, because her physician restricted her from driving for one year following her seizure. Second, because she was a direct threat to the health and safety of others. The EEOC contends that Sones was qualified for the field nurse position with the reasonable accommodation of LHC providing transportation, or allowing her to use public transportation. As to the health and safety concerns, the EEOC seems to contend that Sones presented only a slightly increased risk of harm, and that LHC could have made reasonable accommodations to alleviate the risk.
In determining whether a plaintiff is a "qualified individual" with a disability, a court must first determine whether the plaintiff can perform the essential functions of the job, which are those functions that bear more than a marginal relationship to the job at issue. See Newman v. Chevron U.S.A., 979 F.Supp. 1085, 1090 (S.D. Tex. 1997) (citing Chandler v. City of Dallas, 2 F.3d 1385, 1393 (5th Cir. 1993)). See also Daugherty v. City of El Paso, 56 F.3d 695, 696 (5th Cir. 1995). Only if the court determines that the plaintiff cannot perform the essential functions of the job does the court consider whether a reasonable accommodation by the employer would enable him to perform those functions.
LHC argues that Sones was not qualified for the position of field nurse because she posed a [*18]  direct threat to the health and safety of others. "[T]he ADA does not require an employer to accommodate an individual if the employee would pose a direct threat to the health and safety of others." Robertson v. Neuromedical Ctr., 161 F.3d 292, 296 (5th Cir. 1998). A direct threat is a "significant risk to the health or safety of others that cannot be eliminated by reasonable accommodation." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(3). The employer must make an "individualized assessment of the individual's present ability to safely perform the essential function of the job." EEOC v. E.I. DuPont de Nemours & Co., 480 F.3d 724, 731 (5th Cir. 2007).
There is little evidence of an assessment of Sones' ability to safely perform the field nurse functions, but what there is indicates that LHC found in favor of Sones. Brown testified that LHC would have placed Sones back in the field nurse position if she had been able to drive. There is no evidence to the contrary. Accordingly, LHC has not shown that Sones was unqualified for the field nurse position because she posed a direct threat to the health and safety of others.
In regard to Sones' driving restriction, the Court notes that LHC's purpose is to provide health services in patient homes. It included the legal and practical ability to travel to patient homes in its written job descriptions for RN positions, including [*19]  both field nurse and Team Leader. Among other qualifications, LHC required that a registered nurse possess a "current Driver's License and vehicle insurance, and access to a dependable vehicle." (Sones Dep. Ex. 2, P. 2, ECF No. 201-15). Additionally, a registered nurse's working environment is described in part as "significant portions (more than 50%) of daily assignments require travel to client/resident/patient locations or other work sites, via car or public transportation." (Id. at 7).
The ADA requires that "consideration shall be given to the employer's judgment as to what functions of a job are essential, and if an employer has prepared a written job description before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job, this description shall be considered evidence of the essential functions of the job." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). Sones does not dispute that the ability to travel to patient homes is an essential function of the field nurse position. Because she was prohibited from driving for one year, she could not perform the essential functions of the field nurse position at the time of her termination.
Although LHC argues that Sones did not expressly request an accommodation for her inability to drive, the [*20]  summary judgment evidence shows that Sones informed LHC of her disability and made a request for accommodation by providing feedback from her doctor about her post-seizure limitations. Molina v. DSI Renal, Inc. 840 F. Supp. 2d 984, 1001-02 (W.D. Tex. 2012) (work release with specific restrictions constitutes a request for reasonable accommodation) (citing EEOC v. Chevron Phillips Chem. Co., LP, 570 F.3d 606, 621 (5th Cir. 2009)). Under the ADA's implementing regulations, once a qualified individual informs his employer of a disability, the employer must then engage the employee in an interactive process to determine if there is a reasonable accommodation. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3). LHC's obligation under the law was to provide reasonable accommodation to an employee who can perform the essential functions of the job with such accommodation.
The EEOC contends that LHC should have accommodated Sones' inability to drive by providing transportation, or by allowing her to "utilize transportation, other than her driving." (Pl. Mem. 25, ECF No. 220). The ADA defines a "reasonable accommodation" as including:
job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, reassignment to a vacant position, acquisition or modification of equipment or devices, appropriate adjustment or modifications of examinations, training materials or policies, the provision of [*21]  qualified readers or interpreters, and other similar accommodations for individuals with disabilities.
42 U.S.C. § 12111(9)(B). The ADA does not require LHC to provide transportation for Sones, because it is not a reasonable accommodation to relieve an employee of any essential functions of her job, modify job duties, reassign existing employees to perform those duties, or hire new employees to do so. Burch v. City of Nacogdoches, 174 F.3d 615, 621 (5th Cir. 1999) (firefighter unable to fight fires could not be reasonably accommodated). See also Toronka v. Cont. Air., Inc., 411 F. App'x 719, 724 (5th Cir. 2011) (employer not required to fashion a position that excluded driving); Barber v. Nabors Drilling U.S.A., Inc., 130 F.3d 702, 709 (5th Cir. 1997) ("we cannot say that the disabled can perform the essential functions of the job with reasonable accommodation, if the only successful accommodation is for the disabled not to perform those essential functions.").
Furthermore, the EEOC does not indicate what other transportation options were available to Sones that LHC should have considered as an accommodation. The minimal testimony offered regarding other transportation was that Picayune has no public transportation system, although there is a private van service that can be hired to "take you where you need to go." (Sones Dep. 78, ECF No. 201-15). And although Sones' mother drove her to patient homes on [*22]  the Sunday Sones was on call, she testified that she worked for the Navy as a physical scientist, describing her duties as "[w]ell, we travel. We map the ocean. When we're in-house, we have various duties." (Mabie Dep. 11, ECF No. 201-18). She was never asked if she could drive Sones to daily patient visits, given her own job duties. This evidence is insufficient to show that LHC could have reasonably accommodated Sones' inability to drive to patients' homes by using some other transportation option. Sones' inability to drive therefore rendered her unqualified for the position of field nurse.

ii. Team Leader
LHC contends that Sones never was assigned to the position of Team Leader, but if she was, she was not qualified because she could not perform many of the essential functions of the position, and because she presented a direct threat to the health and safety of others. The EEOC argues that Sones did hold a Team Leader position and was qualified for it because driving was not an essential function of that job.
Although the EEOC argues that Team Leader duties were performed in the office, and therefore driving was not an essential function, the job description requires patient visits and [*23]  care. (Sones Dep. Ex. 6, p. 4, ECF No. 201-15). Sones agreed that she would be required to travel for patient visits for her team if necessary, and there is no evidence that other Team Leaders were exempted from making patient visits. "Provided that any necessary job specification is job-related, uniformly-enforced, and consistent with business necessity, the employer has the right to establish what a job is and what is required to perform it." Kellogg v. Energy Safety Servs., Inc., 544 F.3d 1121, 1127 (10th Cir. 2008) (internal citation and marks omitted).
Regardless of whether driving is an essential function of the Team Leader position, the computer-related and communication duties of a Team Leader are, beyond doubt, essential. Both of Sones' superiors, as well as an experienced Team Leader assigned to train Sones, testified that Sones was not able to perform the tasks required of a Team Leader without significant errors or omissions. Her deficient performance was noted both before and after her seizure, and resulted in patient care issues. Sones agreed that she was struggling with her computer tasks.
The EEOC's suggested reasonable accommodation for Sones' inability to perform the Team Leader duties "would have addressed the need to refresh Sones' recollection [*24]  on some of the computer programs, and the appropriate passwords to use, in operating the computer programs required of a Team Leader." (Pl. Mem. 21,2 ECF No. 220). However, Sones' deficiencies were not confined to remembering passwords or how a program worked. According to the evidence, she was disorganized, making errors in patient records, failing to document events, and speaking in a rude manner to field personnel. Sones' errors resulted in deficient patient care. Refreshing her recollection of some of the computer programs would not have enabled Sones to perform Team Leader tasks without significant error.
Furthermore, it is Sones' qualification for the position at the time of her termination that is dispositive; LHC was not required to "wait an indefinite period for an accommodation to achieve its intended [*25]  effect. . . . [R]easonable accommodation is by its terms most logically construed as that which presently, or in the immediate future, enables the employee to perform the essential functions of the job in question." Myers v. Hose, 50 F.3d 278, 283 (4th Cir. 1995). After what LHC believed to be an adequate training period, it came to the conclusion that Sones could not achieve competency as a Team Leader, and that the position should go to someone else. It would not be a reasonable accommodation to continue training in the hope that Sones would become competent. For these reasons, the Court finds that Sones was not qualified for the position of Team Leader. The EEOC therefore fails to establish the second element of its prima facie case.

C. Sones' Replacement
The fourth element of the EEOC's prima facie case requires it to show that Sones was replaced by, or treated less favorably than, non-disabled persons. There is no evidence relating to this issue. Accordingly, the EEOC has not established this element of its prima facie case.

LHC's Reasons for Termination and Evidence of Pretext
The EEOC has failed to establish a prima facie case of disability discrimination, and therefore its discrimination claim may be dismissed. However, continuing with [*26]  an analysis of the evidence, even if the EEOC had made a prima facie case, LHC has provided evidence that it terminated Sones because her performance was unsatisfactory as a Team Leader and because she could not perform the driving/traveling function of the RN positions. These are legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons for its actions. Walton v. Bisco Indust., Inc., 119 F.3d 368, 370-71 (5th Cir. 1997); Smith v. Rockwell Intern. Corp., 77 F.3d 473, *2 (5th Cir. 1995)
At this point, the burden shifts back to the EEOC to demonstrate that the proffered reason is a pretext for discrimination -- that LHC's alleged nondiscriminatory reason is false and the real reason for the adverse action is disability discrimination. McInnis, 207 F.3d at 282. As with discrimination cases generally, the EEOC at all times bears the ultimate burden of persuading the trier of fact that Sones has been the victim of illegal discrimination based on her disability. St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 511, 113 S. Ct. 2742, 125 L. Ed. 2d 407 (1993).
The EEOC attempts to show pretext by arguing that Sones was performing well as a Team Leader. It argues that she was never actually disciplined for any of the complaints about her work, and furthermore, the people making the complaints were never identified by Taggard or Guchereau. However, LHC is not required to show that all of the complaints about Sones were properly documented or resulted in formal [*27]  discipline in order to support its actions. The record establishes that LHC, in its judgment, had sufficient evidence to support its conclusion that Sones was making errors that put proper patient care at risk, thus warranting her termination from the Team Leader position. Management does not have to make proper decisions, only non-discriminatory ones. See Little v. Republic Ref. Co., 924 F.2d 93, 97 (5th Cir. 1991). "Whether [Defendant] was wrong in its determination . . . is irrelevant, as long as its belief, though erroneous, was the basis for the termination." De Anda v. St. Joseph's Hosp., 671 F.2d 850, 854 n.6 (5th Cir. 1982).
The EEOC also argues that the fact that LHC management was aware of Sones' epilepsy shows that "one or every LHC official may have had a negative response to Sones' symptoms and disability, and these LHC officials wanted to terminate Sones because of them." (Pl. Mem. 29, ECF No. 220). However, the possibility that LHC wanted to terminate Sones because of her epilepsy is speculation that is not supported by any evidence in the record.
The EEOC also states that during the June 19 meeting, "Taggard essentially informed Sones that if her epilepsy manifested itself again, Defendant would be in trouble." (Id.). The Court has been provided with no competent summary judgment3 evidence of such [*28]  a statement. Sones' testimony was that she was told she was being terminated because she was a liability to the company. This statement is consistent with LHC's reasons for terminating Sones and is not evidence of pretext.
The EEOC argues that certain other circumstances or events are evidence of pretext: 1) Sones was the only disabled employee at the Picayune branch; 2) LHC advanced Sones' career prior to her seizure, but afterwards took incremental steps to terminate her; 3) neither Taggard nor Guchereau advised Sones that she would be terminated if she did not improve her performance by the target date; 4) only one work day after the June 19 meeting, LHC made the decision to terminate Sones; 5) Sones' attendance problems were discussed between members of management but not with Sones; and 6) there were no events between the June 19 meeting and the June 24 termination to justify termination. None of these items demonstrates that LHC's reasons for terminating Sones were false and the real reason is disability [*29]  discrimination. Accordingly, even had the EEOC made its prima facie case, it has not demonstrated that there is adequate evidence from which a reasonable jury could conclude that Sones was terminated because of her disability. This claim will be dismissed.

EEOC's Prima Facie Case of Failure to Accommodate
To establish a prima facie case of discrimination based on failure to accommodate a disability, the EEOC is required to show: (1) the employer is covered by the statute; (2) Sones is an individual with a disability; (3) she can perform the essential functions of the job with or without reasonable accommodation; and (4) the employer had notice of the disability and failed to provide accommodation. Mzyk v. N. E. Indep. Sch. Dist., 397 F. App'x 13, 16 (5th Cir. 2010).
For the reasons stated in the Court's discussion of accommodation above, the evidence shows that Sones cannot perform the essential functions of the job with or without reasonable accommodation. As also stated above, LHC had notice of Sones' disability, and there was a discussion between LHC and Sones about the limitations imposed by her disability. However, LHC did not fail to provide accommodation because there was no reasonable accommodation that would allow Sones to perform the field nurse [*30]  or Team Leader jobs. Accordingly, the EEOC cannot meet the prima facie elements for an ADA claim of failure to accommodate. This claim will be dismissed.
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED AND ADJUDGED that the Motion [201] for Summary Judgment filed by the defendant, LHC Group, Inc., d/b/a Gulf Coast Homecare, is GRANTED. The claims of plaintiff EEOC are DISMISSED.
SO ORDERED AND ADJUDGED this the 9th day of August, 2013.
/s/ Louis Guirola, Jr.
LOUIS GUIROLA, JR.
CHIEF U.S. DISTRICT JUDGE

JUDGMENT
This matter having come on to be heard on the defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment, the Court, after review and consideration, finds that in accord with the Order entered herewith,
IT IS ORDERED AND ADJUDGED that judgment is rendered in favor of defendant LHC Group, Inc., d/b/a Gulf Coast Homecare. Plaintiff's claims against LHC Group, Inc., d/b/a Gulf Coast Homecare are DISMISSED with prejudice.
SO ORDERED AND ADJUDGED this the 9th day of August, 2013.
/s/ Louis Guirola, Jr.
LOUIS GUIROLA, JR.
CHIEF U.S. DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

