El Paso Elec. Co. v. IBEW, Local No. 960
United States District Court for the Western District of Texas, El Paso Division
January 9, 2012, Decided; January 9, 2012, Filed
EP-11-CA-080-FM

Reporter
2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 193328 *
EL PASO ELECTRIC COMPANY, Plaintiff, v. INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD OF ELECTRICAL WORKERS, LOCAL NO. 960, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For El Paso Electric Company, Plaintiff, Counter Defendant: Dallan Forrest Flake, Dan C. Dargene, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart, P.C., Dallas, TX.
For International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers Local No. 960, Defendant: Nicholas Jason Enoch, LEAD ATTORNEY, Lubin & Enoch PC, El Paso, TX.
For International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers Local No. 960, Counter Plaintiff: Nicholas Jason Enoch, LEAD ATTORNEY, Stanley Lubin, Lubin & Enoch PC, El Paso, TX.
Judges: FRANK MONTALVO, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: FRANK MONTALVO
Opinion



ORDER GRANTING MOTION TO DISMISS COMPLAINT
On this day, the court considered Defendant and Counter-claimant International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Local No. 960's ("Union") "Motion to Dismiss Complaint Pursuant to Rule 12(b)(6), Fed. R. Civ. P." ("Motion to Dismiss") [ECF No. 8], filed May 20, 2011; Plaintiff and Counter-Defendant El Paso Electric Company's ("EPE") "Plaintiff's Response to Defendant's Motion to Dismiss" ("Response") [ECF No. 11], filed May 27, 2011; and "Defendant's Reply in Support of Its Motion to Dismiss Complaint" ("Reply") [ECF No. 12], filed June 6, 2011. For the reasons set forth below, the court will grant the Union's Motion to Dismiss.

I. BACKGROUND

A. Procedural [*2]  History
On March 2, 2011, EPE filed "Plaintiff's Complaint to Vacate Labor Arbitration Award" ("Complaint") [ECF. No. 1]. In its Complaint, EPE requests the court to vacate an arbitration award and final award (collectively "Award") issued by Arbitrator Mark R. Sherman ("Arbitrator") on September 2, 2010, and February 16, 2011, respectively. EPE claims that the Arbitrator improperly sustained the Union's grievance in finding that EPE lacked just cause to terminate EPE employee, Edgar Bustos ("Bustos"), and in ordering that Bustos be reinstated and awarded back pay.
The Union filed its "Counterclaim (Petition to Confirm Arbitration Award)" ("Counterclaim") [ECF No. 5], on May 16, 2011. In its Counterclaim, the Union requests the court to confirm the Arbitrator's Award, and to award it litigation costs and attorney's fees in this suit. The Union also requests the court to order EPE to pay Bustos interest on the back pay ordered by the Arbitrator. EPE filed its "Plaintiff/Counter-Defendant El Paso Electric Company's Answer and Defenses to Counterclaim" ("Plaintiff's Answer") [ECF No. 10] on May 26, 2011.

B. Facts Alleged
EPE alleges that it entered into a Collective Bargaining Agreement ("CBA") [*3]  with the Union, which was in effect throughout the period relevant to the complaint.1 The CBA governs the terms and conditions of employment for all EPE employees who belong to the Union.2 The CBA also contains a grievance procedure to resolve complaints and disputes between EPE and the Union.3 Pursuant to that procedure, if the parties are unable to settle a grievance, they may submit it for arbitration.4 The CBA provides that "[t]he arbitrator shall not have the authority to change, amend, modify, supplement, or otherwise alter this Agreement in any respect whatsoever, and the arbitrator's sole function shall be to decide issues on the basis of facts and proper application and interpretation of this Agreement."5 Further, "the arbitrator's decision shall be final and binding upon both Parties."6
On April 9, 2010 the parties referred a grievance to Arbitrator Mark R. Sherman ("Arbitrator").7 The issues before the Arbitrator were whether EPE had just cause to fire former employee Edgar Bustos ("Bustos"), [*4]  and if not, what remedy was appropriate.8
Bustos was employed as a meter reader with EPE from January 2007 to March 2009.9 At the arbitration hearing, EPE provided evidence that it terminated Bustos because he failed to timely and truthfully report an accident in a company vehicle, and because of his history of disciplinary and performance problems.10 On the issue of Bustos's performance, EPE presented evidence that in 2007 and 2008 Bustos had the third-lowest accuracy rating of all meter-readers, and his performance reviews for both years showed him to be "unsatisfactory" or "below expectations" regarding meter-reading accuracy.11 EPE also presented evidence of Bustos's disciplinary record from 2008. This evidence included a written warning Bustos received for hitting another car bumper and a five-day suspension issued "after [EPE] discovered Bustos had violated Company policies by leaving his assigned work area on numerous occasions for personal reasons, speeding in a Company vehicle, and using his Company vehicle for personal errands."12 Further, EPE presented evidence that in February 2009 Bustos again violated company policy [*5]  by waiting two hours before reporting a second accident in a company vehicle.13 Finally, EPE offered evidence that when Bustos was questioned about his failure to immediately report the accident, he gave several different explanations.14
On September 2, 2010 the Arbitrator issued his Award ("Award") sustaining the grievance and finding the company did not have just cause to terminate Bustos.15 In the Discussion and Opinion ("Opinion") accompanying his Award, the Arbitrator acknowledged that "Mr. Bustos has a way to go before he can be considered an exemplary employee or even a good employee."16 Nonetheless, the Arbitrator explained that his decision in this matter came down to the question: "How fairly and conscientiously did Management work with the Grievant to correct his behavior problems?"17 The Arbitrator found that EPE management failed in this task, providing only "a series of perfunctory and largely unhelpful responses made within the context of questionable human resource management practices."18 The Arbitrator further found that the evidence regarding the alleged severity of Bustos's two accidents was lacking or misleading.19 In particular, he found that EPE failed to prove any [*6]  damage or third party claims.20 The Arbitrator also determined that Bustos's testimony at the hearing was consistent with the multiple reasons he had previously given to explain why he did not immediately report the 2009 accident.21 At the same time, the Arbitrator found that EPE failed to present evidence to show that any of Bustos's stated reasons were false.22
On February 16, 2011, the Arbitrator issued his Final Award, ordering that Bustos be reinstated and granting him back pay.23

C. Parties' Arguments
The Union argues that the case should be dismissed because EPE's allegations do not state any legally cognizable basis for vacating the Award. The Union contends that EPE's "conclusory allegations and unwarranted factual inferences"24 are unavailing in light of the extremely deferential judicial review of labor arbitration awards. In response, EPE argues it has stated a valid claim for relief based on allegations in its Complaint that the Arbitrator "exceeded his contractual authority and dispensed his own brand of industrial justice."25 Specifically, EPE claims that the Arbitrator exceeded his authority by (1) [*7]  finding that EPE's accuracy standards for meter-readers were unreasonably high; (2) ignoring crucial evidence of Bustos's prior disciplinary and performance problems; and (3) improperly interpreting and relying on Federal antidiscrimination law in deciding the case.

II. APPLICABLE LAW
Pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure Rule 12(b)(6) the court may dismiss a complaint for "failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted."26 However, "the motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim is viewed with disfavor and is rarely granted."27
To survive a Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss, the plaintiff must plead "enough facts to state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face."28 "The plausibility standard is not akin to a 'probability requirement,' but it asks for more than a sheer possibility that a defendant has acted unlawfully."29 The factual allegations in a complaint "must be enough to raise a right to relief above the speculative level."30 In reviewing a complaint, a court must "accept all well-pleaded factual allegations as true, and . . . interpret the complaint in the light most favorable to the plaintiff,"31 resolving all doubts on the plaintiff's behalf.32 However, the court [*8]  need not "accept as true a legal conclusion couched as a factual allegation."33 Finally, "[i]n deciding a motion to dismiss the court may consider documents attached to or incorporated in the complaint and matters of which judicial notice may be taken."34

III. DISCUSSION

A. Standard for Judicial Review of Labor Arbitration Award
Pursuant to the Labor-Management Relations Act, Title 29, United States Code, Section 173, "[f]inal adjustment by a method agreed upon by the parties is . . . the desirable method for settlement of grievance disputes arising over the application or interpretation of an existing collective-bargaining agreement."35 Consequently, a court's power to review labor arbitration decisions is very narrow.36 The court does not have authority to review the merits of the arbitrator's decision, nor may it review the arbitrator's factual findings or his interpretation of the CBA and the relevant law.37 The court will uphold the arbitrator's award so long as "it draws its essence from the collective bargaining agreement, and the arbitrator did not exceed his or her [*9]  authority under the CBA."38
Notwithstanding this deference, the arbitrator is not empowered to "dispense [his] own brand of industrial justice outside the scope of an arbitration agreement."39 Accordingly, the reviewing court must evaluate the arbitrator's decision to ensure it comports with the CBA.40 "[A]n arbitration award must have a basis that is at least rationally inferable, if not obviously drawn, from the letter or purpose of the collective bargaining agreement . . . The award must, in some logical way, be derived from the wording or purpose of the contract."41 The arbitrator exceeds his authority, and his decision should not be upheld, when he ignores or revises "clear and unequivocal" language in the CBA.42 However, "a mere ambiguity in the opinion accompanying an award, which permits the inference that the arbitrator may have exceeded his authority, is not a reason for refusing to enforce the award."43 "[A]s long as the arbitrator is even arguably [*10]  construing or applying the contract and acting within the scope of his authority, that a court is convinced he committed serious error does not suffice to overturn his decision."44

B. Whether the Arbitrator Exceeded His Authority in Determining That EPE's Meter-Reader Accuracy Standards Were Too High
EPE argues that the Arbitrator exceeded his authority because, in evaluating the evidence supporting Bustos's termination, the Arbitrator found the company's accuracy standard for meter-readers to be unreasonably high. EPE contends that this finding contradicts the CBA, which "grants the Company the unilateral right to establish such standards."45
EPE's argument misconstrues the issue decided by the Arbitrator. The Arbitrator did not decide whether the Company had the right to establish performance standards, but rather decided what weight to give these standards in determining if there was just cause to terminate Bustos. In making this latter determination, the Arbitrator acted in accordance with the CBA, which required him to decide issues based on the facts, and on his interpretation and application of the contract.46 Consequently, the Arbitrator evaluated EPE's performance standards for meter readers, and found these to be "extreme," potentially subjecting an employee to discipline if he made more than one mistake per 1,000 tasks.47 The Arbitrator also questioned the relevance of Bustos's negative performance evaluations, finding in part that these evaluations measured "irrelevant, misinterpreted or unobserved traits."48 In particular, the Arbitrator found that it made little sense to evaluate Bustos's "Leadership of himself" and whether [*12]  he was "Financial Results Oriented," given his duties as a meter-reader who worked alone.49
Because it is solely within the Arbitrator's discretion to weigh and evaluate the evidence, the court cannot say that he exceeded his contractual authority by deciding to give less or no weight to the evidence of Bustos's performance as measured against EPE's performance standards.50 To the contrary, the Arbitrator fulfilled his duties under the CBA by providing a reasoned and thoughtful analysis of the evidence in making his determination. Accordingly, the Arbitrator did not "dispense [his] own brand of industrial justice"51 but rather issued a decision that drew its essence from the CBA.

C. Whether the Arbitrator Exceeded His Authority by Ignoring Evidence of Bustos's Performance and Disciplinary Problems
EPE next alleges that the Award should be vacated because the Arbitrator allegedly "ignor[ed] key evidence of Bustos's performance and disciplinary problems."52 EPE argues that in so doing, the Arbitrator acted contrary to the CBA, which required him "to decide issues on the basis of facts and proper application and interpretation of [the CBA]."53 In particular, EPE contends that "the Arbitrator refused to consider the Company's [*14]  documentation of Bustos' consistently poor work performance" and, thus, "sustained the grievance based on his personal disdain for performance evaluations."54
EPE also argues that the Arbitrator improperly sustained the grievance based on his determination that Bustos may have had a legitimate reason for failing to report the February 2009 accident.55 One reason Bustos gave was that he was having problems with his radio.56 The Arbitrator found Bustos's testimony to be plausible.57 He further found that EPE failed to produce evidence to rebut Bustos's alleged reasons.58 EPE contends that the Arbitrator's reasoning on this point was "clearly erroneous" and belied by uncontroverted evidence.59 Specifically, EPE alleges that at the hearing it "presented uncontroverted evidence . . . that when Bustos' supervisor spoke with the field analysts to whom Bustos would have reported any radio problems, they confirmed Bustos had not spoken to them about any radio issues."60
"Arbitrators have broad discretion to make evidentiary decisions."61 Thus, an award may only be vacated "when [*15]  the arbitrators [are] guilty of misconduct . . . in refusing to hear evidence pertinent and material to the controversy."62 Even in cases where the arbitrator erred by refusing to hear evidence, the court must find that the arbitrator acted "in bad faith or [the error] was so gross as to amount to affirmative misconduct."63 Such instances are "very rare."64
While EPE clearly disagrees with Arbitrator's assessment of the evidence, these allegations provide no basis for vacating the Award. EPE does not allege that the Arbitrator prevented the Company from presenting evidence or refused to hear any of its evidence. Nor has EPE alleged any facts to suggest bad faith or gross negligence. To the contrary, the Award reflects that the Arbitrator gave careful consideration to EPE's evidence, including the evidence of Bustos's performance problems and Bustos's reasons for not reporting the 2009 accident.65 The Arbitrator determined that some of this evidence from EPE was "convincing,"66 but explained why he found other evidence, such as Bustos's performance evaluations67 and evidence of the alleged [*16]  damage from Bustos's accident, to be "irrelevant" or "misleading."68
In sum, EPE's allegations fail to state a claim for vacating the Award, as this court has no authority to second-guess the Arbitrator's assessment of the evidence, or his factual findings or legal conclusions.69 "A court is not authorized to review the merits of the arbitrator's decision, even if a party alleges that the arbitrator's decision rests on errors of fact and law."70

D. Whether the Arbitrator Exceeded His Authority by Relying on Federal Antidiscrimination Law
Finally, EPE argues the Award should be vacated because the Arbitrator improperly relied on federal antidiscrimination law when he "sustained the grievance, in part, based on his conclusion that the Company violated its duty to accommodate Bustos's hand impairment."71 EPE maintains that this conclusion "is inconsistent with the Company's legal obligations under the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq. ('ADA')."72
EPE's argument borders on frivolous. First, the Arbitrator did not find that EPE had violated the ADA, and in fact there is no mention of the ADA or any other antidiscrimination law in [*17]  his Opinion. Instead, the Arbitrator explained how he considered EPE's failure to accommodate Bustos's disability when evaluating whether EPE had made a thoughtful effort to help Bustos improve his performance and behavior problems.73 The Arbitrator concluded that management failed to take "two obvious steps" to help Bustos: it did not conduct a Performance Improvement Plan, and did not provide Bustos with a newer model meter-reading device that could be operated with one hand.74 This later proposal was important because Bustos was born with only one hand.75 The Arbitrator acknowledged that Bustos had never requested an accommodation for his disability, but found that "this does not absolve an employer from making a minor accommodation when it represents little if any undue hardship."76 The Arbitrator further found that Bustos's need for the new device was specifically brought to management's attention in 2009 by the field analyst assigned to evaluate Bustos.77 EPE contends that because it had no legal duty to accommodate Bustos under the ADA, the Arbitrator was barred from considering its failure to provide Bustos with a hand-held device. In so arguing, it is EPE—not the Arbitrator—that is [*18]  improperly relying on federal antidiscrimination law to import a limitation into the just cause analysis. Neither the CBA nor any legal authority supports such a proposition.
Second, EPE's allegation that the Arbitrator relied on the ADA also fails to state a claim because an Arbitrator is entitled to "look for guidance from many sources."78 While an award must "draw its essence from the collective bargaining agreement," unless the CBA specifies otherwise, "the labor arbitrator's source of law is not confined to the express provisions of the contract, as the industrial common law—the practices of the industry and the shop—is equally a part of the collective bargaining agreement although not expressed in it."79
Third, there are no grounds to vacate because the Award is rationally inferable from language in the CBA prohibiting disability discrimination. In particular, the CBA provides that [*19]  "[t]he parties hereto shall not discriminate in their employment practices against any person by reason of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, national origin, veteran status, age, or disability."80 Thus, the Arbitrator was arguably construing and applying the CBA when he determined that EPE failed to assist Bustos, because, among other thing, the Company failed to a provide a simple accommodation for his obvious disability.
The Arbitrator's Award draws its essence from the CBA, and EPE's allegations provide no basis to vacate it. "The parties bargained for an arbitrator who would determine facts and interpret the contract; there is no injustice in holding them to this bargain."81

IV. CONCLUSION & ORDERS
The Arbitration Award is "at least rationally inferable, if not obviously drawn, from the letter or purpose of the collective bargaining agreement."82 Accordingly, the court enters the following Orders:
1. The Union's "Motion to Dismiss Complaint Pursuant to Rule 12(b)(6), Fed. R. Civ. P." [ ECF No. 8] is GRANTED.
2. EPE's claims against the Union are DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE.
SO ORDERED.
SIGNED this 9th day of January, [*20]  2012.
/s/ Frank Montalvo
FRANK MONTALVO
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

