Emerick v. Wood River—Hartford Sch. Dist. No. 15
United States District Court for the Southern District of Illinois
March 9, 2018, Decided; March 9, 2018, Filed
Case No. 16-cv-0788-MJR-RJD

Reporter
2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 249910 *; 2018 WL 11508494
JANE EMERICK, Plaintiff, v. WOOD RIVER—HARTFORD SCHOOL DISTRICT NO. 15, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Jane Emerick, Plaintiff: Lee W. Barron, LEAD ATTORNEY, Lee W. Barron, PC, Clarkson Valley, MO.
For Wood River-Hartford School District 15, Defendant: Garrett P. Hoerner, Thomas J Hunter, Becker, Hoerner & Ysursa, P.C., Belleville, IL.
Judges: Michael J. Reagan, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Michael J. Reagan
Opinion



ORDER
REAGAN, Chief District Judge:

I. Introduction
This matter is before the Court on Defendant, Wood River—Hartford School District No. 15's ("Wood River"), Second Motion for Summary Judgment (Doc. 40).1 The underlying dispute is based upon Plaintiff Jane Emerick's claim that Wood River (her employer) failed to provide reasonable accommodations and discriminated against her for her disabilities (Doc. 1). Emerick identifies numerous specific occasions of discrimination or a lack of accommodations in her Complaint spanning from 2013 to present. After reviewing the initial motion to dismiss and motion for summary judgment, this Court narrowed the scope of the claims by eliminating those that could have been presented at earlier dates. The Court deferred ruling on other claims to allow the factual record to develop. In November 2017, Defendant filed a second motion for summary judgment (Doc. [*2]  40). A timely response and reply were also filed (Docs. 46, 47). The matter is now ripe for ruling.

II. Facts
In June of 2017, this Court addressed the parties' initial briefing on a combined motion to dismiss and motion for summary judgment (Doc. 32). The Court extensively reviewed the history of the case and narrowed the scope of the claims based on which claims were presented in a timely fashion to the EEOC and the Court. Based on the prior order, the issues properly before the Court at this juncture could include claims for failure to accommodate or disparate treatment based on discrete incidents of conduct from January 5, 2015, forward. A recapitulation of the remaining factual allegations that survived the first summary judgment ruling will assist in evaluating the appropriateness of summary judgment at this juncture.
Plaintiff alleged that on January 30, 2015, she was not allowed to attend a mock "snowball fight" held in the basement of the school as a reward for student success (Doc. 1, pp 15). Similarly, on February 15, 2015, she was excluded from a dog visit event in the basement (Id., pp. 16). On May 6 and 26, 2015, she was prevented from attending student band [*3]  concerts in the basement (Id., pp. 17). She could not attend any basement activity due to lack of accessibility. Additionally, on August 17 and 18, 2015, access to beginning of the year meetings at the Lewis & Clark campus was difficult because Emerick had to wait over an hour for use of the stair tracker device (Id., pp. 18). On September 14 and 15, 2015, RTI testing (an integral part of Plaintiff's job) was held at the Lewis & Clark campus, but Plaintiff was not allowed to attend (Id., pp. 19-20). During the week of January 11, 2016, RTI testing was again held at the Lewis & Clark campus where Plaintiff was unable to attend. Plaintiff alleged that other RTI interventionists participated, that the principal told her testing was held at Lewis & Clark specifically to exclude her, that the testing was an integral part of her job, and that her exclusion was humiliating and demeaning (Id., pp. 23). Plaintiff alleged in a summative fashion that Defendant has always been aware of her need for accommodations, but that Defendant has repeatedly refused to engage in any collaborative process to develop reasonable accommodations (Id., pp. 24-25).
Plaintiff's deposition testimony provides additional [*4]  details about the events set forth above (Doc. 41-1). Plaintiff testified that she has been a teacher's aide with the district for 19 years (Id. at 8). She spent 15 years at Lewis & Clark school, and then was moved to the Hartford Elementary campus for the 2013-2014 school year (Id. at 9-11). She is able to perform the terms of her job description as a response to intervention specialist ("RTI") (Id. at 19). RTI teachers assist students for approximately 30 minutes a day to work on reading skills (Id.). Plaintiff admitted that the snowball fight activity, the dog visit, and the band concerts were not essential to her role as an RTI specialist, and that no one told her she could not attend the events (Id. at 56-59, 62).
With regard to her ability to access beginning of the year meetings, Plaintiff testified that the meetings lasted two days, and that on one of the days there was an hour long delay at the end of the meeting before a janitor helped her use the stair tracker to ascend the stairs (Id. at 63-68). Despite knowing she needed to attend another meeting, she made small talk and does not recall telling the janitors that she needed to go upstairs sooner (Id. at 67-69). The incident [*5]  caused her embarrassment because she was late to her second meeting of the day (Id. at 63).
Plaintiff also elaborated on her claim that she was excluded from administering certain RTI tests. RTI tests occur three times each school year to assess students' need for remedial instruction (Id. at 79, 86). The three other RTI teachers administered the tests together at Hartford and Lewis & Clark, with the assistance of a social worker who stood in for Plaintiff at the Lewis & Clark testing (Id. at 71-72). Plaintiff was able to attend RTI testing of students at Hartford (Id. at 87-88). Despite her non-attendance at one of the 2015 RTI tests at Lewis & Clark, she still provided feedback about student placement to teachers (Id. at 83-84). No one disparaged her input, despite her absence at the testing (Id. at 84, 101). Plaintiff admitted that she never sought copies of the test materials (Id. at 85). Later in 2015, she apparently refrained from giving input on RTI placement because she felt impaired having not attended testing (Id. at 84, 99-100).
In relation to her failure to accommodate claim, Plaintiff testified that her parents help her on a daily basis by opening the doors to Hartford for [*6]  her (Id. at 106). The lack of grab bars in her classroom restroom has caused her trouble (Id. at 108). For example, on one occasion students would not vacate the handicapped stall of the general restroom, and she soiled herself (Id. at 108). She also asked on a few occasions to be allowed to use the stair tracker device, but was told she could only use it in emergencies (Id. at 113-114).
Plaintiff indicated that she sent a letter to the school board requesting accommodations in September 2015, but she never received a response (Id. at 135-137). She also sent a letter on September 4, 2015, to Dr. Anderson (the superintendent) and her principle seeking grab bars, door openers, and use of the stair tracker, among other things (Id. at 140-43).
Plaintiff has never received negative feedback about her work with the district (Id. at 156). In fact, she has received many compliments from co-workers, parents, and students (Id. at 158). She has never received any offers for accommodations (Id. at 159-60).
The party's specific arguments in relation to disparate treatment and failure to accommodate will be set forth in detail in the analysis section, below.

III. Legal Analysis
Summary judgment is appropriate [*7]  where the admissible evidence shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact, and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Taylor-Novotny v. Health All. Med. Plans, Inc., 772 F.3d 478, 488 (7th Cir. 2014). A "material fact" is a fact that affects the outcome of the lawsuit under the applicable substantive law. Id. at 488, see also Hanover Ins. Co. v. N. Bldg. Co., 751 F.3d 788, 791 (7th Cir.), cert. denied, 135 S.Ct. 280 (2014). Summary judgment should be denied if, based upon the evidence, a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the non-moving party. Miller v. Gonzalez, 761 F.3d 822, 827 (7th Cir. 2014) ("Recall that our job when assessing a summary judgment motion is not to weigh evidence, make credibility determinations, resolve factual disputes and swearing contests, or decide which inferences to draw from the facts."). By contrast, if the factual record could not lead a reasonable jury to find for the non-moving party, then summary judgment is appropriate. Bunn v. Khoury Enter., Inc., 753 F.3d 676, 682 (7th Cir. 2014). This Court assesses the record in the light most favorable to the non-movant, giving the non-movant the benefit of reasonable, favorable inferences. Spaine v. Cmty. Contracts, Inc., 756 F.3d 542, 544 (7th Cir. 2014).

a. Disparate treatment
Defendant argues that there is no viable claim for disparate treatment because none of the remaining factual allegations constitute an adverse action (Doc. 41 at 12-14). Defendant primarily focuses on the extracurricular activities such as attendance [*8]  at the snowball fight, the dog event, and the band concerts (Id.). Defendant relies heavily on Dass for the proposition that not all employer actions that have perceived consequences are materially adverse (Id. at 14). As to attendance at the beginning of the year training, Defendant carefully points out that Plaintiff at her deposition admitted that she waited an hour for the stair tracker device without complaining to those in her presence, thus the instance could not be considered materially adverse (Id.). Finally, Defendant discusses Plaintiff's exclusion from RTI testing, concluding that because she was still able to give input on student placement, and because her role at testing itself would have been merely supervisory, her exclusion was not materially adverse (Id. at 15). Defendant also notes that Plaintiff attended testing at Hartford where she works, but did not attend at Lewis & Clark (Id.).
Plaintiff counters Defendant's arguments by alleging that she does not have to establish a materially adverse consequence because she was subject to direct disparate treatment—namely exclusion from training, RTI testing, student activities, and weekly school meetings (Doc. 46 at 12-13). [*9]  Even if required to show a materially adverse action, Plaintiff contends that her exclusion from the enumerated events was humiliating and degrading and it inhibited her ability to fully participate in her job duties (Id. at 13-14). Thus, Plaintiff concludes that she has presented ample facts, direct and indirect, to proceed beyond summary judgment.
Plaintiff and Defendant both make primary citation to the Hoffman v. Caterpillar, Inc. case for the disparate treatment standard. 256 F.3d 568 (7th Cir. 2001). That case makes it exceedingly clear that if a Plaintiff proffers direct evidence of disparate treatment, he or she does not have to establish an adverse consequence. "Direct evidence of discriminatory intent consists of actions or remarks by the defendant that reflect a discriminatory attitude." Lynch v. Belden and Co., Inc., 882 F.2d 262, 269 (7th Cir. 1989). By contrast, if the evidence of disparate treatment is indirect, a Plaintiff must proceed through the McDonnell-Douglas framework to overcome summary judgment. Hoffman, 256 F.3d at 576. "The purpose of the McDonnell-Douglas burden-shifting approach is to allow a plaintiff to raise an inference of discrimination even in the absence of direct evidence." Id. at 574. In order to establish a prima facie case of discrimination by the indirect method, a [*10]  plaintiff need only show, by a preponderance of the evidence, that his or her employer took an action or made a remark in a way that gives rise to an inference of unlawful discrimination. See Lynch, 882 F.3d at 269. The burden then shifts to the defendant to establish a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for the course of action taken. Id.
There are certain categories of employer activity for which disparate treatment is explicitly prohibited. The ADA specifically prohibits discrimination in regard to "job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions and privileges of employment." Hoffman, 256 F.3d at 575, citing 42 U.S.C. 12112(a). The Hoffman Court carefully explained that if a plaintiff proffers direct evidence of discrimination related to an enumerated activity like "training" then no showing of a materially adverse action is required, whereas, if an employee alleges a general harm based on "terms, conditions, or privileges of employment" then a showing of material adversity may be required. Id. Direct evidence of discrimination regarding an enumerated activity is exceedingly rare. Id. at 576.
Both parties also discuss the Dass v. Chicago Board of Education [*11]  case extensively. 675 F.3d 1060 (7th Cir. 2012). Dass defines a materially adverse employment action as something "more than a mere inconvenience or an alteration of job responsibilities." Id. at 1069. There are three general categories of actionable materially adverse events, including, "cases in which the employee is not moved to a different job or the skill requirements of her present job altered but the conditions in which she works are changed in a way that subjects her to a humiliating, degrading, unsafe, unhealthful, or otherwise significantly negative alteration in her workplace environment." Id. quoting Nicholas v. S. Illinois Univ. Edwardsville, 510 F.3d 772, 780 (7th Cir. 2007) (citation omitted). The Dass Court found that an employer's decision to move a 3rd grade teacher qualified to teach K-8 to 7th grade was not materially adverse despite plaintiff's personal insistence that 7th grade was substantially harder to teach. Id. at 1070.
Here, Plaintiff's allegations fall in to two buckets—first, she alleges restrictions on her ability to participate in training due to delayed operation of the stair tracker. This would be direct evidence of an issue explicitly enumerated—namely job training—so no showing of material adversity would be required under Hoffman. By contrast, Plaintiff's allegation that [*12]  she was not allowed to attend RTI testing or other extracurricular student activities fall within the generalized "other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment" bucket, so for those allegations she would need to establish material adversity. As to the extracurricular activities, the Court finds that she cannot establish material adversity. However, as to the participation in RTI testing, the decision is less clear.
As to the training allegation, Plaintiff cannot establish disparate treatment on the facts presented because the action she identifies does not carry any significant suggestion of discrimination. Plaintiff testified that over the course of two days of beginning of the year training in August 2015, there was a one hour delay on one day of the operation of the stair tracker for her to exit the basement. She indicated that staff who could have operated the stair tracker were in her presence, but she failed to verbalize her need to ascend the stairs at that time. Her choice to socialize with staff could have distracted them from immediately assisting her. A reasonable jury could not infer that this delay was discriminatory in any fashion.
Turning to the general allegations [*13]  of actions that fall within the "other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment" the Court must determine if any of the allegations constituted a material adversity. Starting with the three extracurricular events—the snowball fight, the dog visit, and the student band concerts—the Court finds no material adversity in Plaintiff's exclusion from these events because they are not integral to her role as an RTI interventionist. Based on Plaintiff's own deposition testimony, the events were short, and she was able to use the time the students were at the assemblies to prepare for future lessons (Doc. 41-1 at 47-50). Although it may have felt isolating to miss the events, it certainly did not impair her ability by changing the conditions of her employment such that she could not succeed or advance in her workplace. What is more, Plaintiff does not suggest that her exclusion came about in a humiliating or degrading way. She testified that no one at her workplace has ever said anything degrading to her about her condition, and there is no indication that anything degrading was said in the lead up to these events (Doc. 41-1 at 101). Thus, the Court concludes that exclusion from the three [*14]  events does not constitute material adversity.
Turning to Plaintiff's allegation that she was excluded from participating in RTI testing at the Lewis & Clark campus on multiple occasions, the Court finds that this exclusion also was not materially adverse. On summary judgment, facts must be construed in the light most favorable to the Plaintiff. The evidence on the materiality of RTI testing to Plaintiff's satisfactory performance of her job is primarily Plaintiff's own deposition testimony. At the deposition, Plaintiff avers that RTI testing occurs three times a year, the test is multiple choice, scoring is nearly instantaneous, and once scores are obtained teachers and RTI interventionists discuss the results as well as student classroom behavior prior to the teacher selecting students to participate in RTI (Doc. 41-1 at 73-88). Plaintiff identified multiple occasions starting in January 2015 and onward when she was not allowed to participate in RTI testing at Lewis & Clark (Id. at 80-88, 94-100). In January of 2015, she apparently gave teachers input about RTI placement despite not having seen the substance of the test (Id. at 83-85). She did not ask to see the test, though she did [*15]  obtain the test scores for her personal review (Id.). On later test dates, she testified that she refrained from giving teachers feedback about the RTI placement because she had not been present for the test, nor was she provided a copy of the test (Id. at 99-101). She reportedly was never questioned or chastised for giving feedback or refraining from doing so (Id. at 84).
Plaintiff testified that three other interventionists administered the tests in her absence, and they had to include a school social worker because she could not attend the tests at Lewis & Clark (Id. at 72). The role of proctors was just that---to oversee the test, but not to provide any substantive guidance (Id.). Based on Plaintiff's deposition testimony about the testing and what her role would have been at testing, it is a close call whether or not her exclusion is materially adverse to her. Although teachers make the ultimate decisions about RTI placement, it does seem that Plaintiff has a vested interest because she is an RTI education provider, so she ultimately works with the recommended students. This weighs in favor of the testing being material to her job. However, there are also factors weighing against [*16]  finding that her exclusion was material. Notably, physical attendance at the testing meant being a proctor, so no substantive involvement occurred at that time. Presumably Plaintiff could have read the substance of the test while proctoring to better analyze student scores, but there is no indication that she would have done that. By contrast, she could have just as easily asked for the test and reviewed the substance at another time so that she could collaborate with teachers. The most important fact weighing against materiality is that Plaintiff testified that she was able to attend RTI testing at Hartford—the school where she actually teaches students (Id. at 87-88). Thus, her exclusion from proctoring was only over students at Lewis & Clark—a school she did not teach at. Though it might feel unfair to be excluded from that process, her participation as a proctor at another school campus, for a test to students she does not teach, is not materially adverse.
The final issues that Plaintiff attempts to include in her disparate treatment claim are facilities type accommodations like the lack of automatic opening doors and the lack of grab bars in the restroom in her classroom. Without [*17]  automatic doors, Plaintiff requires the assistance of her family to enter and exit her workplace. Without grab bars, Plaintiff is required to walk down the hallway and around a corner to use an accessible restroom. There are certainly scenarios where these issues could be humiliating or degrading—such as the time when Plaintiff was unable to access an accessible restroom quickly and she had an accident. However, for an action to be materially adverse, it must be a change in working conditions that makes conditions humiliating or degrading. Plaintiff's testimony strongly suggests that the lack of grab bars or door openers have been an issue the entire time she has worked for the district—so these conditions cannot constitute disparate treatment because they did not come about as a result of a change.
In sum, none of Plaintiff's factual allegations about disparate treatment—whether by direct or indirect evidence—are sufficient to proceed beyond summary judgment.

b. Failure to accommodate
To establish a failure to accommodate, a Plaintiff must show that "(1) she is a qualified individual with a disability; (2) the employer was aware of her disability; and, (3) the employer failed to reasonably [*18]  accommodate the disability." Mobley v. Allstate Ins. Co., 531 F.3d 539, 545 (7th Cir. 2008). To make a reasonable accommodation, "the ADA requires that the employer and employee engage in an interactive process to determine a reasonable accommodation." Id. "The term 'reasonable accommodation,' in the context of this case means, '[m]odifications or adjustments to the work environment, or to the manner or circumstances under which the position is held or desired is customarily performed, that enable [a qualified] individual with a disability...to perform the essential functions of that position[.]" Bunn, 753 F.3d at 682 (citing 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(1)(ii)).
Here, the parties do not dispute that Plaintiff has a disability or that the Defendant was aware of it, thus the Court need only consider the third element—whether the parties engaged in a process to determine an accommodation. Defendant suggests that this claim cannot proceed because the discrete incidents of failure to accommodate were contained in portions of the complaint excised under this Court's earlier time-bar/EEOC analysis (Doc. 41 at 17-20). Defendant additionally insists that as to remaining possible allegations contained in the remedies section of the Complaint, or elsewhere, any claims should not survive because Plaintiff failed [*19]  to raise the issues through established grievance channels (Id.). What is more, Defendant argues that Plaintiff can and is performing her job without accommodations, so the employer has no burden to make accommodations (Id.).
The Court's prior order left open the possibility that a theory of failure to accommodate could succeed either based upon conduct post-dating January 5, 2015, or perhaps based upon a theory of a continuing violation. Plaintiff responds that the Complaint and record contain discrete incidents of failure to accommodate that fall within this Court's prior summary judgment ruling (Doc. 46 at 11). As to Defendant's other arguments that Plaintiff successfully performs her job, Plaintiff argues this is not an excuse for the Defendant failing to engage in a collaborative accommodations process (Id. at 8-11). The evidence now before the Court is sufficient for a reasonable jury to find that the Defendant failed to accommodate Plaintiff's needs.
Plaintiff testified that despite multiple attempts to confer with her employer about needed accommodations, the process was never collaborative (Doc. 41-1 at 159-160). Some of her attempts to secure accommodations post-date January [*20]  5, 2015—such as her September 4, 2015 letter to Dr. Anderson (the superintendent), and her September 2015 letter to the school board—both of which went unanswered (Id. at 135-43). Additionally, some of the paragraphs of her complaint that survived the initial time-bar/EEOC exhaustion analysis allege a general 'failure to accommodate' without specifying which particular aspects of the work facility caused a problem (See Doc. 1 at 5-6). These allegations—within the 300 days of the second EEOC filing—could support a theory of a continuous violation.2 Plaintiff has been employed with the school district for approximately 19 years. Despite the fact that she has developed her own work arounds to do her job by having her parents help her get into the building, etc., her employer is not off the hook for the collaborative accommodation process. Defendant cannot fairly say that Plaintiff can perform the functions of her job without accommodation because she would not even be able to enter the building to begin performing functions of her job without the help of her parents. Thus, the Court finds that a reasonable jury could review the evidence and conclude that Defendant has failed to make efforts [*21]  to accommodate Plaintiff.

IV. Pending motions
On December 18, 2017, Defendant filed a Motion for Sanctions (Doc. 43) seeking sanctions against Plaintiff for alleged non-compliance with a discovery directive issued by the assigned Magistrate Judge—Reona J. Daly. The undersigned hereby DEFERS ruling on that Motion to Judge Daly since she is the Judge who is overseeing the discovery process.
On January 16, 2018, Defendant filed a Reply to Plaintiff's Response to Summary Judgment wherein it asked the undersigned to grant summary judgment in its favor as a sanction against Plaintiff for failing to respond to the Motion for Sanction. The Court finds this request to be extreme. Accordingly, the relief requested in the Reply (Doc. 47) is hereby DENIED.
Defendant's Motion in Limine (Doc. 48) will be addressed by separate order.

V. Conclusion
Based upon the foregoing analysis, the Court hereby GRANTS in PART and DENIES in PART the Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment (Doc. 41). Summary judgment is GRANTED as to any claim that Plaintiff was subjected to disparate treatment. By contrast, summary judgment is  [*22] DENIED as to Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim.
This matter is scheduled to proceed to trial on Monday, March 26, 2018 at 9a.m. The final pretrial conference is on Thursday, March 22, 2018, at 2p.m. Jury instructions and a final pretrial memo are due to chambers by Monday, March 19, 2018.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
DATED: March 9, 2018
/s/ Michael J. Reagan
Michael J. Reagan
United States District Judge


End of Document

