Espinosa v. Contra Costa County
United States District Court for the Northern District of California
January 10, 2022, Decided; January 11, 2022, Filed
Case No. 19-cv-08055-JSW

Reporter
2022 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 17400 *
DARRIN ESPINOSA, Plaintiff, v. CONTRA COSTA COUNTY, Defendant.
Subsequent History: Affirmed by, Motion denied by Espinosa v. Contra Costa Cnty., 2023 U.S. App. LEXIS 12646, 2023 WL 3596449 (9th Cir. Cal., May 23, 2023)
Counsel:  [*1] For Darrin Espinosa, Plaintiff: Richard Neil Koss, Law Offices of Richard N. Koss, Redwood City, CA.
For Contra Costa County, Defendant: Sean Michael Rodriquez, LEAD ATTORNEY, Office of the Contra Costa County Counsel, Martinez, CA.
Judges: JEFFREY S. WHITE, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: JEFFREY S. WHITE
Opinion



ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
Re: Dkt. No. 36
Now before the Court is the motion for summary judgment filed by Defendant County of Contra Costa ("County"). The Court finds the motion well-taken and it is GRANTED.

BACKGROUND
Plaintiff was a temporary building inspector for the County who was seriously injured by a dog bite on his first day of work. After working with the injury for the time period of his temporary employment, Plaintiff eventually applied for a permanent position. Although he received a conditional offer of permanent employment, the offer was withdrawn after it was determined that Plaintiff was unable to pass the functional capacity examination due to his inability to climb a ladder. Plaintiff's employment by the County ended when his temporary assignment terminated.
By this lawsuit, Plaintiff seeks to raise state and federal claims that he was unlawfully terminated based [*2]  on his disability. However, Plaintiff was not qualified to perform the essential functions of the permanent position he applied for. Plaintiff was not deprived of a reasonable accommodation as the employer is not required to waive an essential function of the job and Plaintiff himself has not identified any reasonable accommodation he requested, was entitled to, or was denied. Lastly, the County did not fail to engage in an interactive process when the undisputed record indicates that Plaintiff cancelled the interactive meeting, failed to reschedule one, and consistently maintained that he did not require any accommodation.

ANALYSIS

A. Applicable Legal Standards.
Summary judgment, or partial summary judgment, is proper "if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). A principal purpose of the summary judgment procedure is to identify and dispose of factually unsupported claims. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323-24, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). The Court may not weigh evidence or make determinations of credibility. Rather, "[t]he evidence of the non-movant is to be believed, and all justifiable inferences are to be drawn in his favor." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, 477 U.S. 242, 255, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). The party moving for [*3]  summary judgment bears the initial burden of identifying those portions of the pleadings, discovery, and affidavits that demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact. Celotex, 477 U.S. at 323; see also Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). While the Court may consider all materials in the record, the court need only consider the materials the parties cite: it is not the Court's task to scour the record in search of a disputed issue of fact. See Keenan v. Allan, 91 F.3d 1275, 1279 (9th Cir. 1996) (citing Richards v. Combined Ins. Co., 55 F.3d 247, 251 (7th Cir. 1995)); see also Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(3).
An issue of fact is "genuine" only if there is sufficient evidence for a reasonable fact finder to find for the non-moving party. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248-49. A fact is "material" if it might affect the outcome of the case. Id. at 248. If the party moving for summary judgment does not have the ultimate burden of persuasion at trial, that party must produce evidence which either negates an essential element of the non-moving party's claims or show that the non-moving party does not have enough evidence of an essential element to carry its ultimate burden of persuasion at trial. Nissan Fire & Marine Ins. Co. v. Fritz Cos., 210 F.3d 1099, 1102 (9th Cir. 2000). Once the moving party meets its initial burden, the non-moving party must "identify with reasonable particularity the evidence that precludes summary judgment." Keenan, 91 F.3d at 1279 (9th Cir. 1996). A "mere scintilla of evidence" is insufficient to defeat a properly [*4]  supported motion for summary judgment; rather, the nonmoving party must "introduce some significant probative evidence" to support its case. Summers v. Teichert & Son, Inc., 127 F.3d 1150, 1152 (9th Cir. 1997) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). If the non-moving party fails to point to evidence precluding summary judgment, the moving party is then entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Celotex, 477 U.S. at 323.

B. Claims under ADA and FEHA.
Plaintiff contends that he was subject to discrimination in employment due to his disability. He claims that the County's failure to hire him in a permanent position, or to terminate him from a temporary one, was based upon his disability as a result of the dog bite on the first day of his temporary position, causing him injuries to his left shoulder, arm, and wrist.
After some time as a temporary inspector, Plaintiff applied for a permanent position and was granted a conditional offer of employment contingent on successfully passing the physical examination and functional capacity test. Plaintiff self-reported loss of feeling in his upper extremities and pain that limited his daily activities and/or ability to perform essential functions of the job. He reported weakness in his arms and hands and difficulty moving his arms [*5]  and legs, as well as difficulty climbing a flight of stairs or a ladder carrying more than 25 pounds. (County Evidence, Ex. EE at 9.) As part of the functional capacity test, Plaintiff was required to climb up and down a ladder twice. (Id. at ¶ 8.) Plaintiff did not take or pass the functional capacity test and he did not reschedule a time to meet for an interactive meeting.
Plaintiff's first claim for disability discrimination is premised upon an alleged violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"). Plaintiff claims the County violated the ADA by "refusing to accommodate [his] disability, by refusing to consider any request for reasonable accommodation or offer any other reasonable accommodation which would not have caused an undue hardship for [the County], and by instead terminating him." (Complaint at ¶ 36.)
In order to prevail on an ADA claim based on unlawful discharge, a plaintiff must show that he suffered an adverse employment action because of his disability. Specifically, the plaintiff "must establish a prima facie case by showing that: (1) he is a disabled person within the meaning of the statute; (2) he is a qualified individual with a disability; and (3) he suffered an adverse employment action because [*6]  of his disability." Hutton v. Elf Atochem N. Am., 273 F.3d 884, 891 (9th Cir. 2001). In order to satisfy the requirement to be considered a qualified individual with a disability, the employee must be able to "perform the essential functions of the employment position." 4 U.S.C. § 1211(8). The "essential functions" of a position are comprised of the position's "fundamental duties." Garcia v. Johnson, 630 Fed. Appx. 684, 686 (9th Cir. Nov. 13, 2015). The ADA does not apply where the employee is incapable of performing an essential function of the job, even with an accommodation. Bates v. UPA, 511 F.3d 974, 990 (9th Cir. 2007). "The ADA does not require an employer to exempt an employee from performing essential functions or to reallocate essential functions to other employees." Dark v. Curry County, 451 F.3d 1078, 1089 (9th Cir. 2006). Here, there is no dispute that being able to climb a ladder is an essential function of the job Plaintiff applied for — and there is no dispute that Plaintiff passed the test to demonstrate he was capable of this essential function.
With regard to the third prong — the requirement that the adverse action was taken because of the employee's disability, the burden is on the plaintiff to "show that the adverse employment action would not have occurred but for the disability." Murray v. Mayo Clinic, 934 F.3d 1101, 1105 (9th Cir. 2019) (emphasis added). In order to prevail on a claim under the ADA, the plaintiff must show that he would not have been discharged [*7]  if not for his disability. Id. at 1006.
In this case, Plaintiff at once contends that he functioned in his temporary position without accommodation, and also that he requested no further accommodations when applying for a permanent position. An employee who is adamant that he does not require accommodation cannot be entitled to recovery under a theory that he was deprived an accommodation he neither sought nor needed. In this case, Plaintiff has changed position from his original complaint in which he alleged that he was terminated because of his disability to his current position in opposing the motion for summary judgment that he was not terminated, but rather was not hired as a permanent employee due to his disability. (See Opp. Br. at 19 n.1.) Further, as Plaintiff claims that he was able to perform all the functions of the building inspector, regardless whether it was in his temporary or the permanent position, he claims that the County violated his rights because of "his perceived disability." (Id.)
It is clear from the undisputed factual record that during his temporary tenure at the County, Plaintiff's position as building inspector required that he be able to climb ladders. The determination [*8]  not to give Plaintiff the functional capacity test during the application process for a permanent position was based on upon the conclusion that Plaintiff was not able, safely, to climb due to the loss of strength in Plaintiff's left hand. (See Def. Ex. EE at ¶ 29.)
The California Fair Housing and Employment Act ("FEHA"), which bars discrimination based on disability, similarly requires the plaintiff to show that (1) he suffers from a disability, (2) he is otherwise qualified to do his job, (3) he suffered an adverse employment action, and (4) the employer harbored discriminatory intent. Avila v. Continental Airlines, Inc., 165 Cal. App. 4th 1237, 1247, 82 Cal. Rptr. 3d 440 (2008). Again, based on the undisputed record here, Plaintiff cannot make out a prima facie case of discrimination as he was not qualified to the job as permanent building inspector. See Dep't of Fair Empl.& Housing v. Lucent Techs, Inc., 642 F.3d 728, 745 ("The FEHA prohibits discrimination against any person with a disability, but, like the ADA, provides that the law allows the employer to discharge an employee with a physical disability when that employee is unable to perform the essential duties of the job even with reasonable accommodation."). The plaintiff bears the burden to demonstrate that he is a qualified individual under the statute and must demonstrate that he [*9]  could perform the essential functions of the job with or without a reasonable accommodation. See Atkins v. City of Los Angeles, 8 Cal. App. 5th 696, 71 (2017) (internal quotations omitted).
Just as he was unable to carry his burden under the ADA, Plaintiff here is unable to demonstrate that he qualifies for the protections under the FEHA. Employers simply do not have the obligation to accommodate a disabled employee by waiving a requirement of the position at issue. Furtado v. State Pers. Bd., 212 Cal. App. 4th 729, 753, 151 Cal. Rptr. 3d 292 (2013). Here, it is also clear that the adverse employment action was not terminating Plaintiff from his temporary position, but rather failing to hire him for a permanent position without the appropriate qualifications. This does not amount to a violation of either the ADA or the FEHA. Regardless, under both the ADA and the FEHA, Plaintiff cannot be heard to complaint about the lack of accommodation when he specifically and repeatedly denied needing or requesting one.

C. Claim for Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process.
Plaintiff's claim for failure to engage in the interactive process under the FEHA is similarly precluded by the undisputed facts in the record. In order to state such a claim, a plaintiff must establish that (1) he had a known disability, (2) he requested a reasonable [*10]  accommodation for the disability so that he could perform the essential job functions, (3) he was willing to participate in the interactive process to determine whether a reasonable accommodation could be made, (4) the employer failed to participate in a timely good-faith interactive process to determine whether a reasonable accommodation could be made, (5) the employee was harmed, and (6) the employer's failure to engage in a good-faith interactive process was a substantial factor in causing the harm. Shirvanyan v. L.A. Community College District, 59 Cal. App. 5th 82, 94, 273 Cal. Rptr. 3d 312 (2020).
Plaintiff is unable to bear his burden to demonstrate that he was so harmed as he has consistently maintained that he neither requested nor needed an accommodation for his perceived or actual disability. Without seeking such an accommodation, Plaintiff is not able to demonstrate that he was harmed by the failure of his employer to provide one. The statutory provision applicable for this cause of action provides that it is unlawful for an employer to fail to engage in an interactive process "in response to a request for a reasonable accommodation by an employee or applicant with a known physical or mental disability or known medical condition." Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(n). As Plaintiff has consistently and unequivocally [*11]  stated that he made no request for such accommodation nor did he need such an accommodation, his claim for his employer's failure to engage in the process of fixing such an accommodation necessarily fails.1

CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, the Court GRANTS the County's motion for [*12]  summary judgment on all claims. The Court shall issue a separate judgment and the clerk shall close the file.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
Dated: January 10, 2022
/s/ Jeffrey S. White
JEFFREY S. WHITE
United States District Judge

JUDGMENT
Pursuant to the Court's order issued this date granting Defendant Contra Costa County's, motion for summary judgment, the Court HEREBY ENTERS JUDGMENT in favor of Defendant.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
Dated: January 10, 2022
/s/ Jeffrey S. White
JEFFREY S. WHITE
United States District Judge


End of Document

