Ewing v. W. Va. Advocates
United States District Court for the Southern District of West Virginia, Charleston Division
April 28, 2009, Decided; April 28, 2009, Filed
CIVIL ACTION NO. 2:07-cv-00700

Reporter
2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 145138 *
FREDERICK L. EWING, Plaintiff, v. WEST VIRGINIA ADVOCATES, INC., Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Frederick L. Ewing, Plaintiff; Mark Jenkinson, LEAD ATTORNEY, BURKE SCHULTZ HARMAN & JENKINSON, Martinsburg, WV USA; Scott H. Kaminski, BALGO & KAMINSKI, Charleston, WV USA.
For West Virginia Advocates, Inc., Defendant: Billie Jo Streyle, LEAD ATTORNEY, ALLEN KOPET & ASSOCIATES, Charleston, WV USA; Charles R. Bailey, BAILEY & WYANT, Charleston, WV USA.
Judges: Joseph R. Goodwin, Chief United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Joseph R. Goodwin
Opinion



ORDER
Pending before the court are the plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment [Docket 116], the defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment [Docket 118], and the defendant's Motion to Exceed Page Limit for Memorandum in Support of Motion for Summary Judgment [Docket 120]. For the reasons herein, the plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment is DENIED, the defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment is GRANTED in part and DENIED in part, and the defendant's Motion to Exceed Page Limit is GRANTED.

I. Factual History
In 1972, the plaintiff, Frederick L. Ewing, was in a motorcycle accident that left him paralyzed from the chest down. (WVA's Mot. Summ. J., Ex. 1, Oct. 20, 2008 Ewing Dep. 7:19-20, October 20, 2008 ("Ewing 2008 Dep.").) As a quadriplegic, Mr. Ewing [*2]  has sensation above his breast line and limited movement in his arms and hands. (Id. at 8:5-9.) These physical limitations do not, however, prevent him from performing activities such as typing and driving.
On June 7, 1995, Mr. Ewing was hired on a temporary full-time basis with the defendants, West Virginia Advocates, Inc. ("WVA"), as a Regional Advocate. (WVA's Mot. Summ. J., Ex. 4.) The executive director of WVA who oversaw Mr. Ewing's work in that position reports that his performance was excellent. (Ewing's Mot. Partial Summ. J., Ex. A, Leasure Dep. 38:10-11, Oct. 22, 2008 ("Leasure 2008 Dep.").) Subsequently, on April 2, 1996, Mr. Ewing commenced a full-time position with WVA as an Advocate for the Client Assistance Program ("CAP"). (WVA's Mot. Summ. J., Ex. 5.) That position was based out of WVA's Charleston office. (Id.) In that position, Mr. Ewing was "responsible for providing assistance and advocacy services under the supervision of [the] CAP Director." (Id.) Among the essential job functions of an Advocate is the "ability to travel and work independently." (Id., Ex. 6 at 1.) From the time that he was hired in that position until the year 2000, Mr. Ewing appears to have performed [*3]  his work very well. (Leasure 2008 Dep. 43:2-6.)
On August 1, 2000, Mr. Ewing began working from his home in Piney View, West Virginia. (WVA's Mot. Summ. J., Ex. 8.) He continued, however, to travel to Charleston about once a week to conduct outreach. (Ewing 2008 Dep. 63:14-23.) Occasionally he would not be able to go to Charleston because "either [he] was sick, had vehicle trouble," or his outreach session was not scheduled. (Id. 64:5-8.) Most often, he was unable to travel to Charleston because of trouble with his specially-equipped van, which occurred fairly frequently. (Id. 67:5-14.)
Starting in 2004, Mr. Ewing's performance reviews began to indicate that he was not successfully performing the functions of his position. Until that time, Mr. Ewing had consistently received high marks in his performance reviews. The reviews describe Mr. Ewing's extensive knowledge of the programs and services offered by WVA. Even those early reviews, however, show that Mr. Ewing had some difficulties with organization and keeping up with his cases. The review for the time period between September 1, 2004 and September 29, 2005, specifically includes comments on these areas, as well as others. For instance, [*4]  the review reports that Mr. Ewing's difficulty with his vehicle and events in his personal life impeded his ability to excel in his position. (Ewing's Mot. Partial Summ. J., Ex. J.) The review also reports that he did not close his cases in a timely manner and that he had missed "more than fifty percent of his scheduled outreaches." (Id.) The review also includes a Plan for Improvement addressing Mr. Ewing's difficulties with closing cases, attendance, and job interferences associated with Mr. Ewing's personal and vehicle needs. (Id.)
On January 11, 2005, Clarice E. Hausch, who became the WVA executive director in January 2004, sent a memorandum to all of WVA's employees explaining its decision to close all of its field offices. (Id., Ex. 10.) Because Mr. Ewing's home office was among those to be closed, Mr. Ewing requested that he be permitted to continue working from his home despite WVA's decision. The reasons underlying his request included his concerns about his breathing difficulties and the absence of a personal support system in Charleston. Mr. Ewing asserts that environmental conditions such as "exhaust fumes, pollution, [and] heat]" affect him as a quadriplegic because he [*5]  has more difficulty breathing in such conditions. (Ewing 2008 Dep. 13:11-14, 58:16-59:12.) By the time he made his 2005 request to continue working from home, his breathing problems had worsened from the time that he had initially worked in Charleston. (Id. 72:1-10.) Mr. Ewing's doctor, however, did not have any objection to his going to work in Charleston. (Id. 74:1-20.)
On August 10, 2005, Ms. Hausch sent Mr. Ewing a letter denying Mr. Ewing's request to continue working from his home. Recognizing that Mr. Ewing's request was for an ADA accommodation, Ms. Hausch explained that the defendant could not grant the accommodation because it would "cause an undue financial hardship" for WVA. (Ewing's Mot. Partial Summ. J., Ex. C.)
Despite having denied Mr. Ewing's request, Ms. Hausch allowed Mr. Ewing to continue working from his Piney View home for another year. (Id., Ex. D ¶ 6; WVA's Mot. Summ. J., Ex. 9, Clarice Hausch Dep. 67:21-70:10, June 5, 2008.) Mr. Ewing also received a two-step pay increase from WVA. (Ewing's Mot. Partial Summ. J., Ex. E.) In the letter informing Mr. Ewing of his pay increase, Ms. Hausch commended Mr. Ewing for his "hard work, teamwork and willingness to learn new [*6]  things and . . . desire to accept new challenges." (Id.) Mr. Ewing continued, however, to have some job performance difficulties during that year. WVA administrators had several communications with Mr. Ewing with respect to client complaints about his services and his outreach efforts. (WVA's Mot. Summ. J., Ex. 13.) Further, Mr. Ewing's performance review for that year demonstrates that Mr. Ewing had some difficulty performing the duties of his position. The performance review indicates that he again had trouble keeping up with and closing his accounts and responding to clients in a timely manner. (Ewing's Mot. Partial Summ. J., Ex. J.) The review also indicates that Mr. Ewing did not provide any alternatives "to meeting the essential functions of his job when his personal situation interferes with him getting his job done." (Id.) Mr. Ewing had also failed to schedule outreach events as required by his position. (Id.) Finally, the review reports that Mr. Ewing was "unable to organize his time and work effectively due to problems with his staff not showing up for work." (Id.) The review also shows, however, that Mr. Ewing was pleasant to work with, communicated clearly, and was exceedingly [*7]  knowledgeable about the programs offered by WVA.
On August 31, 2006, Mr. Ewing was informed by conference call that the WVA management had finally decided to close his home office and require him to work out of the Charleston office. (Ewing's Mot. Partial Summ. J., Ex. M.) The WVA management's decision was "based on the need to have more control over confidential client information as well as other agency related issues." (Id.) On September 5, 2006, Mr. Ewing sent another letter requesting to work from his home as an ADA job accommodation. (WVA's Mot. Summ. J., Ex. 18.) In that letter, Mr. Ewing explained that the requested accommodation would "keep [him] out of the pollution in the Charleston, WV area that will adversely affect [his] breathing. It will lesson the progression of [his Chronic Restrictive Pulmonary Disease]. The accommodation will also allow [him] to have reduced exposure to colds and flu which exacerbate [his Chronic Restrictive Pulmonary Disease]." (Id.) On September 18, 2006, Ms. Hausch responded to Mr. Ewing's letter and denied his request. (Ewing's Mot. Partial Summ. J., Ex. G.) Ms. Hausch explained that while there was no question that Mr. Ewing was disabled, "[his] [*8]  job performance in recent months indicates that [he] may not be qualified to perform the essential functions of [his] job." (Id.) Ms. Hausch further stated her belief that WVA would better support and supervise Mr. Ewing's work from the Charleston office. (Id.) Ms. Hausch also offered to provide Mr. Ewing with various support and accommodations to assist his transition and work at the Charleston office. (Id.)
After his request to work from home was denied, Mr. Ewing did not go to work at the Charleston office. Instead, on November 13, 2006, Mr. Ewing went on paid leave. (Ewing 2008 Dep. 145:4-9.) By December 13, 2006, Mr. Ewing had exhausted all of his paid leave and was placed on unpaid leave. (Id. 147:15-148:21). He did, however, continue to receive medical benefits through WVA. (Id. 149:16-24.)
On October 25, 2006, Mr. Ewing filed a complaint with the West Virginia Human Rights Commission ("Commission") alleging that WVA's decision requiring him to work from Charleston rather than his home office in Piney View constituted discrimination against him based on his disability. (WVA's Mot. Summ. J., Ex. 21.) On March 7, 2007, the Commission entered a determination of "No Probable Cause" [*9]  with respect to Mr. Ewing's claim. (Id.) In November 2007, Mr. Ewing filed for disability benefits with the Social Security Administration ("SSA"). (Ewing's Mem. Opp'n WVA's Mot. Summ. J., Ex. B, D [Docket 124].)

II. Procedural History
On July 30, 2007, Mr. Ewing filed a Complaint in the Circuit Court of Kanawha County, West Virginia, against WVA. (Petition Removal, Ex. 1 [Docket 1].) In that Complaint, Mr. Ewing raised claims under the West Virginia Human Rights Act ("WVHRA"), W. Va. Code § 5-11-9(7), and the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101-12213, 47 U.S.C. § 225. Specifically, Mr. Ewing asserted that the defendant discriminated against him in violation of both the ADA and the WVHRA by not providing him with a reasonable accommodation. Mr. Ewing also alleged that WVA retaliated against him for filing a complaint with the Human Rights Commission by continuing to discriminate against him. Mr. Ewing sought an injunction prohibiting WVA's alleged discriminatory practices and compelling the restoration of his employment from his home office. He also sought monetary damages.
On November 2, 2007, WVA removed Mr. Ewing's action to this court based on this court's federal question jurisdiction. (Petition Removal ¶ 5.) On February [*10]  18, 2009, Mr. Ewing filed a Motion for Partial Summary Judgment [Docket 116]. In that Motion, Mr. Ewing seeks summary judgment only on his WVHRA claim alleging that WVA failed to provide him with a reasonable accommodation. On March 2, 2009, WVA filed a Motion for Summary Judgment [Docket 118] in which it makes three specific judgment requests.1 First, WVA seeks summary judgment on all of Mr. Ewing's claims based on the fact that Mr. Ewing is not a qualified individual protected by the ADA or the WVHRA. WVA argues that because Mr. Ewing is not a qualified individual, WVA was not required to provide him with a reasonable accommodation. Second, WVA seeks summary judgment on Mr. Ewing's retaliation claim because Mr. Ewing has not established a prima facie case. Third, WVA asks this court to deny Mr. Ewing's request for an injunction. Mr. Ewing seeks an injunction requiring WVA to provide the requested accommodation and to allow Mr. Ewing to return to work. WVA argues that Mr. Ewing's request for an injunction should be denied because Mr. Ewing poses a direct threat to himself and others when performing the essential functions of his position.
In addition to the arguments raised in [*11]  its Motion for Summary Judgment, WVA also argues in its response to Mr. Ewing's motion that Mr. Ewing's motion should be stricken. I will address this argument first before discussing the arguments for judgment.

III. WVA Request to Strike Mr. Ewing's Motion
WVA argues that Mr. Ewing's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment should be stricken because it raises new factual issues. Specifically, the defendant references Mr. Ewing's affidavit, dated February 13, 2009, two days after the conclusion of discovery in this matter. (WVA's Resp. Ewing's Mot. Partial Summ. J. 2 [Docket 123].) The defendant argues that Mr. Ewing asserts reasons in that affidavit, and also in his motion, as to why he needed to work from his home that were not before the defendant when it denied Mr. Ewing's request to do so. (Id. at 3.) For instance, Mr. Ewing asserts in his affidavit and his motion that he could not work in Charleston because he needed the support network he had established in Piney View, he physically could not tolerate the long commute, and the Charleston office was inaccessible to a person with his disabilities. In his 2006 request to work from his home, however, Mr. Ewing only cited to the pollution in Charleston [*12]  which would "adversely affect his breathing" and "lessen the progression of his CPRD." (Id. at 3.) Because the defendant has not had the opportunity to conduct discovery on this new theory of his case, WVA argues that Mr. Ewing should not be granted summary judgment on such a theory. (Id. at 4.)
Mr. Ewing replies that he has not raised new issues. (Ewing's Reply 2 [Docket 126].) He notes that he explained the difficulties caused by his disability in his request to work from his home. He also notes that all of the issues addressed in the affidavit were covered by his depositions. He argues that the allegedly "new" facts are no more than a summary of the information gleaned over the course of discovery. (Id. 3-4.)
I FIND that WVA's argument is without merit because Mr. Ewing's motion and affidavit dated February 13, 2009, do not present new information. In Mr. Ewing's October 20, 2008 deposition, he discussed several concerns underlying his request to work from home. Among those were his breathing difficulties in Charleston and his need for his support system in Piney View (Ewing 2008 Dep. 70:9-71:12.) He also explained how his medical conditions inhibited his ability to commute to and from Charleston on a daily [*13]  basis. (Id. 78:7-81:11.) Moreover, Mr. Ewing has presented several depositions in which the deponents discussed the inaccessibility of the Charleston office. (See Ewing's Reply, Ex. A—C.) As Mr. Ewing stated, the February 13, 2009, affidavit merely consolidates issues previously discussed by the parties. Moreover, because the affidavit does not assert any facts that could not be found in other portions of the record, there is no concern that the Mr. Ewing has submitted the affidavit for the purpose of creating factual issues and avoiding summary judgment. (See WVA's Resp. Ewing's Mot. Partial Summ. J. 2.) Accordingly, WVA's request to strike Mr. Ewing's motion on the basis that he introduced new facts and a new theory of the case is DENIED.2 I will now address the substantive arguments raised in each motion.

IV. WVA's Motion for Summary Judgment

A. Standard of Review
To obtain summary judgment, the moving party must show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). In considering a motion for summary judgment, the court will not "weigh the evidence and determine the truth of the matter." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 249, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). Instead, the court [*14]  will draw any permissible inference from the underlying facts in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co., Ltd. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 587-88, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986).
Although the court will view all underlying facts and inferences in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party, the nonmoving party nonetheless must offer some "concrete evidence from which a reasonable juror could return a verdict in his [or her] favor." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 256. Summary judgment is appropriate when the nonmoving party has the burden of proof on an essential element of his or her case and does not make, after adequate time for discovery, a showing sufficient to establish that element. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). The nonmoving party must satisfy this burden of proof by offering more than a mere "scintilla of evidence" in support of his or her position. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 252. Likewise, conclusory allegations or unsupported speculation, without more, are insufficient to preclude the granting of a summary judgment motion. See Felty v. Graves-Humphreys Co., 818 F.2d 1126, 1128 (4th Cir. 1987); Ross v. Comm'ns Satellite Corp., 759 F.2d 355, 365 (4th Cir. 1985), overruled on other grounds, 490 U.S. 228, 109 S. Ct. 1775, 104 L. Ed. 2d 268 (1989).

B. ADA and WVHRA Reasonable Accommodation Claims
Both the ADA and the WVHRA require an employer to provide reasonable accommodations to qualified individuals who are disabled. Under the ADA, a covered employer may not "discriminate against a qualified individual with [*15]  a disability because of the disability of such individual . . . ." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). The ADA defines "qualified individual" as "an individual with a disability who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds or desires." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). Essential functions do "not include the marginal functions of the position." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(1); see also Wells, 483 F. Supp. 2d at 508, 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 26107 ("[I]f a job function bears more than a marginal relationship to the job at issue, it is an essential job function.").
An employer's failure to provide a reasonable accommodation to a qualified individual constitutes "discrimination" under the ADA. See 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5). In order to establish a prima facie case of discrimination based on an employer's failure to provide reasonable accommodation, a plaintiff must show: "(1) that he was an individual who had a disability within the meaning of the statute; (2) that the [employer] had notice of his disability; (3) that with reasonable accommodation he could perform the essential functions of the position . . .; and (4) that the [employer] refused to make such accommodations." Rhoads v. FDIC, 257 F.3d 373, 387 n.11 (4th Cir. 2001) (quoting Mitchell v. Washingtonville Cent. School Dist., 190 F.3d 1, 6 (2d Cir. 1999).
Like the ADA, the WVHRA imposes a duty on employers to "make reasonable accommodations for [*16]  known impairments to permit an employee to perform the essential functions of the job." Skaggs v. Elk Run Coal Co., Inc., 198 W. Va. 51, 479 S.E.2d 561, 575 (W. Va. 1996). In order to succeed on a claim based on an employer's failure to make reasonable accommodations, a plaintiff must prove that:
(1) The plaintiff is a qualified person with a disability; (2) The employer was aware of the plaintiff's disability; (3) The plaintiff required an accommodation in order to perform the essential functions of the job; (4) A reasonable accommodation existed that would meet the plaintiff's needs; (5) The employer knew or should have known of the plaintiff's needs and of the accommodation; and (6) The employer failed to provide the accommodation.
Id. (internal footnotes omitted).
WVA argues that Mr. Ewing cannot establish these elements of his reasonable accommodation claim under either statute because he is not a "qualified individual." See Rhoads, 257 F. 3d at 387 n.11 (explaining that the plaintiff raising a reasonable accommodation claim under the ADA must prove that "with reasonable accommodation he could perform the essential functions of the position."). Specifically, WVA argues that Mr. Ewing would not be able to perform the essential functions of his position even if WVA provided him the requested [*17]  accommodation and allowed him to work from home. (WVA's Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J. 20-21 [Docket 121].) In support of this argument, WVA relies on three types of evidence. First, WVA observes that Mr. Ewing's sworn statement to the SSA shows that he was not able to perform the essential functions of his position. (Id. 20.) Second, the defendant references two of Mr. Ewing's performance reviews which show his failure to perform some of the essential functions of his position from his home. (Id. at 19.) Finally, the defendant asserts that Mr. Ewing's own testimony shows that he could not perform the essential functions of his position from his home.
In response, Mr. Ewing asserts that WVA misconstrues the denial of Mr. Ewing's request for accommodation. Specifically, Mr. Ewing observes that the defendant denied his request to work from his home because the defendant believed the accommodation was not necessary to Mr. Ewing's continued performance and not because Mr. Ewing was unable to perform the essential functions of his job. (Ewing's Mem. Opp'n WVA's Mot. Summ. J. 1.) Mr. Ewing also notes that WVA did not investigate the nature of his disability, as required by law, before denying his request for [*18]  accommodation. (Id. at 2.) Mr. Ewing further argues that his receipt of Social Security Disability Insurance ("SSDI") benefits does not preclude his ability to perform the essential functions of an Advocate because his SSDI application claimed that he "was too disabled to do the only job that his employer would make available for him, i.e. working full-time in the Charleston office." (Id. at 3.) Further, Mr. Ewing notes that the SSA did not make any determination as to his vocational abilities, but rather granted him benefits based on his being categorically disabled. (Id. at 8-9.) Mr. Ewing argues that this court must assess WVA's actions based on the information available at the time WVA denied Mr. Ewing's request. (Id. at 4.)
Mr. Ewing also disputes WVA's assertion that he was unable to perform the essential functions of his position. Mr. Ewing argues that WVA considered him qualified to perform his position and cites to a letter dated November 3, 2005, in which he was commended for his performance and received a merit-based pay increase. (Id. at 12.) He also questions the validity of his 2005 performance review in light of the fact that he had already requested to work from his home at the time the review occurred. (Id. at 13.)
I [*19]  FIND that Mr. Ewing has raised a genuine issue of material fact as to whether he is a qualified individual under the ADA and WVHRA. Accordingly, WVA's Motion for Summary Judgment as to Mr. Ewing's ADA and WVHRA reasonable accommodation claims is DENIED. My evaluation of the facts in this case follows.

1. Mr. Ewing's Statements to the ADA Do Not Preclude Mr. Ewing's Assertion that He is a Qualified Individual
WVA argues that because Mr. Ewing's sworn statements to the SSA that he could not work because of his disability show that he cannot perform the essential functions of his position. WVA is wrong. Though an applicant for SSDI must assert that he cannot work because of a disability, that assertion does not create a negative presumption against the plaintiff being a qualified individual under the ADA. See Fox v. General Motors Corp., 247 F.3d 169, 177 (4th Cir. 2001). This is in part because "when the SSA determines whether an individual is disabled for SSDI purposes, it does not take the possibility of 'reasonable accommodation' into account, nor need an applicant refer to the possibility of reasonable accommodation when [he] applies for SSDI." Cleveland v. Policy Mgmt. Sys. Corp., 526 U.S. 795, 803, 119 S. Ct. 1597, 143 L. Ed. 2d 966 (1999). A SSDI applicant asserting an ADA claim must, however, "proffer a sufficient explanation for any [*20]  apparent contradiction between the two claims." Fox, 247 F.3d at 177 (citing Stowe-Pharr, 26 F.3d at 378). In other words, the plaintiff must provide a sufficient explanation as to why he was "unable to work" within the meaning of his SSDI application but is still a qualified individual under the ADA. Cleveland, 526 U.S. at 806. "[T]hat explanation must be sufficient to warrant a reasonable juror's concluding that, assuming the truth of, or the plaintiff's good faith belief in, the earlier statement, the plaintiff could nonetheless perform the essential functions of [his] job, with or without reasonable accommodation." Fox, 247 F.3d at 177 (quoting Cleveland v. Policy Mgmt. Sys. Corp., 526 U.S. 795, 806, 119 S. Ct. 1597, 143 L. Ed. 2d 966 (1999)).
Therefore, Mr. Ewing's statements to the SSA that he is "unable to work" may preclude Mr. Ewing's ability to assert that he is a "qualified individual" unless he provides sufficient explanation for the contradiction. See Cleveland, 526 U.S. at 806. Mr. Ewing proffers three explanations. First, Mr. Ewing notes that he completed his application for disability benefits more than one year after his request to work from home. Also, he asserts that "it was the Defendant's refusal to continue to accommodate his disability and insistence that he relocate to the Charleston office in the fall of 2006 that rendered him unable to work." (Ewing's Mem. Opp'n WVA's Mot. [*21]  Summ. J. 6.) Finally, Mr. Ewing explains that because the SSA determined that Mr. Ewing was categorically disabled, it did not assess his vocational capacity. (Id. at 8.) Accordingly, he argues, his receipt of disability benefits has no bearing on his ability to perform the essential functions of an advocate.
Mr. Ewing is essentially asserting that his statements to the SSA describe his disability in the context of being required to work in Charleston. In other words, Mr. Ewing asserts that he was disabled for the purposes of his SSDI application because of WVA's denial of his request for an accommodation. Where a plaintiff's statement in an SSDI application does not take into account whether the plaintiff could have worked if given a reasonable accommodation, that statement does not preclude a question of fact as to whether the plaintiff is a "qualified individual" under the ADA. EEOC v. Stowe-Pharr Mills, Inc., 216 F.3d 373, 377 (4th Cir. 2000). I FIND that Mr. Ewing has proffered a sufficient explanation for the potential contradiction between his sworn statements to the SSA and his claim that he is a "qualified individual" under the ADA. Accordingly, Mr. Ewing's statements to the ADA do not preclude the existence of a genuine question of material fact [*22]  as to whether Mr. Ewing is a qualified individual.

2. The Record Shows a Genuine Issue of Material Fact as to Whether Mr. Ewing is a Qualified Individual
WVA cites to several statements in Mr. Ewing's performance review to show that he was not qualified for the position of Advocate. Specifically, the defendant notes that in Mr. Ewing's 2004-2005 performance review, his reviewer observed that Mr. Ewing's cases were not closed in a timely manner and that his attendance was problematic. (WVA's Mot. Summ. J., Ex. 11.) In his 2005-2006 review, his reviewer observed that he still failed to close cases in a timely manner and failed to respond to clients in a timely manner. (Id., Ex. 14.) His reviewer further observed that Mr. Ewing allowed his personal situation to interfere with his work, he had not contacted many of his clients, and he was unorganized. (Id.) The defendant asserts that these reviews demonstrate Mr. Ewing's inability to perform the essential functions of his position.
WVA also asserts that Mr. Ewing conceded in his depositions that he cannot perform the essential functions of his position. For instance, WVA points out that Mr. Ewing conceded that he would not attend outreach [*23]  sessions in winter months when the weather was bad even though attendance at outreach was an essential function of his position as Advocate. (Ewing 2008 Dep. 184:5-185:15.) Finally, WVA recites Mr. Ewing's various medical conditions and argues that those conditions render him unable to work "regardless of his work location." (WVA's Reply 4 [Docket 126].)
Other evidence submitted by the parties, however, raises genuine issues of material fact with respect to whether Mr. Ewing could perform the essential functions of his position. First, Mr. Ewing received a two-step pay increase along with commendation for his "hard work, teamwork and willingness to learn new things and . . . accept new challenges." (Ewing's Mot. Partial Summ. J., Ex. E.) This pay raise and commendation came at the same time as the two negative reviews cited by WVA. Second, the performance reviews and Mr. Ewing's statements show only that Mr. Ewing was not performing all of the essential functions of his position. They do not show that Mr. Ewing could not perform those functions. On the contrary, Mr. Ewing has asserted that he can drive, even in winter weather, and it appears that Mr. Ewing had been performing the essential [*24]  functions of his position, at least for the first several years that he was employed with WVA. Because I FIND a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Mr. Ewing was a qualified individual, I cannot grant summary judgment against Mr. Ewing on his reasonable accommodations claim.

C. ADA and WVHRA Retaliation Claim
The ADA prohibits retaliatory discrimination against individuals that oppose violations of that statute. See 42 U.S.C. § 12203. To establish a prima facie case of such retaliation, a plaintiff must show "(1) that [he] has engaged in conduct protected by the ADA; (2) that [he] suffered an adverse action subsequent to engaging in the protected conduct; and (3) that there was a causal link between the protected activity and the adverse action." Freilich v. Upper Chesapeake Health, Inc., 313 F.3d 205, 216 (2002) (citing Rhoads, 257 F.3d at 392). A plaintiff is protected by the ADA even if the "conduct [he] opposed [did not] actually constitute[] an ADA violation . . . [if he] allege[s] the predicate for a reasonable belief that the behavior she is opposing violates the ADA." Id. (internal quotations omitted). "Temporal proximity" between the protected opposition and the adverse action is sufficient to establish a causal link supporting a prima facie retaliation claim. Yashenko v. Harrah's NC Casino Co., LLC, 446 F.3d 541, 550 (4th Cir. 2006). If a plaintiff [*25]  successfully makes out a prima facie case, and the defendant offers a "'non-discriminatory explanation' for his termination, [the plaintiff] 'bears the burden of establishing that the employer's proffered explanation is pretext for . . . retaliation." Id. (quoting Nichols v. Ashland Hosp. Corp., 251 F.3d 496, 502 (4th Cir. 2001)).
The WVHRA also prohibits retaliatory adverse employment actions. A WVHRA retaliation claim requires proof of elements similar to those of an ADA retaliation claim. A plaintiff bringing such a claim must prove by a preponderance of the evidence (1) that the plaintiff engaged in an activity protected by the WVHRA, (2) that plaintiff's employer was aware the plaintiff had engaged in such activity, (3) that the plaintiff subsequently suffered an adverse action, and (4) that the adverse action followed the protected activity in period of time allowing an inference of a retaliatory motive. Colgan Air, Inc. v. W. Va. Human Rights Comm'n, 221 W. Va. 588, 656 S.E.2d 33, 42 (W. Va. 2007) (quoting Syl. pt. 6, Conrad v. ARA Szabo, 198 W. Va. 362, 480 S.E.2d 801 (W. Va. 1996)). Once a plaintiff has established a prima facie case of retaliation under the WVHRA, the burden shifts to the defendant to "prove a legitimate, nonpretextual, and nonretaliatory reason" for the adverse action. Id. (quoting Syl. pt. 4, Brithisel v. Tri-Cities Health Servs. Corp., 424 S.E.2d 606 (W. Va. 1992)) (internal citation omitted). Once the defendant offers a non-discriminatory reason, [*26]  the plaintiff can only prevail on the retaliation claim if it shows that the defendant's reason is merely pretext. Id. at 43.
WVA argues that Mr. Ewing cannot establish a claim for retaliation under the ADA and the WVHRA because the alleged retaliatory conduct occurred after he opposed WVA's alleged ADA violation.3 (WVA's Mot. Summ. J. 22.) Mr. Ewing has asserted that he opposed WVA's denial of his request to work from home by filing a complaint with the West Virginia Human Rights Commission and that WVA continued to discriminate against him in part because of that opposition. (Petition Removal, Ex. 1 ¶ 4.) WVA observes that the denial of Mr. Ewing's request occurred on September 18, 2006, more than a month before Mr. Ewing filed his complaint with the West Virginia Human Rights Commission. (WVA's Mot. Summ. J. 22.)
Mr. Ewing responds, however, that he suffered another adverse action when WVA placed him on unpaid leave in December 2006, which was after he filed his complaint. (Ewing Mem. Opp'n WVA's Mot. Summ. J. 15.) Because of the temporal relationship between his complaint and the defendant's adverse decision, Mr. Ewing asserts that he has made a prima facie case of retaliation. (Id. at 16.) In reply, [*27]  WVA asserts that its decision to place Mr. Ewing on unpaid leave was not an adverse action because Mr. Ewing has "voluntarily exhausted all of his paid leave . . . and decided not to return to his employment." (WVA's Reply 7 (emphasis in the original).) WVA further states that it could have terminated Mr. Ewing at the point that he "abandoned" his position and exhausted all of his leave, but instead placed him on unpaid leave and continued to pay his medical insurance for one year. (Id.) Therefore, WVA's act of placing Mr. Ewing on unpaid leave cannot be characterized as an adverse action. (Id.)
Even if Mr. Ewing's being placed on unpaid leave could constitute an adverse action, WVA has demonstrated a non-discriminatory explanation for that action. Specifically, WVA placed Mr. Ewing on unpaid leave because he had stopped working at WVA and had exhausted all of his paid leave. Mr. Ewing concedes in his deposition that after he went on leave on November 13, 2006, he did not go into work, even after his paid leave concluded on December 13, 2006. (Ewing 2008 Dep. 147:4-24.). Mr. Ewing has not made any showing that WVA's decision to place him on leave was pretextual in light of the circumstances. [*28]  Additionally, nothing in the record supports such a conclusion. In light of WVA's explanation, Mr. Ewing has not sustained his burden of creating a genuine issue of material fact with respect to whether WVA's explanation was pretextual. Accordingly, WVA's motion for summary judgment on Mr. Ewing's retaliation claim is GRANTED. See Holland v. Washington Homes, Inc., 487 F.3d 208, 216-217 (4th Cir. 2007) (affirming summary judgment in favor of defendant in a retaliation case where plaintiff provided no evidence that defendant's proffered reason for adverse employment action was pretextual).

D. Mr. Ewing's Request for Injunction and Reinstatement
Courts in this circuit have recognized that "a person is not otherwise qualified [under the ADA] if the disability poses a direct threat to the health or safety of others." Johnson v. State of Md., 940 F. Supp. 873, 878 (D. Md. 1996); see Taylor v. Hampton Roads Regi'l Jail Auth., 550 F. Supp. 2d 614, 616 (E.D. Va. 2008); see also 42 U.S.C. § 12113(a)-(b). An employee poses a direct threat if, in his performance of the essential functions of his position, he poses "a significant risk of substantial harm to the health or safety of the individual or others that cannot be eliminated or reduced by reasonable accommodation." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(r). Whether an individual poses a direct threat is based on an individual assessment of an employee's abilities, a reasonable medical judgment, and/or the best available [*29]  objective evidence. (Id.) Moreover, a determination of whether an individual poses a direct threat should take into consideration four factors: "(1) The duration of the risk; (2) The nature and severity of the potential harm; (3) The likelihood that the potential harm will occur; and (4) The imminence of potential harm." (Id.)
In another iteration of its argument that Mr. Ewing is not a qualified individual, WVA asks this court to deny Mr. Ewing's request for injunctive relief because Mr. Ewing is "unable to perform the essential functions of his job without creating a substantial hazard to his health and the safety of others." (WVA's Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J. 23.) Specifically, WVA asserts that Mr. Ewing's medical conditions and consumption of prescription drugs for those conditions makes him unable to drive safely. WVA also cites to Mr. Ewing's deposition statements regarding dizziness episodes caused by blood pressure drops that he has while driving. (WVA's Reply 8.) His inability to drive safely, WVA argues, "severely impact[s] his ability to travel, an essential function of his position." (WVA's Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J. 23.)
Mr. Ewing responds that he is able to drive safely. (Ewing's [*30]  Mem. Opp'n WVA's Mot. Summ. J. 16.) Mr. Ewing reports that he has a valid driver's license and that his license has never been suspended or revoked for any reason. (Id.) Mr. Ewing also argues that even if he was unable to drive, he could easily fulfill his travel obligations through other accommodations. (Id. at 17.)
A denial of Mr. Ewing's request for injunctive relief is inappropriate at this stage of the proceedings for two reasons. First, although WVA cites to Mr. Ewing's own testimony about his difficulties with driving, it does not provide any medical basis for its conclusion or address whether reasonable accommodations could alleviate the dangers posed by Mr. Ewing's driving. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(r); see Taylor, 550 F. Supp. 2d at 620. Moreover, I FIND that there is a genuine question of material fact as to whether Mr. Ewing can drive safely. Though the record shows that Mr. Ewing has experienced some dangerous driving incidents related to his medical conditions and treatment, Mr. Ewing explains that those incidents occurred during the period that he was ingesting a high dosage of Baclofen. (Ewing 2008 Dep. 17:14-19:10.) He stated that his daily dosage has since been reduced to twenty milligrams of Baclofen per day and that he no longer [*31]  suffers the side effect of drowsiness.4 (Id. 20:19-22:24.) He also stated that he is able to manage his dizziness when his blood pressure drops while he is driving such that he is not concerned for his safety or the safety of others. (Id. 33:3-34:14.) Moreover, he has affirmed that he has a valid a driver's license, which WVA does not dispute.5 (Ewing's Mem. Opp'n WVA's Mot. Summ. J., Ex. F.) Because there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Mr. Ewing poses a direct threat to himself and others while performing the essential functions of his position, I cannot grant WVA's request to deny Mr. Ewing's injunction on that basis.

V. Mr. Ewing's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment on His WVHRA Claim
Mr. Ewing seeks summary judgment on his WVHRA reasonable accommodation claim. In their briefing on this motion, as in their briefing on WVA's motion, the parties dispute whether Mr. Ewing is a "qualified individual." For the reasons discussed above, there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Mr. Ewing is a qualified individual. Accordingly, Mr. Ewing's motion for summary judgment on his WVHRA claim is DENIED.

VI. Conclusion
For the reasons stated above, Mr. Ewing's Motion [*32]  for Partial Summary Judgment [Docket 116] is DENIED, WVA's Motion to Exceed Page Limit for Memorandum in Support of Motion for Summary Judgment [Docket 120] is GRANTED, and WVA's Motion for Summary Judgment [Docket 118] is GRANTED in part and DENIED in part. It is GRANTED as to Mr. Ewing's retaliation claims. It is DENIED as to all other claims.
The court DIRECTS the Clerk to send a copy of this Order to counsel of record and any unrepresented party.
ENTER: April 28, 2009
/s/ Joseph R. Goodwin
Joseph R. Goodwin, Chief Judge


End of Document

