Faidley v. UPS of Am., Inc.
United States District Court for the Southern District of Iowa, Central Division
November 30, 2015, Filed
No. 4:13-cv-00029-JAJ-SBJ

Reporter
2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 190120 *
JERRY LEE FAIDLEY, Plaintiff, vs. UNITED PARCEL SERVICE OF AMERICA, INC., Defendant.
Subsequent History: Affirmed in part and reversed in part by, Remanded by Faidley v. UPS of Am., Inc., 853 F.3d 447, 2017 U.S. App. LEXIS 5770 (8th Cir. Iowa, Apr. 4, 2017)
Affirmed by Faidley v. UPS of Am., Inc., 889 F.3d 933, 2018 U.S. App. LEXIS 12392 (8th Cir. Iowa, May 11, 2018)
Counsel:  [*1] For Jerry Lee Faidley, Plaintiff: Mark D Sherinian, Melissa C Hasso, LEAD ATTORNEYS, SHERINIAN & WALKER PC, WEST DES MOINES, IA.
For United Parcel Service of America, Inc., Defendant: Bradley Michael Bakker, LEAD ATTORNEY, ARMSTRONG TEASDALE LLP, St. Louis, MO; Laurence R. Tucker, LEAD ATTORNEY, PRO HAC VICE, ARMSTRONG TEASDALE LLP, KANSAS CITY, MO.
Judges: JOHN A. JARVEY, CHIEF UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: JOHN A. JARVEY
Opinion



ORDER
In January and February of 2013, Plaintiff Jerry Faidley filed two lawsuits in Iowa state court, alleging that he was disabled, and that Defendant UPS both discriminated against him because of his disability and retaliated against him for reporting the discrimination. UPS removed both cases to this Court, and the Court consolidated the cases.
Defendant now moves for summary judgment under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56. It argues no reasonable jury could find that Mr. Faidley was qualified for his position, or that UPS took an adverse employment action against Mr. Faidley. Mr. Faidley resists the motion, pointing to accommodations he says UPS failed to explore, and arguing that UPS forced him to pick between early retirement and unpaid leave.

I. Legal Standard for Summary Judgment
A motion for summary judgment [*2]  may be granted only if, after examining all of the evidence in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party, the court finds that no genuine issues of material fact exist and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a); HDC Medical, Inc. v. Minntech Corp., 474 F.3d 543, 546 (8th Cir. 2007). But the nonmoving party may not rest on its pleadings; it must cite materials in the record showing there is a genuine issue of material fact for trial. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(1)(A); Mosby v. Dolphin, 998 F.2d 1018, (8th Cir. 1993). An issue is genuine if the evidence would allow a reasonable jury to rule for the nonmoving party, and it is material if, under the governing law, it might affect the suit's outcome. Great Plains Real Estate Development, L.L.C. v. Union Central Life Ins. Co., 536 F.3d 939, 944 (8th Cir. 2008); Saffels v. Rice, 40 F.3d 1546, 1550 (8th Cir. 1994).

II. Factual Background
Plaintiff Jerry Faidley began work with the United Parcel Service of America in 1977. He became a package car driver for that company in 1987, and held that position for almost twenty-five years. Package car drivers both deliver and pick up packages to and from residential and commercial locations; the position involves heavy lifting and sometimes long hours, especially during the holiday season. Many of UPS's workers, including their package car drivers, are unionized, and Mr. Faidley's employment was governed by a collective bargaining agreement. Three of its provisions affect the [*3]  events of this case:
1) Package car driver work hours were specifically regulated in the agreement. The agreement required UPS to work to keep package car drivers to less than nine-and-a-half-hour workdays. Under some circumstances, drivers who worked more than that could file a grievance. Drivers could request up to two workdays without overtime per month, and UPS considered those requests based on seniority.
2) If a position existed for thirty calendar days, it was considered a "permanent new job" under the collective bargaining agreement. The parties do not agree about all the effects of this provision, but several witnesses testified that UPS would only provide alternative work schedules to injured employees for up to 29 days, to avoid the alternative job being classified as permanent.
3) When UPS created new positions, or a position opened, it had to fill that position through a bidding process. Existing employees could bid on the position, and the most senior employee already working in that job classification would get the job. If no employees in the job classification bid, then the most senior bidding employee received the position.

A. Mr. Faidley's Injuries
In February of 2010, [*4]  Mr. Faidley injured his back, took two weeks off work, and was given a light workload for two months. He then did his normal job for almost ten months, before again experiencing intense back pain in January or February 2011. It is not clear what happened for the next eight months; Mr. Faidley claims he was on worker's compensation leave, while UPS claims he tried and failed to continue working for parts of that period. The parties agree that Mr. Faidley had hip surgery in October of 2011 and spent several months in physical therapy.

B. First Return to Work
Mr. Faidley returned to work on April 27, 2012. He eased back into work, doing paperwork all day on his first day back and working for a bit over eight hours on his second. Despite a lighter workload on the fourth day, his back again started hurting and he could not work on his fifth day back. He had the weekend off and worked a lighter day on Monday, but spent the rest of the week working normal days. He saw his doctor, Dr. Goetz, the following week, and Dr. Goetz restricted him to working at most 8 hours per day. UPS received that restriction on May 16, 2012, and sent Mr. Faidley home, because the package car driver job description [*5]  required drivers to work overtime. Mr. Faidley returned to worker's compensation leave.

C. First Accommodation Process
UPS's disability accommodation process has four steps. First, Mr. Faidley had to fill out accommodation request forms. UPS sent him those forms on May 18th, and he returned them in mid-June. Second, UPS held an accommodation checklist meeting on July 24th with Mr. Faidley, the area human resources manager, and an occupational health supervisor. The three of them discussed Mr. Faidley's limitations and possible accommodations. Mr. Faidley suggested that he continue to work as a package car driver, but receive daily workloads that could be completed in eight and a half hours or less. He also listed a number of other jobs that he could do at UPS if his hours were capped at eight per day.
In the third step, the area human resources manager and occupational health supervisor reviewed the information they got from the checklist meeting, and looked into what positions were available. They could not cap his hours, because other drivers would have to make up the difference. Finally, both of them met with the regional human resources operations manager and the regional occupational [*6]  health manager. They discussed offering Mr. Faidley a feeder driver position. Feeder drivers work long hours, but the position is less physically difficult than the package car driver. None of those positions were open, so the group instead offered Mr. Faidley a part-time position on August 9th . Mr. Faidley filed a discrimination complaint with the Iowa Civil Rights Commission on August 22nd, and turned the part-time position down the next day.

D. Second Return to Work
On January 24, 2013, Mr. Faidley returned to Dr. Goetz, who adjusted his work restrictions to allow more than eight hours' work in any position except package car driver. Mr. Faidley began signing bid sheets for open positions, but most of the positions went to more senior employees. He ultimately won a position on February 4th . The parties do not agree on what position he won, but they do agree that when Mr. Faidley reported to work on February 17th, he was assigned to work as a midnight loader/pre-loader. After the first day of work, he began having muscle spasms in his back, and the problem worsened during his second day. His supervisor helped him complete the shift, but the following afternoon he experienced the [*7]  "sharpest pain [he'd] ever felt" and called in sick.
Mr. Faidley visited Dr. Goetz again, who temporarily restricted him to working four hours per day and to doing only the pre-loading work. The goal was to allow Mr. Faidley to build up his strength and return to work gradually over a period of several weeks. UPS rejected that arrangement, asserting that Mr. Faidley had already used up the alternative work time the collective bargaining agreement permitted.

E. Second Accommodation Process
Mr. Faidley visited Dr. Goetz once again on March 3, 2013. Dr. Goetz said Mr. Faidley was permanently unable to lift above 70 pounds and to lift above his shoulders more than twice per hour. Mr. Faidley informed UPS of the new restrictions, and UPS began another accommodation process. Mr. Faidley completed the first step, returning the accommodation request forms, on April 1st. The area human resources manager then met with Mr. Faidley on May 22. They discussed several full-time positions Mr. Faidley could do with those restrictions, none of which were open at that point. In September, UPS offered Mr. Faidley a part-time position, which he again turned down because he would lose his seniority.

F. Mr. [*8]  Faidley's Retirement
Mr. Faidley began asking about retiring on September 23, 2013, about two and a half years since he had last regularly worked for UPS. In October, he announced his decision to retire effective November 1st.

III. Analysis
Mr. Faidley alleges that UPS violated the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Iowa Civil Rights Act by discriminating against him because of his disability and retaliating against him for complaining to the Iowa Civil Rights Commission. Although federal law does not control Mr. Faidley's Iowa Civil Rights Act claims, "[d]isability discrimination claims under the ICRA are generally analyzed" using the ADA framework. Gretillat v. Care Initiatives, 414 F.Supp.2d 901, 906 (N.D. Iowa 2006); Brown v. Farmland Foods, Inc., 178 F.Supp.2d 961, 971 (N.D. Iowa 2001). The parties do not argue that the Court should treat Mr. Faidley's ICRA claim differently from his ADA claim, so it will apply the federal analysis to both.
Mr. Faidley "carries the initial burden... of establishing a prima facie case." McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 802, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973); Thompson v. Bi-State Development Agency, 463 F.3d 821, 825 (8th Cir. 2006). A prima facie case of disability discrimination has four elements: 1) that the plaintiff is disabled; 2) that he is qualified to perform the job's essential functions, with or without accommodation; 3) that he suffered an adverse employment action; and 4) that he suffered the action due to his disability. [*9]  Thompson, 463 F.3d at 825. That fourth element can be proved either through evidence of discriminatory motive or through a showing of failure to accommodate. Chalfant v. Titan Distribution, Inc., 475 F.3d 982, 991-92 (8th Cir. 2007); EEOC v. Product Fabricators, Inc., 763 F.3d 963, 971 (8th Cir. 2014). A failure to accommodate can, in turn, be demonstrated by showing that the defendant failed to engage in an interactive accommodation process. Product Fabricators, 763 F.3d at 971. A prima facie case of retaliation has three elements; the plaintiff must show that he 1) engaged in protected activity; 2) suffered an adverse employment action; and 3) suffered the action because of the protected activity. Peterson v. Scott County, 406 F.3d 515, 524 (8th Cir. 2005).
UPS makes three arguments in support of its summary judgment motion: 1) that Mr. Faidley did not suffer an adverse employment action; 2) that Mr. Faidley was not qualified to perform the essential functions of his job, even with reasonable accommodation; and 3) that UPS engaged with Mr. Faidley in an interactive accommodation process. The first argument, if successful, ends all of Mr. Faidley's claims. The second defeats his disability discrimination claim, but not his retaliation claim. And the third would remove one means of proving one element of his disability discrimination claim. The Court addresses those arguments in order.

A. Adverse Employment Action
Mr. Faidley alleges that UPS [*10]  constructively discharged him.1 A constructive discharge occurs "when an employer deliberately renders the employee's working conditions intolerable and thus forces him to quit his job." Smith v. World Ins. Co., 38 F.3d 1456, 1460 (8th Cir. 1994). Mr. Faidley therefore must show both that a "reasonable person would [have found] conditions intolerable" in his position at UPS, and that UPS acted "with the intention of forcing [him] to" retire. Smith v. Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co., 895 F.2d 467, 472 (8th Cir. 1990). He does not have to demonstrate that UPS "consciously" forced him; employers are "held to intend the reasonably foreseeable consequences of [their] actions." Hukkanen v. International Union of Operating Engineers, Hoisting & Portable Local No. 101, 3 F.3d 281, 284 (8th Cir. 1993).
The Resistance to the summary judgment motion emphasizes the hardships of Mr. Faidley's unpaid leave. But UPS did not force Mr. Faidley to take unpaid leave; he chose to remain on leave rather than accept a part-time position. The Court therefore considers whether a reasonable juror could find that the offered part-time employment was intolerable.
Courts consider a wide range of factors in deciding whether an employment situation is intolerable. "Demeaning" work, or an "abusive or oppressive" environment can constructively discharge an employee. Sanders v. Lee County School Dist. No. 1, 669 F.3d 888, 894 (8th Cir. 2012); see also Mehl v. PortaCo, Inc., 859 F.Supp.2d 1026, 1033 (D. Minn. 2012) ("Courts analyze constructive discharge claims with a totality of the circumstances [*11]  standard, looking to the frequency of the discriminatory conduct, its severity, whether it was physically threatening or humiliating or just offensive utterances, and whether it unreasonably interfered with the employee's work performance."). So can changes in pay, benefits, and hours. See Gartman v. GenCorp, Inc., 120 F.3d 127, 130 (8th Cir. 1997) (concluding a transfer did not constructively discharge the plaintiff in part because she would be "doing the same work, drawing the same pay, and enjoying the same benefits"); Allen v. Bridgestone/Firestone, Inc., 81 F.3d 793, 797 (8th Cir. 1996) (reduction in hours and therefore pay was not a constructive discharge when the plaintiff still worked forty-hour weeks); Schneider v. Jax Shack, Inc., 794 F.2d 383, 385 (8th Cir. 1986) ("Employers should not be able to avoid responsibility for discriminatory discharges by first demoting employees to part-time or fill-in status.").
A reasonable juror could infer that taking a part-time position would affect Mr. Faidley's hours and pay. But the record before the Court does not show how: Mr. Faidley offered little evidence of what his new hours or pay rate would be. He rejected the position not because of lost hours or pay changes, but because he would lose seniority; despite his twenty-five years of work for UPS, all part-time workers would be senior to him. Plaintiff's Response to Defendants' [*12]  Statement of Facts at ¶ 55; Def. Appx. 154. It is not clear how that loss would affect his working conditions. Mr. Faidley's notes and his answers to interrogatories indicate that two people gave him information about that. First, Mike Arendt told him that a switch to part-time would reduce his pay by $10 per hour, cause "loss" to his pension, and move him "to the end of the line for time off and job bidding." Second, Claudia Pettit told him his retirement benefits would be "way lower," his insurance would be different, and he would have to work five years before receiving retirement benefits. Context and degree matters for all of those changes. Minor drops in hours are not always constructive discharges; neither are small pay changes. Allen, 81 F.3d at 797 ("[A] reduction in pay does not necessarily constitute a constructive discharge."); Tatom v. Georgia-Pacific Corp., 228 F.3d 926, 929, 932 (8th Cir. 2000) (a 120-day unpaid suspension was not objectively intolerable). The evidence does not show what Mr. Faidley's new hours or pay would be, or how much value his pension or benefits would lose. It does not explain how hard it would be for him to get time off, or to successfully bid on a different job. Without that context, a reasonable jury could not find his working conditions [*13]  intolerable.

B. Reasonable Accommodations
To maintain his disability discrimination claim, Mr. Faidley must show that he was qualified to perform the essential functions of a position, with or without reasonable accommodation. Thompson, 463 F.3d at 825. He points to three positions he believes he was qualified for: 1) his package car driver position, modified to include no overtime; 2) a feeder car driver position, with no accommodations; and 3) a midnight loader/pre-loader position, modified to involve a four-or five-week part-time "work hardening" period.
Mr. Faidley was also not qualified to stay at UPS if he turned down a reasonable accommodation necessary for him to maintain a position there. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.9(d). He therefore argues that the part-time positions UPS offered him were not reasonable accommodations.

1. Package Car Driver
Mr. Faidley argues that he was qualified for his original position, the package car driver position, even though he could not work overtime in that job. That argument takes two forms: either working overtime was not an essential function of the position, or eliminating overtime was a reasonable accommodation. Neither framing persuades.
Courts determine whether a job function is "essential" by looking [*14]  at six factors: (i) the employer's judgment; (ii) written job descriptions; (iii) the collective bargaining agreement; (iv) the amount of time spent on the function; (v) the consequences of not requiring the employee to perform the function; and (vi) the work experience of employees in similar jobs. Summerville v. Trans World Airlines, Inc., 219 F.3d 855, 858 (8th Cir. 2000). The first three factors support UPS's position. UPS maintained, long before this litigation and in the package car driver job description, that working overtime was essential. Def. Appx. 323. Mr. Faidley admitted that the job description accurately represented the position's essential functions, including its overtime requirements. And the collective bargaining agreement assumes that package car drivers will work overtime. The agreement allows drivers to ask for only two overtime-free days per month. Mr. Faidley relies on the last three factors, arguing that he averaged only six minutes per day of overtime, that other drivers could cover that minimal change in workload, and that Mr. Faidley and his coworkers had to accommodate other workers' reduced schedules.
"[A] task may be an essential function even if the employee performs it for only a few minutes each week, and even if other employees [*15]  are available to perform the task for the disabled employee." Minnihan v. Mediacom Communications Corp., 779 F.3d 803, 813 (8th Cir. 2015). Despite Mr. Faidley's emphasis on the average per-day overtime, package car driver overtime is more than a few minutes of work. While Mr. Faidley did not work overtime every day or even every week, when he did work overtime he would often do so for one to three hours. If he did not do that work, other drivers would have to, and the ADA does not mandate "accommodation[s] that would cause other employees to work harder [or] longer." Minnihan, 779 F.3d at 813.
Mr. Faidley names two workers, David Dew and Mike Loose, who had less than eight hour planned days. UPS sometimes reduced Mr. Dew's assigned workload because he was not completing his work quickly enough. But the company did not act like Mr. Dew's inability to do the additional work was a "marginal function" of the job. It instead treated Mr. Dew as a problem performer and worked to bring him up to the workload expected of all package car drivers. The evidence does not explain the details of Mr. Loose's schedule, including whether he "was given less than an 8 hour planned day" permanently or even on more than one occasion. "An employer does not concede that a job function is 'non-essential' simply by voluntarily [*16]  assuming the limited burden associated with a temporary accommodation." Laurin v. Providence Hosp., 150 F.3d 52, 60-61 (8th Cir. 1998). Without evidence suggesting Mr. Loose's situation was long-term, a reasonable jury must find that overtime was essential to the package car position.

2. Feeder Car Driver
Mr. Faidley also argues that UPS should have given him a feeder driver position. But he was not qualified for that job: his doctor had limited him to eight-hour days, and the position required working nine-and ten-hour days. Mr. Faidley communicated that limitation clearly to UPS, emphasizing in his accommodation paperwork that even jobs other than the package car driver had to be only eight hours per day. He now asserts that the feeder driver job was not physically strenuous, so he could have done it for longer periods. But UPS "was entitled to rely and act upon the written advice from [Mr. Faidley's] physician that unambiguously and permanently restricted" him from working more than eight hours a day. Alexander v. Northland Inn, 321 F.3d 723, 727 (8th Cir. 2003).
There is evidence that UPS did not in fact rely on that restriction. UPS officials considered positions that took more than eight hours' work, but were physically easier, including the feeder driver job. The ADA did not require them to make that [*17]  effort. Alexander, 321 F.3d at 727 ("The ADA does not require an employer to permit an employee to perform a job function that the employee's physician has forbidden."). An employer's efforts to do more than the ADA requires do not open it up to liability, even if those efforts fail. See Smith v. Ameritech, 129 F.3d 857, 867 (6th Cir. 1997); Windsor v. Parkway School Dist., No. 4:06CV1310DDN, 2008 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 3176, 2008 WL 161849, at *9, (E.D. Mo. Jan. 15, 2008).

3. Temporary Alternative Work
UPS's temporary alternative work program similarly exceeds the ADA's requirements, and arguments about the parameters of that policy are therefore irrelevant. While modified or part-time schedules can sometimes be reasonable accommodations, "an employer is not required to... assign those tasks that the worker cannot perform to other employees." Hatchett v. Philander Smith College, 251 F.3d 670, 675 (8th Cir. 2001); 42 U.S.C. § 12111(9). When Mr. Faidley attempted the midnight loader/preloader position in February 2013, he could not perform its essential functions, and wanted to abandon the "loader" half of the job. UPS could have permitted that, but did not have to. Moritz v. Frontier Airlines, Inc., 147 F.3d 784, 788 (8th Cir. 1998) ("It is well settled that an employer is under no obligation to reallocate the essential functions of a position that a qualified individual must perform.").

4. Part-Time Positions
Disabled employees do not have to accept whatever accommodations they are offered. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.9(d). But [*18]  if they reject a reasonable accommodation "necessary to enable [them] to perform the essential functions of the position held or desired" they will "not be considered qualified" for that position. Id. Mr. Faidley wanted to stay at UPS, and since he was not qualified for the available full-time positions, taking a part-time job was the only way to do that. Part-time work can be a reasonable accommodation, and it is particularly appropriate in this case: Mr. Faidley repeatedly requested limited hours. 42 U.S.C. § 12111(9). By turning down the part-time positions, Mr. Faidley rejected a reasonable accommodation necessary to enable him to remain at UPS. His disability claim must therefore fail, because he was not qualified to remain at UPS.

C. Interactive Process
Employees and employers share responsibility to resolve accommodation requests. EEOC v. Convergys Customer Management Group, Inc., 491 F.3d 790, 795 (8th Cir. 2007). They should do so through "a flexible, interactive process that involves" both of them. 29 C.F.R. § 1630. Refusing to engage in that process does not, by itself, create liability. Peebles v. Potter, 354 F.3d 761, 769 (8th Cir. 2004). But a failure to engage in the interactive process "is prima facie evidence that the employer may be acting in bad faith." Fjellestad v. Pizza Hut of America, Inc., 188 F.3d 944, 952 (8th Cir. 1999). An employee alleging a failure to engage in the interactive process must show that [*19]  "1) the employer knew about the employee's disability; 2) the employee requested accommodations or assistance for his or her disability; 3) the employer did not make a good faith effort to assist the employee in seeking accommodations; and 4) the employee could have been reasonably accommodated but for the employer's lack of good faith." Id.
Mr. Faidley asserts that the interactive process broke down during his second attempt to return to work, when he asked to work part-time temporarily to build his strength back. He says that UPS did not actually limit alternative work like it said it did, and that even if the collective bargaining agreement did limit alternative work, UPS could have and did not negotiate with the union for an exception. But rejecting one accommodation suggestion is not the same as refusing to dialogue in good faith. See Minnihan, 779 F.3d at 809, 814 (finding that an employer assisted an employee in good faith, even though it refused to restructure his position). UPS representatives met with Mr. Faidley repeatedly, listened to his accommodation suggestions, and offered suggestions of their own. Based on the evidence before the Court, a reasonable jury could not find that UPS acted in bad faith. [*20] 

IV. Conclusion
The Court's determination that Mr. Faidley did not suffer an adverse employment action is fatal to both his retaliation and his disability discrimination claims; its further decision that he was not qualified to stay at UPS, even with reasonable accommodation, independently ends his disability discrimination claims. Finally, its decision that Mr. Faidley did not show an interactive process failure forecloses one method of proving his disability discrimination claim.
For these reasons, IT IS ORDERED that Defendant's motion for summary judgment is GRANTED. The Clerk shall enter judgment accordingly.
/s/ John A. Jarvey
JOHN A. JARVEY, Chief Judge
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF IOWA


End of Document

