Fails v. Bd. of Trs. of the Univ. of W. Fla.
United States District Court for the Northern District of Florida, Pensacola Division
September 1, 2023, Decided; September 1, 2023, Filed
Case No. 3:22cv7026-TKW-HTC

Reporter
2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 156047 *; __ F.Supp.3d __
HERMAN FAILS, Plaintiff, v. THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE UNIVERSITY OF WEST FLORIDA, et al., Defendants.
Counsel:  [*1] For HERMAN FAILS, Plaintiff: MARIE A MATTOX, LEAD ATTORNEY, MATTOX LAW FIRM - TALLAHASSEE FL, TALLAHASSEE, FL.
For THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE UNIVERSITY OF WEST FLORIDA, DEBORAH FLETCHER, INDIVIDUALLY, MARC COSSICH, INDIVIDUALLY, DAVID FAIRCLOTH, INDIVIDUALLY, Defendants: KRISTEN CANDICE DIOT, MATTHEW JOSEPH CARSON, ROBERT JACOB SNIFFEN, SNIFFEN & SPELLMAN PA - TALLAHASSEE FL, TALLAHASSEE, FL.
Judges: T. KENT WETHERELL, II, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: T. KENT WETHERELL, II
Opinion



ORDER GRANTING SUMMARY JUDGMENT
This case is before the Court based on Defendants' motions for summary judgment (Doc. 47, 52). Upon due consideration of the motions, Plaintiff's responses in opposition (Doc. 57, 61), Defendants' reply (Doc. 65), and the evidence submitted by the parties (attachments to Docs. 46, 50, 51, 55, and 56) the Court finds that the material facts are not in dispute and that Defendants are entitled to judgment as a matter of law.

I. Facts
Plaintiff worked as a law enforcement officer for the University of West Florida (UWF) Police Department from January 1994 to April 2020. The UWF Police Department is a relatively small agency, with a total of only twenty-six employees and twenty sworn law enforcement [*2]  officers.
Plaintiff was thirty-four years old when he was hired, and he was over the age of 40 at the time of all the events described below.
Plaintiff suffers from back issues, a learning disability, and chronic respiratory issues. The respiratory issues started after Plaintiff responded to a chemical fire in 2001 while on duty.
Plaintiff was promoted multiple times over the course of his career, achieving his highest rank, sergeant, by December 2007. As a sergeant, Plaintiff was responsible for supervising a "shift"1 of officers who patrolled UWF's campus.
There were three ranks above sergeant in the UWF Police Department's hierarchy: captain, assistant chief, and police chief. For the last few years of Plaintiff's employment, Defendant David Faircloth was the captain, Defendant Deborah Fletcher was the assistant chief, and Defendant Marc Cossich was the police chief.
Beginning in 2008, Plaintiff began to believe that he was being passed over for promotions in favor of Fletcher, who was approximately twenty years his junior. In 2008, Fletcher was promoted to lieutenant,2 and in 2016, she was promoted to assistant chief, despite Plaintiff having spent more time with the UWF Police Department [*3]  than her.
In response to Fletcher's 2008 promotion to lieutenant, Plaintiff filed a charge of discrimination with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), alleging that UWF was committing sex discrimination, age discrimination, and nepotism. Plaintiff would go on to file five more EEOC charges against UWF—two before the end of his employment (in May 2018 and September 2018) and three after his employment ended (in June 2020,3 August 2020, and January 2022).
Plaintiff also availed himself of other federal and state employment rights during the course of his employment at UWF—he made three different reasonable accommodation requests under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) (two of which were granted in full); he requested (and received) five different periods of leave under the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA);4 and he filed twelve5 worker's compensation claims (seven of which were granted).
After Fletcher was promoted to lieutenant in 2008—and even more so after she was promoted to assistant chief in 2016—Plaintiff began to experience what he perceived as negative changes in his working conditions that he attributed to some sort of animus on Fletcher's part.6
The most significant change occurred in November 2017 when Plaintiff was reassigned from his duties as patrol sergeant [*4]  to a role in dispatch where he would be answering 911 calls and coordinating officer responses. This change occurred shortly after Plaintiff was approved to take a year of intermittent FMLA leave to accommodate periodic doctor's appointments and was made even though Plaintiff's doctor never ordered that he be reassigned.
The reassignment to dispatch was a demotion insofar as Plaintiff lost the supervisory authority that he held as a patrol sergeant. Working in dispatch was also a less desirable position for Plaintiff because his learning disability also made the reading-heavy duties in dispatch difficult, and his respiratory issues were irritated by the cigarette smoke that often lingered in the dispatch office.
When Plaintiff voiced his dissatisfaction with the dispatch position, he was reassigned to the role of a security guard. That position had only menial security duties and did not have the supervisory authority Plaintiff enjoyed as a sergeant.
UWF claims that Plaintiff was reassigned for the duration of his intermittent FMLA leave because the unpredictability of his schedule during that period would have made it difficult to ensure that there was always a sergeant assigned to each [*5]  patrol shift. The record contains no contradictory evidence on this issue.
Plaintiff's pay and title were not changed during the time that he was reassigned to the dispatch and security guard positions, and he was reinstated as a patrol sergeant upon the expiration of his year of intermittent FMLA leave.
After Plaintiff returned to his sergeant position, UWF outfitted the police department's patrol cars with mobile laptops so patrol officers could complete reports while in the field. Shortly thereafter, Captain Faircloth instructed all patrol officers that that they were to complete their reports exclusively on the laptops, rather than on the desktop computers in the police department's offices.
Plaintiff was concerned that completing reports in his patrol car would aggravate his back injuries, so he requested that he be allowed to continue completing his reports at the office desktop computers as he had done prior to the issuance of the laptops.
A representative from UWF's human resource department, in consultation with the police department's leadership, informed Plaintiff that he was welcome to remove his mobile laptop from his vehicle to complete reports, but he would not be allowed [*6]  to complete reports inside the office. She explained that it was necessary to keep officers in the field while they completed reports in order to maintain police visibility on campus.
About a year later, during a mandatory firearm training on October 15, 2019, Plaintiff witnessed what he perceived to be violations of UWF Police Department policies when an officer who was not a certified firearms instructor conducted a portion of the training and another officer prematurely discharged his firearm at the firing range.7 Plaintiff was concerned about these incidents and the way that they were handled, so on October 21, 2019, he emailed a four-page, single-spaced memorandum titled "'Whistleblower and Retaliation' Letter of Disappointment at the Firing Range" (the "October 2019 Memorandum") to thirty-nine UWF email addresses, including the entire UWF Police Department.
The October 2019 Memorandum detailed the incidents that occurred during the October 15 firearms training and provided other critiques of the UWF Police Department's current leadership. It also alleged that the UWF Police Department was forced to travel to the further-away Santa Rosa County firing range, rather than the closer [*7]  Escambia County firing range, because a UWF police officer, Officer Montoya, had been "banned" from the Escambia County range for past misconduct.
Chief Cossich instructed Captain Faircloth to investigate the claims in the October 2019 Memorandum shortly after Plaintiff circulated it. Captain Faircloth's investigation determined that incidents described by Plaintiff in the October 2019 Memorandum were either untrue or did not amount to a policy violation.
Captain Faircloth also investigated the accuracy of Plaintiff's claim that Officer Montoya had been banned from the Escambia County firing range. Captain Faircloth concluded after his investigation that Officer Montoya had not been banned from the Escambia County firing range and that the UWF Police Department was only using the Santa Rosa County firing range because the Escambia County range was closed for renovations.
On November 1, 2019, Plaintiff sent a follow-up email in the same thread he used to circulate the October 2019 Memorandum in which he apologized to Officer Montoya for claiming that she had been "banned" from the Escambia County firing range. He stated in the email that he "had no actual written fact or personal knowledge [*8]  of that to be true or not."
After Plaintiff's email admitting that he had no support for his allegation about Officer Montoya, Chief Cossich directed Captain Faircloth to investigate whether Plaintiff had violated a UWF Police Department policy prohibiting defamation of a fellow officer. Captain Faircloth informed Defendant that he was the subject of an internal investigation and attempted to schedule an interview with him, but Plaintiff left work on FMLA leave before the two could meet.8
On March 31, 2020, while still on FMLA leave, Plaintiff sent Chief Cossich a letter titled "Letter of Separation into Civilian Life" in which he announced his "retirement" effective the following day—April 1, 2020. Plaintiff claimed in the letter that he was forced into an early retirement—which he referred to as a "constructive discharge"—because Chief Cossich (1) opened an investigation into his alleged defamation of Officer Montoya and (2) and failed to assure him that the UWF Police Department would implement appropriate COVID-19 precautions.
Captain Faircloth completed his investigation after Plaintiff retired. He concluded that Plaintiff's unfounded claim that Officer Montoya had been banned from [*9]  the Escambia County firing range violated various policies, but Plaintiff was not subjected to any discipline because he was no longer employed by the UWF Police Department.
In October 2020, Plaintiff was found to be permanently and totally disabled by the Social Security Administration. He applied for these benefits in January 2020—several months before he was allegedly "constructively discharged."

II. Procedural Background
In March 2022, Plaintiff filed suit against UWF and three individual defendants (Chief Cossich, Assistant Chief Fletcher, and Captain Faircloth) alleging a multitude of claims under state and federal law. Defendants removed the case to this Court based on federal question jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. §1331 and responded to the complaint with a motion to dismiss. Plaintiff responded to the motion to dismiss with an amended complaint, and in due course, he filed the operative second amended complaint (Doc. 22), which Defendants answered.
The second amended complaint alleges fourteen counts: disability discrimination against UWF in violation of the Florida Civil Rights Act (FCRA) (Count I), ADA (Count II), and Rehabilitation Act (Count VIII); age discrimination against UWF in violation of the FCRA (Count V) and the [*10]  Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) (Count VI); retaliation against UWF in violation of the FCRA (Count III), ADA (Count IV), ADEA (Count VII), Florida worker's compensation law (Count XI), and the First Amendment (Count X); retaliation in violation of the First Amendment against Assistant Chief Fletcher (Count XI), Captain Faircloth (Count XII), and Chief Cossich (Count XIII) in their individual capacities; and retaliation against an unspecified "Defendant" (presumably UWF) in violation of the FCRA (Count XIV).
The parties engaged in an extended period of discovery after which Defendants filed a joint motion for summary judgment on all claims asserted in the second amended complaint. The individual defendants filed a separate motion for summary judgment arguing that they were entitled to qualified immunity on the claims against them in their individual capacities.
The motions are fully briefed and ripe for rulings. No hearing is needed to rule on the motions.

III. Standard of Review
"The court shall grant summary judgment if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). An issue of fact is "material" if it would change the outcome of the litigation, and a dispute about a [*11]  material fact is "genuine" if the evidence is such that it could lead a reasonable factfinder to find for the non-moving party. See Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). The Court's role at the summary judgment stage is not to weigh the evidence, but rather to "conclude whether [the evidence] is so one-sided that the result of any trial is inevitable." Turner v. Phillips, 2022 U.S. App. LEXIS 4179, 2022 WL 458238, at *4 (11th Cir. Feb. 15, 2022); see also Anderson, 477 U.S. at 252 (explaining that when ruling on a motion for summary judgment, "the judge must ask himself ... whether a fair-minded jury could return a verdict for the [non-moving party] on the evidence presented").

IV. Analysis
The fourteen claims asserted in the second amended complaint can be grouped into three broad categories—discrimination (Counts I, II, V, VI, and VIII),9 failure to provide reasonable accommodations (Counts I, II, and VIII), and retaliation (Counts III, IV, VII, and IX through XIV). The Court will address each category in turn.

A. Discrimination
Plaintiff asserts his claims for age and disability discrimination under four statutory headings: the FCRA,10 ADA, ADEA and Rehabilitation Act. "Disability and age-related discrimination actions under the FCRA are analyzed under the same frameworks as the ADA and ADEA, respectively," Mazzeo v. Color Resolutions Int'l, LLC, 746 F.3d 1264, 1266 (11th Cir. 2014), and the same standards govern [*12]  claims under the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act, Silberman v. Miami, 927 F.3d 1123, 1133 (11th Cir. 2019).
The prima facie cases for the age discrimination claims and the disability discrimination claims are similar in that they require Plaintiff to show that his protected status (i.e., age or disability) was the "but-for" cause of any adverse employment action he suffered. See McNely v. Ocala Star-Banner Corp., 99 F.3d 1068, 1077 (11th Cir. 1996) ("The ADA imposes a 'but-for' liability standard."); Liebman v. Metro. Life Ins. Co., 808 F.3d 1294, 1298 (11th Cir. 2015) ("To assert an action under the ADEA, an employee must establish that his age was the 'but-for' cause of the adverse employment action.").
Here, among other arguments,11 Defendants contends that Plaintiff has not presented evidence sufficient to create a jury question on but-for causation for any of his discrimination claims. The Court agrees.
The most common method of proving causation is through circumstantial evidence is identifying a comparator (i.e., a fellow employee who is similarly situated to the plaintiff but outside of his protective class) who was not subject to the same adverse employment actions as the plaintiff. See Sailboat Bend Sober Living, LLC v. City of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., 46 F.4th 1268, 1275-76 (11th Cir. 2022) (discussing comparators in ADA cases); Connor v. Bell Microproducts-Future Tech, Inc., 492 F. App'x 963, 965 (11th Cir. 2012) (same for ADEA case); see also Lewis v. City of Union City, Ga., 918 F.3d 1213, 1218 (11th Cir. 2019) (explaining that comparators in employment discrimination cases must be "similarly situated in all material [*13]  respects" to the plaintiff.). However, a plaintiff may also survive summary judgment by "presenting a 'convincing mosaic of circumstantial evidence that would allow a jury to infer intentional discrimination by the decisionmaker.'" Smith v. Lockheed-Martin Corp., 644 F.3d 1321, 1328 (11th Cir. 2011).
Here, Plaintiff relies exclusively on the "convincing mosaic" theory to establish causation. See Doc. 61 at 23-25. Apart from his recitation of the relevant legal standards, Plaintiff's convincing mosaic argument consists of a single paragraph:
This is text-book [sic] case of a convincing mosaic of discrimination. There is ample evidence proffered by Plaintiff that Defendant discriminated against him, including, but not limited to, Fletcher's refusal to approve [Plaintiff's] ADA request for accommodation that would have allowed him to continue to complete his report at his desk using the computer equipment that worked best for his learning disability and Fletcher's decision to move [Plaintiff] to the position in Dispatch that was not a law enforcement position with supervisory authority and subjected him to considerable difficult breathing and associated health damages. As such, summary judgment must be denied.
Id. at 25.
That argument does not present a mosaic [*14]  of discrimination, much less a convincing one. Plaintiff merely recounts two of the challenged employment actions and concludes, without citing any evidence of discriminatory intent,12 that discrimination must have motivated these actions.
The fact that certain employment actions may have exacerbated Plaintiff's disabilities does not mean that they were motivated by Plaintiff's disabilities. And worse yet, Plaintiff does not even attempt to tie any of the alleged adverse employment actions to his age.
Typical convincing mosaic evidence consists of "suspicious timing," "ambiguous statements," "systemically better treatment of similarly situated employees," "pretext," or "other information from which discriminatory intent may be inferred." See Jenkins v. Nell, 26 F.4th 1243, 1250 (11th Cir. 2022). Plaintiff has not presented any of that. Because Plaintiff has completely failed to adduce any evidence of but-for causation, summary judgment is due to be granted on all of Plaintiff's discrimination claims.

B. Failure to Provide Reasonable Accommodations
The ADA requires employers to provide "reasonable accommodations" to disabled employees to ensure that the employees can perform the essential functions of their job. See Holly v. Clairson Indus., LLC, 492 F.3d 1247, 1256 (11th Cir. 2007). "An accommodation [*15]  is 'reasonable' and necessary under the ADA ... only if it enables the employee to perform essential functions of the job." Id.
"[T]he ADA does not require the employer to eliminate an essential function of the plaintiff's job" to accommodate his disability. Id. (quoting D'Angelo v. ConAgra Foods, Inc., 422 F.3d 1220, 1229 (11th Cir. 2005)). Rather, "the ADA may require an employer to restructure a particular job by altering or eliminating some of its marginal functions." Id. (emphasis in original) (quoting Lucas v. W.W. Grainger, Inc., 257 F.3d 1249, 1260 (11th Cir. 2001)).
An employer's failure to provide a reasonable accommodation upon a disabled employee's request "constitutes discrimination under the ADA." Id. at 1262. To prevail on a failure to accommodate claim, "[t]he employee has the burden of identifying an accommodation and demonstrating that it is reasonable." Frazier-White v. Gee, 818 F.3d 1249, 1255-56 (11th Cir. 2016).
Here, it is undisputed that UWF granted two of Plaintiff's three accommodation requests (providing air purification in dispatch and uploading voice-to-text software to Plaintiff's computer) in full.13 However, Plaintiff argues that UWF's failure to grant his third accommodation request (allowing him to complete reports in his office rather than in his patrol car) violated the ADA. UWF argues that its partial accommodation of this request—allowing Plaintiff to [*16]  complete reports outside of his patrol car but not secluded in his office—was sufficient, and that Plaintiff's request to complete reports in his office was unreasonable. The Court agrees with UWF.
As noted above, a requested accommodation is unreasonable under the ADA if it would eliminate an essential function of the disabled employee's job. See Holly, 492 F.3d at 1256. UWF contends that remaining visible on campus during his patrol was an essential function of Plaintiff's job and that allowing Plaintiff to complete reports in his office would interfere with that function. Plaintiff disputes the essentiality of remaining visible on campus.
"[E]ssential functions 'are the fundamental job duties of a position that an individual with a disability is actually required to perform.'" Id. at 1257 (quoting Earl v. Mervyns, Inc., 207 F.3d 1361, 1365 (11th Cir. 2000)). In determining whether a function is essential, "the employer's view is entitled to substantial weight," but "this factor alone may not be conclusive." Id. at 1258 (cleaned up); accord 42 U.S.C. §12111(8) ("[C]onsideration shall be given to the employer's judgment as to what functions of a job are essential, and if an employer has prepared a written description before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job, this description shall [*17]  be considered evidence of the essential functions of the job"). Other factors that can be considered in determining essentiality include "[t]he amount of time spent on the job performing the function" and "[t]he consequences of not requiring the incumbent to perform the function." 29 C.F.R. §1630.2(n)(3).
Here, UWF submitted evidence showing that, in its judgment as an employer, presence and visibility on campus was an essential function of Plaintiff's job as a police sergeant. For example, the "essential functions" section of the written job description for "law enforcement sergeant" identifies on-the-scene law enforcement duties (e.g., conducting arrests, investigations, crowd control, etc.), combined with report preparation, as accounting for 35% of a sergeant's time on the job—which confirms that a significant portion of Plaintiff's job must be spent on campus in the field.
The Court did not overlook that a patrol sergeant must balance his on-the-scene law enforcement with report preparation, but the reason UWF issued laptops to its patrol officers was to allow officers to remain in the field (and increase their visibility on campus) while performing their report-writing duties. Indeed, in a memorandum [*18]  issued to all patrol officers on February 14, 2019, Captain Faircloth explained that:
[a] significant amount of resources have been dedicated to the acquisition and implementation of laptops for Patrol. Laptops allow officers/supervisors to stay in-service in the patrol zones without having to return to the station just to complete, review and approve reports. This is important in our efforts toward community oriented policing.
Doc. 51-69 at 33. This was the same reason that UWF gave to Plaintiff for denying his request to complete reports in his office. See Doc. 51-39 at 1 ("[T]he ... directive to utilize mobile laptops and remain in the field ... must be adhered to .... The goal of utilizing the mobile laptops is to offer consistent visible officer presence in the field.").
Plaintiff has not identified any countervailing evidence that calls into question UWF's judgment that being in the field while completing reports was an essential part of Plaintiff's job. Thus, there is no issue of material fact to submit to a jury on this issue. See Kendall v. Sec'y, Dep't of Veterans Affs., 682 F. App'x 761, 766 (11th Cir. 2017) (affirming grant of summary judgment against failure to accommodate claim where "[Plaintiff] did not present evidence contradicting the employer's [*19]  judgment or evidence about any of the other factors" because "[t]hough the employer's judgment is not the only factor to be considered, in this case, it was the only factor about which any evidence was presented.").
The Court did not overlook Plaintiff's argument that "there is no evidence that [completing reports in the office rather than on the laptop] would have decreased Plaintiff's total time on patrol being visible," Doc. 61 at 27-28, but the Court rejects that argument as a matter of common sense. A law enforcement officer using a laptop in the field is obviously more visible than he would be sitting in an office, and any time that Plaintiff spent in his office completing reports would be time that he would not be in the field.
Moreover, Plaintiff does not explain why UWF's proffered comprise—i.e., allowing him to complete reports outside of his patrol car but not in the isolation of his office—was not a reasonable accommodation. The reason for Plaintiff's accommodation request was to alleviate back pain caused by the awkward twisting required to complete reports on the laptop in the patrol car, but allowing Plaintiff to complete the reports on the laptop outside of his patrol [*20]  car would have presumably ameliorated this problem just as well as Plaintiff's preferred accommodation. See Stewart v. Happy Herman's Cheshire Bridge, Inc., 117 F.3d 1278, 1286 (11th Cir. 1997) ("[U]nder the ADA a qualified individual with a disability is 'not entitled to the accommodation of [his] choice, but only a reasonable accommodation.'") (quoting Lewis v. Zilog, Inc., 908 F. Supp. 931, 948 (N.D. Ga. 1995)).
In sum, because the undisputed evidence cited in the parties' briefing shows that maintaining a visible presence on campus was an essential function of Plaintiff's job, Plaintiff has not carried his burden to show that his requested accommodation was reasonable. Likewise, based on the evidence presented, Plaintiff has not shown that UWF's proposed accommodation was unreasonable. Accordingly, UWF is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim.

C. Retaliation
Plaintiff alleges that Defendants subjected him to retaliatory adverse employment actions in response to (1) his reports of disability discrimination, (2) his reports of age discrimination, (3) his ADA accommodation requests, (4) his filing worker's compensation claims, (5) his filing FMLA leave requests, and (6) his exercise of his First Amendment Rights. The Court will discuss each category of retaliation in turn, although the Court will discuss [*21]  the first four categories together because they are subject to the same basic legal standard.

1. Retaliation for Reports of Discrimination, Reasonable Accommodation Requests, and Worker's Compensation Claims
Although Plaintiff's claims of retaliation for reporting discrimination, requesting ADA accommodations, and requesting worker's compensation arise under different laws (i.e., the ADA, the ADEA, the FCRA, and the Florida Worker's Compensation Law), they all require proof of the same basic elements: (1) Plaintiff engaged in a protected activity (whether that is reporting discrimination, requesting ADA accommodations, or filing a claim for worker's compensation), (2) Plaintiff suffered an adverse employment action, and (3) there is a causal connection between the two. See Brillinger v. City of Lake Worth, 317 F. App'x 871, 877 n. 5 (11th Cir. 2008) (FCRA and ADEA retaliation); Davis v. Orange Cnty., 2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 128404, 2023 WL 4743586, at *6 (M.D. Fla. Jul. 25, 2023) (ADA retaliation); Juback v. Michaels Stores, Inc., 143 F. Supp. 3d 1195, 1203 (M.D. Fla. 2015) (worker's compensation retaliation).
Logically, identifying a distinct protected activity as the trigger for a particular adverse employment action is essential to determining whether there is a causal connection between the two. Plaintiff makes almost no attempt to do this. Instead, he merely points out that, over the course of nearly two decades, he filed six charges [*22]  of discrimination with the EEOC, he requested three ADA accommodations, he filed for worker's compensation twelve times, and he was subjected to fifteen14 supposed adverse employment actions. Then, he leaves it to the Court to connect the causation dots between those thirty-six discrete events. This presents several problems.
First, when a plaintiff does not tie specific protected activity to specific adverse actions, there are several steps of the analysis that the Court simply cannot perform. For example, a plaintiff cannot establish a retaliation claim unless he can prove that the decisionmaker responsible for the adverse employment action was aware of the protected activity at the time the adverse action was imposed. See Patterson v. Georgia Pac., LLC, 38 F.4th 1336, 1351 (11th Cir. 2022). If no particular protected activity or adverse action is specifically identified, then no relevant decisionmaker is specifically identified, and the Court cannot perform this analysis.
Second, where there is no direct evidence of retaliation (and here there is none), the temporal proximity between the protected activity and the adverse action is often offered as circumstantial evidence of a retaliatory motive. See Thomas v. Cooper Lighting, Inc., 506 F.3d 1361, 1364 (11th Cir. 2007). But where there is no proposed link between [*23]  certain protected activities and certain adverse actions, the Court cannot determine if the two happened near-in-time.
Third, Plaintiff has the ultimate burden to prove that his protected activities were the "but-for" cause of his adverse employment actions, Tolar v. Bradley Arant Boult Cummings, LLP, 997 F.3d 1280, 1294 (11th Cir. 2021), but if the plaintiff does not identify which protected activity triggered which adverse action, there can be no but-for causation analysis. For example, was Plaintiff's alleged retaliatory reassignment to dispatch in 2017 caused by an ADA accommodation request? A worker's compensation request? An EEOC charge? Two out of three? All three? Plaintiff does not say.15
A plaintiff cannot carry his burden to prove a retaliation claim if his argument is too vague to even analyze. See A.L. v. Jackson Cnty. Sch. Bd., 635 F. App'x 774, 787 (11th Cir. 2015) ("[T]he onus is upon the parties to formulate arguments ....") (quoting Resol. Tr. Corp. v. Dunmar Corp., 43 F.3d 587, 599 (11th Cir.)); Selman v. CitiMortgage, Inc., 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 37017, 2013 WL 838193, at *15 n. 24 (S.D. Ala. Mar. 5, 2013) ("At best, plaintiffs have offered a vague, shadowy allegation .... [A district court] cannot and will not fill in the blanks for an argument that plaintiffs have not developed.").
Here, the Court would have to make Plaintiff's argument for him and link particular adverse actions to particular protected activities before it could even consider Plaintiff's claims. The Court will not do [*24]  so. See Reaves v. Sec'y, Fla. Dep't of Corr., 872 F.3d 1137, 1149 (11th Cir. 2017) ("It is not [the Court's] job, especially in a counseled civil case, to create arguments for someone who has not made them or to assemble them form assorted hints and references scattered through the brief." (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Yeomalakis v. FDIC, 562 F.3d 56, 61 (1st Cir. 2009))).
That said, the Court did not overlook Plaintiff's truistic argument that if he had not made ADA accommodation requests or worker's compensation requests, there would have been nothing to deny, suggesting that perhaps the denial of benefits was retaliation for requesting those benefits. That, however, is not how retaliation claims work.
As discussed above, a failure to provide reasonable accommodations under the ADA is a direct discrimination claim, not a retaliation claim. And the relevant worker's compensation statue makes it unlawful to "discharge, threaten to discharge, intimidate or coerce" an employee who makes a worker's compensation claim, §440.205, Fla. Stat.—i.e., to take some adverse employment action outside of the worker's compensation process. In either case, denying a valid request may be a violation of law, but it is not "retaliation" for making the request.
The Court also did not overlook Plaintiff's vague suggestion that his "constructive [*25]  discharge" in March 2020 was retaliation for all of his protected activities over the years. However, even if Plaintiff was constructively discharged,16 none of his ADA accommodation requests, EEOC charges, or worker's compensations requests were close enough in time to suggest a retaliatory motive, at least not without some other kind of evidence (of which there is none). The closest ADA accommodation request to Plaintiff's alleged constructive discharge was in February 2019 (over a year before), the closest EEOC charge was in September 2018 (a year and a half before), and the closest worker's compensation request was in May 2019 (10 months before)—and, all of those time gaps are significantly longer than the temporal proximity that can support an inference of causation. See Thomas, 506 F.3d at 1364 (explaining that "mere temporal proximity, without more, must be very close" and holding that "[a] three to four month disparity between the statutorily protected expression and the adverse employment action is not enough [to support an inference of causation]")
Accordingly, for the reasons stated above, UWF is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's ADA, ADEA, FCRA, and worker's compensation retaliation [*26]  claims.

2. FMLA Retaliation
Plaintiff's response to Defendants' motion for summary judgment suggests that some of the adverse actions taken against him were retaliation for his various FMLA leave requests. See Doc. 61 at 45 ("Plaintiff asks for FMLA leave, Defendants humiliate him by reassigning him to non-sworn law enforcement positions ...."). However, FMLA retaliation is a separate cause of action arising under the FMLA statute, Strickland v. Water Works & Sewer Bd. of City of Birmingham, 239 F.3d 1199, 1206 (11th Cir. 2001), and Plaintiff did not plead a claim for FMLA retaliation in the second amended complaint. Accordingly, Plaintiff cannot pursue an unpled FMLA retaliation claim at this stage of the case. See Austin v. City of Montgomery, 196 F. App'x 747, 753 (11th Cir. 2006) ("A party cannot amend [his] complaint to add a new claim through argument in a brief opposing summary judgment" (citing Gilmour v. Gates, McDonald & Co., 382 F.3d 1312, 1314-15 (11th Cir. 2004))).

3. First Amendment Retaliation
Plaintiff's First Amendment retaliation claim is his most developed retaliation claim in that he argues that Defendants violated the First Amendment by opening an internal investigation against him (which led to his alleged constructive discharge) in retaliation for his circulation of the October 2019 Memorandum.17 Defendants respond that Plaintiff's speech in the October 2019 Memorandum was not protected by the First Amendment. The Court agrees with Defendants.18
"[T]he First Amendment safeguards a public employee's right, as a citizen, to participate in discussions involving public affairs; it does not empower public employees to 'constitutionalize' any grievances they have with their employers." McAlpin v. Town of Sneads, 61 F.4th 916, 934 (11th Cir. 2023). Courts consider two questions when determining whether a public employee has a First Amendment claim:
First [the court] determin[es] whether the employee spoke as a citizen on a matter of public concern. If the answer is no, the employee has no First Amendment cause of action based on his or her employer's reaction to the speech. If the answer is yes, then the possibility of a First Amendment claim arises. The question [then] becomes whether the relevant governmental entity had an adequate justification for treating the employee differently from any other member of the general public.
Garcetti v. Ceballos, 547 U.S. 410, 418, 126 S. Ct. 1951, 164 L. Ed. 2d 689 (2006) (internal citations omitted). The second question requires an evaluation of whether "the employee's First Amendment interest in engaging in the speech outweighs the employer's interest in prohibiting the speech to promote the efficiency of the public services it performs through its employees." McAlpin, 61 F.4th at 934 (quoting Anderson v. Burke Cnty., 239 F.3d 1216, 1219 (11th Cir. 2001)).
Here, Defendants argue that Plaintiff's claims can be resolved at the first step of the analysis because the summary judgment record establishes [*28]  that Plaintiff wrote the October 2019 Memorandum as a disgruntled employee, not a citizen speaking on a matter of public concern. The Court agrees.
To have a First Amendment potentially viable claim, Plaintiff must prove that he spoke (1) as a citizen, and (2) on a matter of public concern in the October 2019 Memorandum. See Alves v. Bd. of Regents of the Univ. Sys. of Ga., 804 F.3d 1149, 1160 (11th Cir. 2015). Both elements are questions of law for the Court. Id. at 1159.
On the first element (speech as a citizen), the Court looks to the role occupied by the speaker, being aware that "when public employees make statements pursuant to their official duties, the employees are not speaking as citizens for First Amendment purposes." Id. at 1160 (quoting Garcetti, 547 U.S. at 421). The "central inquiry is whether the speech at issue owes its existence to the employee's professional responsibilities," and the Court considers "practical factors" such as "the employee's job description, whether the speech occurred at the workplace, and whether the speech concerned the subject matter of the employee's job." Id. at 1161 (cleaned up); see also Fernandez v. Sch. Bd. of Miami-Dade Cnty., Fla., 898 F.3d 1324, 1332 (11th Cir. 2018) (identifying factors of "(1) speaking with the objective of advancing official duties; (2) harnessing workplace resources; (3) projecting official authority; (4) heeding official directives; and (5) observing formal workplace [*29]  hierarchies"). Moreover, although "speech that an employee made in accordance with or in furtherance of the ordinary responsibilities of [his] employment" is not speech as a citizen, that does not necessarily mean that "speech that [merely] concerns the ordinary responsibilities of [his] employment" is so limited. Alves, 804 F.3d at 1162 (emphasis added).
On the second element (matter of public concern), the Court looks to "the content, form, and context of a given statement" to determine if the speech relates to a matter of public concern or one of only personal interest. Id. (quoting Connick v. Myers, 461 U.S. 138, 147-48, 103 S. Ct. 1684, 75 L. Ed. 2d 708 (1983)). "[T]he relevant inquiry is not whether the public would be interested in the topic of the speech at issue, it is whether the purpose of the employee's speech was to raise issues of public concern." Id. at 1167 (cleaned up; emphasis in original). "To fall within the realm of 'public concern,' an employee's speech must relate to 'any matter of political, social, or other concern to the community.'" Id. at 1162 (quoting Connick, 461 U.S. at 146). However, because "an employee's speech will rarely be entirely private or entirely public," id. (quoting Akins v. Fulton Cnty., 420 F.3d 1293, 1304 (11th Cir. 2005)), the Court reviews the whole record to determine "whether the main thrust of the speech in question is essentially public [*30]  in nature of private." Id. (quoting Vila v. Padron, 484 F.3d 1334, 1340 (11th Cir. 2007)) (emphasis added).
Here, the evidence establishes that Plaintiff wrote the October 2019 Memorandum in his capacity as a disgruntled UWF employee, not a concerned citizen. Importantly, the October 2019 Memorandum arose out of a mandatory firearm training for UWF police officers, which was one of Plaintiff's "ordinary responsibilities." Plaintiff attempts to draw a distinction between participating in the training (within his responsibilities) and vocalizing concerns over how that training was conducted (outside of his responsibilities), but "in reporting conduct that interfered with [his] ordinary job duties, [Plaintiff] spoke pursuant to those duties." Id. at 1165. Moreover, the October 2019 Memorandum is written from the perspective of a seasoned member of the UWF police force upset at a perceived failure of leadership and lack of procedural compliance during a firearms training he personally attended, and the stated objective of the letter "is to inform and implement immediate change [at the UWF police force], both in operational policies and in personnel." Those are the unique perspectives and goals of an employee, not a citizen.19
Even if Plaintiff was [*31]  speaking as a citizen, he was not speaking on a matter of public concern. See Alves, 804 F.3d at 1166 n. 5 (explaining that where a court finds that a plaintiff was not speaking as a private citizen, it need not address the "public concern" inquiry, but best practice is to analyze both prongs). This conclusion follows for three reasons.
First, although the October 2019 Memorandum opens by briefly mentioning public safety, the discussion of that subject does not extend beyond the first paragraph. See King v. Board of Cnty. Comm's, 916 F.3d 1339, 1347 (11th Cir. 2019) (explaining that merely "mention[ing], or allud[ing] to," topics of public concern is not enough to "convert ... employee speech into a First Amendment-protected complaint."). Instead, when the October 2019 Memorandum is read in full, it is apparent that its "main thrust" is to air Plaintiff's personal grievances with individual members of the UWF Police Department and their approach to administration. See Boyce v. Andrew, 510 F.3d 1333, 1344 (11th Cir. 2007) ("A 'public employee may not transform a personal grievance into a matter of public concern by invoking a supposed popular interest in the way public institutions are run.'") (quoting Ferrara v. Mills, 781 F.2d 1508, (11th Cir. 1986)). Indeed, most of the issues raised in the October 2019 Memorandum relate to perceived personal slights, and all of the issues pertain to the [*32]  internal workplace dynamic at the UWF Police Department—not matters of general public concern.20 Moreover, even if the issues raised in the Memorandum could have some tangential effect on the public, Plaintiff's purpose of raising those issues—as evidenced by its tone and explicit demands for changes in the police department's personnel—was "to further [Plaintiff's] own employment interest," not to "raise issues of public concern." See Boyce, 510 F.3d at 1344, 1345 (cleaned up).
Second, the two points raised in the October 2019 Memorandum that could be considered safety concerns (the use of a non-certified instructor and the premature discharge of a firearm during the training) related to workplace safety, not public safety. See Royster v. Robinson, No. 20-14877, 2021 U.S. App. LEXIS 32702, 2021 WL 5105810, at *4 (11th Cir. Nov. 3, 2021) (concluding that plaintiff's complaint of a "strong chemical smell" in her work area, which plaintiff characterized as concerning "workplace safety," was not a matter of public concern). Moreover, as explained above, these safety concerns were not even the "main thrust" of the October 2019 Memorandum—they took a noticeable backseat to Plaintiff's complaints of personal mistreatment and perceived mismanagement of the UWF Police Department.
Third, Plaintiff only circulated the October 2019 [*33]  Memorandum internally to UWF personnel,21 rather than making it public. See Alves, 804 F.3d at 1162 ("[W]hether the speech at issue was communicated to the public or privately to an individual is relevant [to the matter of public concern analysis] ...."). "[A] court cannot determine that an utterance is not a matter of public concern solely because the employee does not air the concerns to the public," id. (cleaned up; emphasis in original), but this factor, when combined with the other two mentioned above, supports the conclusion that Plaintiff was not speaking on a matter of public concern in the October 2019 Memorandum.
In sum, because Plaintiff was speaking as an employee on employment matters in the October 2019 Memorandum (and not as a citizen on matters of public concern), his speech was not protected by the First Amendment and could not serve as the basis for a retaliation claim. Thus, even if the October 2019 Memorandum played a substantial part in Plaintiff's alleged constructive discharge (and the Court is skeptical that a jury could find that it did), Defendants are entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's First Amendment retaliation claims.

V. Conclusion
In sum, for the reasons stated above, it is ORDERED that:
1. Defendants' [*34]  motions for summary judgment (Docs. 47, 52) are GRANTED.
2. The Clerk shall enter judgment in favor of Defendants and close the case file.
DONE and ORDERED this 1st day of September, 2023.
/s/ T. Kent Wetherell, II
T. KENT WETHERELL, II
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

