Feist v. Louisiana
United States District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana
March 16, 2010, Decided; March 16, 2010, Filed
CIVIL ACTION NO: 09-7060 SECTION: "S" (1)

Reporter
2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 147294 *
PAULINE G. FEIST VERSUS STATE OF LOUISIANA, DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
Subsequent History: Summary judgment granted by, Dismissed by, Judgment entered by Feist v. La., DOJ, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 193635 (E.D. La., Sept. 21, 2012)
Counsel:  [*1] For Pauline G. Feist, Plaintiff: Dale Edward Williams, LEAD ATTORNEY, Law Office of Dale Edward Williams, Covington, LA; John Courtney Wilson, LEAD ATTORNEY, J. Courtney Wilson, Attorney at Law, Metairie, LA; Pauline G. Feist, LEAD ATTORNEY, Feist & Associates, New Orleans, LA; Victor Roma Farrugia, Farrugia Law Firm, LLC, New Orleans, LA.
For Pauline G. Feist, (11-1585), Consol Plaintiff: John Courtney Wilson, LEAD ATTORNEY, J. Courtney Wilson, Attorney at Law, Metairie, LA; Pauline G. Feist, LEAD ATTORNEY, Feist & Associates, New Orleans, LA; Victor Roma Farrugia, Farrugia Law Firm, LLC, New Orleans, LA.
For Louisiana State, Department of Justice, Office of the Attorney Generals, Defendant: Antonio M. Clayton, LEAD ATTORNEY, Clayton, Fruge & Ward, LLC, Port Allen, LA; Edmond W. Shows, LEAD ATTORNEY, Shows, Cali & Walsh, LLP, Baton Rouge, LA; Amy L. McInnis, Milling Benson Woodward, LLP (Baton Rouge), Baton Rouge, LA; Lindsay L. Pantaleo, Louisiana Department of Health & Hospitals (Baton Rouge), Bureau of Legal Services, Baton Rouge, LA.
For Louisiana State, (11-1585) Department of Justice, Office of the Attorney General, Consol Defendant: Amy L. McInnis, Milling Benson Woodward, LLP [*2]  (Baton Rouge), Baton Rouge, LA; Lindsay L. Pantaleo, Louisiana Department of Health & Hospitals (Baton Rouge), Bureau of Legal Services, Baton Rouge, LA.
For Victor R. Farrugia, Movant: Victor Roma Farrugia, Farrugia Law Firm, LLC, New Orleans, LA.
Judges: MARY ANN VIAL LEMMON, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: MARY ANN VIAL LEMMON
Opinion



ORDER AND REASONS
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Motion to Dismiss filed by defendant, State of Louisiana, Department of Justice (Doc. #6), is GRANTED as to plaintiff's prospective injunctive relief claims, and DENIED as to plaintiff's claims for failure to accommodate under the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12101, et seq.1

BACKGROUND
This matter comes before the court on a motion to dismiss filed by the defendant, the State of Louisiana, Department of Justice (the "LaDOJ"). The LaDOJ argues: (1) that plaintiff's ADA claims regarding failure to accommodate should be dismissed for failure to state a claim; (2) that plaintiff's ADA retaliation claims should be dismissed for failure to exhaust administrative remedies; and, (3) that plaintiff's prospective injunctive relief claims should be dismissed for lack of standing.
Plaintiff, Pauline Feist, is an African-American female who was [*3]  employed as a staff attorney in the medical malpractice section of the LaDOJ. In 2005, plaintiff developed a chronic knee condition that limited her ability to walk. In 2008, the LaDOJ moved its New Orleans, Louisiana office to 400 Poydras Street where the majority of the employee parking was approximately two blocks away from the office. There were a limited number of on-site parking spaces that were reserved for employees in leadership positions. On July 30, 2008, plaintiff informed the LaDOJ of her knee condition and requested an on-site parking space. Her request was denied. Plaintiff alleges that there were available on-site parking spaces and that on-site parking spaces were given to white, non-disabled males who were not in leadership positions. Plaintiff also alleges that the LaDOJ created false titles to justify the allocation of the on-site parking spaces. Additionally, plaintiff alleges that the LaDOJ did not discuss a reasonable accommodation with her or her treating physician.
Further, plaintiff alleges that she was paid less than lesser-qualified, white staff attorneys in the medical malpractice section of the LaDOJ. On July 25, 2008, plaintiff requested a salary increase [*4]  based on merit and increased cost of living. In response, the LaDOJ informed her that salary adjustments would be based on an upcoming study of the LaDOJ compensation structure. Plaintiff alleges that no study was conducted, and that the Attorney General of the State of Louisiana refused to meet with her. Plaintiff also alleges that when she complained of the racially discriminatory wage differentials, she was terminated on the pretextual reason of "messing up a case," where other similarly situated white employees who failed to win cases were not terminated.
Plaintiff filed a complaint with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC") alleging that the LaDOJ discriminated against her on the basis of race, sex, and disability. Plaintiff subsequently filed a second EEOC charge against the LaDOJ alleging racial discrimination and retaliation under Title VII.2 On September 2, 2009, plaintiff received a right to sue letter from the EEOC.
On October 28, 2009, plaintiff filed this suit against the LaDOJ. Plaintiff claims: (1) that the LaDOJ violated Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e, et seq., by discriminating against her in terms of her salary and retaliating against her [*5]  for complaining about the disparate wages by firing her; and, (2) that the LaDOJ owes her damages because it violated the ADA by not attempting to accommodate her with an on-site parking space and took adverse actions against her due to her disability. Plaintiff seeks back and front pay with benefits, damages for mental anguish, loss of professional reputation, and loss of enjoyment of life, prejudgment interest, attorneys' fees and costs, and injunctive and equitable relief. Plaintiff does not specifically claim in her complaint that she seeks reinstatement to her position as a staff attorney with the LaDOJ.

ANALYSIS

1. Legal Standard
Rule 12(b)(6) permits a motion to dismiss a complaint for failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted. To survive a Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss, enough facts to state a claim for relief that is plausible on its face must be pleaded. In re Katrina Canal Breaches Litigation, 495 F.3d 191, 205 (5th Cir. 2007) (quoting Bell Atl. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 127 S. Ct. 1955, 1964-65, & 1973 n. 14, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929 (2007)). "Factual allegations must be enough to raise a right to relief above the speculative level, on the assumption that all the allegations in the complaint are true (even if doubtful in fact)." Bell Atl., 127 S. Ct. at 1965.

2. Plaintiff's ADA Failure to Accommodate Claims
Plaintiff contends that she was discriminated against because of her disability. [*6]  She alleges that her knee condition is a disability under the ADA because it causes a significant and permanent limitation of her ability to walk. Plaintiff alleges that the LaDOJ failed to accommodate her disability in violation of the ADA by refusing to give her an on-site parking space. Plaintiff claims that the request was for a reasonable accommodation because she had to walk two blocks one or more times per day to and from her car, which caused her great pain that limited her ability to do her job.
The LaDOJ argues that the requested accommodation was not reasonable because there were a limited number of on-site parking spaces that were reserved for employees in leadership positions. The LaDOJ also argues that such an accommodation had no impact on plaintiff's ability to perform her job as a staff attorney and would have given plaintiff an advantage over her non-disabled co-workers.
Title I of the ADA prohibits covered entities from committing employment discrimination on the basis of disability, which discrimination includes "not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical and mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability . . . unless such [*7]  covered entity can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose undue hardship on the operation of the business of such covered entity."3 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). "An employer's obligation to provide a 'reasonable accommodation,' when triggered, contemplates changes to an employer's procedures, facilities, or performance requirements that will permit a qualified individual with a disability to perform the essential functions of his or her job." Burch v. Coca-Cola Co., 119 F.3d 305, 314 (5th Cir. 1997). An employer violates that ADA if it fails to reasonably accommodate an employee, unless the employer can demonstrate that the accommodation causes undue hardship. Id.; see also Riel v. Elec. Data Sys. Corp., 99 F.3d 678, 681-82 (5th Cir. 1996). Remedies for violations of Title I of the ADA include injunctive relief, back pay, equitable relief, and appropriate affirmative action. 42 U.S.C. § 12117; see also 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-5.
To establish a prima facie case for failure to accommodate, a plaintiff must show that: (1) she is a qualified individual with a disability; (2) the employer was aware of her disability; and (3) the employer failed to reasonably accommodate her disability." E.E.O.C. v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 417 F.3d 789, 797 (7th Cir. 2005). As to the third element, "the ADA requires that the employer and employee engage in an interactive process to determine a reasonable accommodation." Id. (quoting Baert v. Euclid Beverage, Ltd., 149 F.3d 626, 633 (7th Cir. 1998)). An employer's unwillingness [*8]  to engage in a good faith interactive process may lead to a failure to reasonably accommodate an employee in violation of the ADA. Loulseged v. Akzo Nobel Inc., 178 F.3d 731, 736 (5th Cir. 1999). However, the employer cannot be found to have violated the ADA when the employee is responsible for the breakdown of the interactive process. Id.
Plaintiff has sufficiently alleged a prima facie case for failure to accommodate under the ADA. She alleges that she is a qualified individual, an attorney working for the LaDOJ, who has a disability, a chronic knee condition that impairs her ability to walk. She also alleges that her employer was aware of her disability and failed to make a reasonable accommodation, an on-site parking space. Further, plaintiff alleges that the LaDOJ failed to engage in an interactive process to determine the reasonableness of the requested accommodation. Therefore, the LaDOJ's motion is DENIED as to plaintiff's ADA failure to accommodate claims.

3. Plaintiff's Prospective Relief Claims
The LaDOJ argues that plaintiff's claims for prospective injunctive relief under Title VII should be dismissed for lack of standing because plaintiff is no longer employed at the LaDOJ. Plaintiff contends that the court should defer ruling on this [*9]  portion of the LaDOJ's motion until after the close of discovery because reinstatement is an available remedy under Title VII, and if she is reinstated, she seeks an injunction to prevent the LaDOJ from taking the same actions that gave rise to this suit.
To assert a claim for injunctive relief in federal court a plaintiff must "satisfy the threshold requirement imposed by Art. III of the Constitution" by showing "that he has sustained or is immediately in danger of sustaining some direct injury as a result of the challenged . . . conduct." Armstrong v. Turner Indus., Inc., 141 F.3d 554, 562-63 (5th Cir. 1998) (quoting City of Los Angeles v. Lyons, 461 U.S. 95, 103 S. Ct. 1660, 1665 and 1669, 75 L. Ed. 2d 675 (1983)). "Past wrongs do not in themselves amount to that real and immediate threat of injury necessary to make out a case or controversy." Lyons, 103 S.Ct. at 1666. Further, "[t]o pursue an injunction or declaratory judgment, the [plaintiffs] must allege a likelihood of future violations of their rights by [the defendant], not simply future effects from past violations." Armstrong, 141 F.3d at 563 (quoting Fair Employment Council of Greater Washington, Inc. v. BMC Mktg. Corp., 28 F3d 1268, 307 U.S. App. D.C. 401 (D.C.Cir. 1994)).
Because plaintiff is no longer employed at the LaDOJ and, as noted above, she has not claimed in her complaint that she seeks reinstatement, there is no probability of future injury that would give her standing to seek prospective injunctive relief. Therefore, the LaDOJ's motion to dismiss is GRANTED as to plaintiff's [*10]  prospective injunctive relief claims, and such claims are DISMISSED.

CONCLUSION
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the Motion to Dismiss filed by defendant, State of Louisiana, Department of Justice (Doc. #6), is GRANTED as to plaintiff's prospective injunctive relief claims, and DENIED as to plaintiff's claims for failure to accommodate under the ADA.
New Orleans, Louisiana, this 16th day of March, 2010.
/s/ Mary Ann Vial Lemmon
MARY ANN VIAL LEMMON
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

