Ferrell v. Talecris Plasma Res.
United States District Court for the Central District of Illinois, Urbana Division
April 26, 2018, Decided; April 26, 2018, E-Filed
Case No. 16-cv-2353

Reporter
2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 234728 *; 2018 WL 10456822
PAUL FERRELL, Plaintiff, v. TALECRIS PLASMA RESOURCES, Defendant.
Subsequent History: Costs and fees proceeding at, Motion granted by, in part Ferrell v. Talecris Plasma Res., 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 234727, 2018 WL 10460251 (C.D. Ill., July 9, 2018)
Prior History: Ferrell v. Talecris Plasma Res., 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 234790, 2018 WL 10460215 (C.D. Ill., Feb. 28, 2018)
Counsel:  [*1] Paul Ferrell, Plaintiff, Pro se, Champaign, IL.
For Talecris Plasma Resources, Defendant: Neil H Dishman, LEAD ATTORNEY, Jason A Selvey, JACKSON LEWIS PC, Chicago, IL.
Judges: COLIN S. BRUCE, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: COLIN S. BRUCE
Opinion



ORDER
On November 15, 2016, Plaintiff filed a Complaint (#1) against Defendant, Talecris Plasma Resources ("TPR") alleging that Defendant violated the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq. Plaintiff alleges that Defendant discriminated against him on the basis of disability and unlawfully retaliated against him for asserting a legally protected right.
On February 23, 2018, Defendant filed a Motion for Summary Judgment (#26). Plaintiff filed his Response (#34) on March 12, 2018. On April 6, 2018, Defendant filed its Reply (#36). This court has carefully reviewed the arguments of the parties and the documents filed by the parties. For the following reasons, Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment (#26) is GRANTED.
FACTS1
Defendant TPR operates plasma donation centers, collecting source plasma from donors for use in the development of medicines. Plasmapheresis is the process by which plasmapherisis machines extract plasma from donors' blood. TPR employs phlebotomists [*2]  to assist in determining the suitability of donors to undergo plasmapherisis, to connect donors to plasmapherisis machines, and to monitor donors and equipment during the plasmapheresis process to ensure the health of donors and the quality of the plasma extracted. Phlebotomists may also be cross-trained to perform other tasks at the center and assigned to perform those tasks as needed. Phlebotomists are paid at the same rate regardless of what tasks they are assigned on a given day.
TPR has a disability accommodation policy which prohibits both unlawful discrimination against individuals with disabilities and retaliation against employees who request reasonable accommodations for their disabilities. Under the policy, when an employee seeks an accommodation for a disability, TPR (through Grifols Health Management Services ("HMS")) engages in an interactive process to determine if an appropriate reasonable accommodation can be provided. HMS requires an employee seeking a reasonable accommodation to submit documentation from a qualified medical services provider describing the employee's disability, any work limitations, and recommended accommodations. Then, HMS and TPR review the recommended [*3]  accommodations to determine whether they can be provided without undue hardship to TPR.
In September 2012, TPR hired Plaintiff as a phlebotomist at TPR's center in Waukegan, Illinois. In 2015, while working at the Waukegan Center, Plaintiff told Waukegan Center Manager Gerunda Johnson that he had ADHD. He provided TPR with a letter from a clinical psychologist which states that Plaintiff "presents with the behavioral difficulties of an individual with Attention Deficit-Hyperactivity Disorder." The letter does not describe any accommodations that Plaintiff would need at work. It is the only documentation Plaintiff ever submitted to TPR or HMS concerning his ADHD.
HMS employee Jennifer Russell then attempted to contact Plaintiff several times to determine whether he needed any reasonable accommodations. Plaintiff did not respond to most of Russell's multiple phone calls. Russell called Plaintiff on September 10, 11, 15, 16, 17, and 18 of 2015, leaving voicemail messages with HMS's contact information and asking Plaintiff to contact HMS. Plaintiff's only responses to Russell's calls were: 1) a September 14, partially inaudible voicemail, and 2) a September 22 voicemail stating that he did [*4]  not consider the matter to be an HMS issue and that he had called and emailed Human Resources ("HR") and expected to hear back from HR. Around that time, HR Business Partner John Rollins received a call from Plaintiff. Rollins returned the call, asking for a call back, but Plaintiff did not call him back. In her continuing efforts to reach Plaintiff, Russell asked TPR's Johnson to tell Plaintiff to contact HMS. Johnson did so, but Plaintiff told Johnson that he did not consider the matter to be an HMS issue. Plaintiff continued to not return Russell's calls. On December 17, 2015, Russell sent Plaintiff a letter summarizing her efforts to reach him. She wrote that he needed to contact HMS if he had any accommodations requests.
As a part of a January 25, 2016 Mediation Settlement Agreement related to an EEOC charge Plaintiff had filed on August 24, 2015,2 Defendant agreed to transfer Plaintiff to its Champaign Center. On February 1, 2016, Rollins sent Plaintiff an email discussing Plaintiff's transfer which stated, again, that Plaintiff needed to contact HMS if he needed any accommodation. Plaintiff admits to receiving that email. As of February 28, 2016, Plaintiff voluntarily transferred [*5]  to TPR's center in Champaign, Illinois. By the time of his transfer, Plaintiff was cross-trained to perform donor screening.
On March 28, 2016, Champaign Center Assistant Manager Crystal Lake completed a 30-day Interim Evaluation of Plaintiff. Having not had any significant problems with Plaintiff during his first month at the Champaign Center, she rated him "Satisfactory." As of April 2016, TPR's Champaign center changed its staffing policy for the donor floor. Under the new staffing policy, each phlebotomist was assigned to a color-coded section of the floor, overseeing the plasmapheresis process for the donors in his or her section only. As needed, TPR could temporarily assign a phlebotomist as a "floater" to go between the color-coded sections. After the Interim Evaluation and after the implementation of the new staffing policy, management began receiving reports of Plaintiff acting inappropriately.
On April 1, 2016, Champaign Center Operations Supervisor Jody Roderick submitted a written statement. She wrote that Plaintiff was rude and abusive towards her and another phlebotomist the previous evening, and that Plaintiff consistently complained about his assignment and staffing and [*6]  failed to follow her instructions regarding prioritization of tasks. Roderick also stated that, on April 1, 2016, Plaintiff interrupted two colleagues and acted aggressively while complaining about the new color-coded section policy.
On April 3, 2016, Assistant Manager Lake told Champaign Center Manager Soriah Conner that Plaintiff loudly and aggressively argued with her about the new floor section policy for 30-45 minutes in front of other staff and donors. Lake also told Conner about another phlebotomist's report of Plaintiff loudly arguing with his peers about the policy. That same day, Plaintiff told Lake that he had ADHD. He requested that he be assigned as a floater and permitted extra breaks to take medication. At no time did he provide any documentation concerning his medical need for these requests.
The next day, HMS's Russell called Plaintiff to follow up on the accommodations requests. Russell left a voicemail with contact information and asked that Plaintiff return her call. TPR's Conner also gave Plaintiff HMS's contact information. In the meantime, Conner and Lake assigned Plaintiff to "float" as much as possible when the center needed a floater.
On April 6, 2016, Plaintiff [*7]  spoke with Russell by phone. Plaintiff asked Russell to call the instructor for an upcoming training session. Plaintiff told Russell to tell the instructor that Plaintiff was to be assigned breaks whenever he needed them, the instructor was not to be offended if Plaintiff seemed edgy, and Plaintiff should be offered extra one-on-one training. Plaintiff also told Russell that he wanted to be a floater, not assigned to a color-coded section. Russell responded by telling Plaintiff that he needed to follow the company's disability accommodations policy and start the interactive accommodations process by getting a doctor's note recommending necessary accommodations. Russell told Plaintiff that, per company policy, TPR would not provide accommodations without medical documentation to support the need for them. Plaintiff did not provide medical documentation, and the scheduled training session was cancelled so that he could document the medical need for his requests.
On April 7, 2016, a plasma donor made a complaint about Plaintiff to Lake. The donor stated that Plainitiff ignored her concerns and her request that Plaintiff not attend to her. The donor said Plaintiff fussed at and talked down [*8]  to another phlebotomist, ignoring the donor's request to stop doing so.
On April 8, 2016, in front of donors, Plaintiff argued with Lake about opening another section rather than attending to his assigned donors. Plaintiff continued arguing when Lake told him another section would not be opened, causing a delay in donor processing. Plaintiff then also confronted Conner about the issue.
On April 12, 2016, Plaintiff again asked Conner to let him float and to let him leave the floor to take medication. Conner asked Plaintiff how many breaks per day he needed and whether he had any documentation from his physician with respect to the requested accommodations. Plaintiff responded that TPR had the necessary documentation on file. He refused to provide any other medical documentation. HR's Rollins also told Plaintiff to submit documentation in support of his accommodations request so TPR could then determine what accommodations it could provide.
Also on April 12, 2016, Plaintiff emailed the general HR email address. He complained about having been asked to provide information from his physician, asserting that he did not believe any further documentation was necessary. In an email the next day [*9]  to the same HR email address, Plaintiff complained that he was no longer allowed to float. Conner and Lake did not learn about these emails to HR until after Plaintiff resigned on April 28, 2016.
Meanwhile, Russell continued trying to discuss the accommodations requests with Plaintiff. She left another voicemail message with Plaintiff on April 13, 2016, asking him to contact HMS.3
Also on April 13, 2016, Operations Supervisor Shilo Hale told Lake that Plaintiff argued with her about cleaning plasmapheresis machines, even though doing so was a part of his job. Plaintiff delayed cleaning the machines despite being instructed to do so. Hale also reported that Plaintiff called another phlebotomist "lazy" in front of a donor.
On April 14, 2016, Medical Specialist Rachel Kleiss reported to Conner and Lake that a donor was concerned about his safety because Plaintiff was shaking and did not have good needle placement. The donor stopped the donation process. That same day, another phlebotomist reported that Plaintiff refused to help shut down plasmapheresis machines and Plaintiff complained in front of donors about the center's system not working.
Pursuant to company policy and based upon their [*10]  own observations and all of the reports of concerns about Plaintiff's actions, Conner and Lake decided to issue an Employee Counseling Disciplinary Action Notice ("ECN") to Plaintiff. The ECN, dated April 15, 2016, was delivered to Plaintiff on April 20, 2016. It did not result in a suspension or loss of pay. ECNs do not automatically bar employees from receiving training or obtaining a promotion. Plaintiff asserts that after the ECN, he was mostly assigned to perform donor screening. Donor screening was a task within his job description and for which he was trained, and TPR had assigned him to that task on occasions both prior to and after April 12 and 13, 2016.
On April 21, 2016, Conner and Lake met with Plaintiff, with Rollins and Russell present via phone. The TPS and HMS personnel tried to discuss the information they needed for the disability accommodations process, but Plaintiff said he would not listen without a lawyer present. A week later, on April 28, Plaintiff voluntarily resigned from TPR.
TPR policy provides that former employees with significant disciplinary problems are not allowed to donate plasma at their former workplace. Based on the conduct underlying the ECN, Plaintiff [*11]  was not allowed to donate plasma at the Champaign center following his resignation.
ANALYSIS

I. Summary Judgment Standard
Summary judgment is appropriate "if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a); see also Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). In ruling on a motion for summary judgment, a district court "has one task and one task only: to decide, based on the evidence of record, whether there is any material dispute of fact that requires a trial." Waldridge v. Am. Hoechst Corp., 24 F.3d 918, 920 (7th Cir. 1994). "[T]he district court's function is not to weigh the evidence and determine the truth of the matter, but to determine whether there is a genuine issue for trial." Winters v. Fru-Con, Inc., 498 F.3d 734, 744 (7th Cir. 2007). In making this determination, the court must construe the evidence in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party and draw all reasonable inferences in favor of that party. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986); Singer v. Raemisch, 593 F.3d 529, 533 (7th Cir. 2010). However, a court's favor toward the nonmoving party does not extend to drawing "[i]nferences that are supported by only speculation or conjecture." Singer, 593 F.3d at 533, quoting Fischer v. Avanade, Inc., 519 F.3d 393, 401 (7th Cir. 2008).
"The mere existence of an alleged factual dispute will not defeat a summary judgment motion; instead, the nonmovant must present definite, competent evidence in rebuttal." Butts v. Aurora Health Care, Inc., 387 F.3d 921, 924 (7th Cir. 2004). Summary judgment [*12]  "is the 'put up or shut up' moment in a lawsuit, when a party must show what evidence it has that would convince a trier of fact to accept its version of events." Koszola v. Bd. of Educ. of City of Chicago, 385 F.3d 1104, 1111 (7th Cir. 2004), quoting Johnson v. Cambridge Indus., Inc., 325 F.3d 892, 901 (7th Cir. 2003). Specifically, to survive summary judgment, "the nonmoving party must make a sufficient showing of evidence for each essential element of its case on which it bears the burden at trial." Kampmier v. Emeritus Corp., 472 F.3d 930, 936 (7th Cir. 2007), citing Celotex Corp., 477 U.S. at 322-23.

II. Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment
Plaintiff's Complaint (#1) alleges that Defendant intentionally discriminated against him by: 1) failing to reasonably accommodate his disabilities, and 2) retaliating against him for asserting a legally protected right. Defendant moves for summary judgment on both of those claims.

A. Failure to Provide Reasonable Accommodations
An employer's failure to provide a reasonable accommodation is a type of discrimination claim that may be made under the ADA. Curtis v. Costco Wholesale Corp., 807 F.3d 215, 224 (7th Cir. 2015). To prove a failure to accommodate claim, a plaintiff must show that: (1) he was a qualified individual with a disability, (2) his employer was aware of his disability, and (3) the employer failed to reasonably accommodate his disability. Id.
"An employer need only provide a qualified individual with a reasonable accommodation, not [*13]  the accommodation the employee would prefer." Hoppe v. Lewis University, 692 F.3d 833, 840 (7th Cir. 2012) (internal quotations and citations omitted). An interactive process between the employer and the employee may be necessary to determine what reasonable accommodations are appropriate. Id.; see also Ekstrand v. School Dist. of Somerset, 583 F.3d 972, 976 (7th Cir. 2009) ("An employee's request for reasonable accommodation requires a great deal of communication between the employee and employer."). "This process should identify the precise limitations resulting from the disability and potential reasonable accommodations that could overcome those limitations." Jackson v. City of Chicago, 414 F.3d 806, 813 (7th Cir. 2005).
An employer must engage in this interactive process in good faith, and any resulting accommodations must be reasonable and appropriate. Id. An employee must also participate in the process in good faith, and an employee who fails to do so "cannot impose liability on the employer for its failure to provide a reasonable accommodation." Id. Where the interactive process breaks down as a result of a party's acting in bad faith, such as by obstructing or delaying the interactive process or failing to communicate, "courts should attempt to isolate the cause of the breakdown and then assign responsibility." Beck v. University of Wisconsin Bd. of Regents, 75 F.3d 1130, 1135 (7th Cir. 1996).
When appropriate, an employee must clarify the extent [*14]  of his medical restrictions as a part of participating in the interactive accommodations process in good faith. Id. Specific medical documentation may be required. Id. For example, in Hoppe, 692 F.3d at 841, an employer was not liable for failing to reasonably accommodate an employee's disability where the employee's doctor's letter "lacked specific details about what steps were necessary to reasonably accommodate [the employee's] disability." Likewise, in Steffes v. Stepan Co., 144 F.3d 1070, 1072 (7th Cir. 1998), the court concluded that an employee failed to hold up her end of the interactive process where her doctor's letters did not clarify the kinds of work she could do. And, in Jackson v. City of Chicago, 414 F.3d 806, 813 (7th Cir. 2005), an employer was not liable for a breakdown in the interactive process where it sent numerous letters requesting medical records clarifying the limits of the employee's abilities but the employee did not submit any medical documentation.
The requests for accommodations at issue in this case are Plaintiff's April 2016 requests to be assigned as a floater and to be permitted extra breaks to take medication. For the purposes of its motion for summary judgment, Defendant does not contest that Plaintiff was a qualified individual with a disability or that he notified Defendant of his [*15]  disability. Defendant argues that Plaintiff cannot establish that Defendant failed to reasonably accommodate his disability.
When Plaintiff made his accommodations requests in April 2016, he and Defendant were both required to engage in good faith in an interactive process to determine what reasonable accommodations were appropriate. Hoppe, 692 F.3d at 840. Defendant attempted to do so. Both before and after the April 2016 accommodations requests, Defendant repeatedly reached out to Plaintiff in an effort to start the interactive process for determining what reasonable accommodations were appropriate. However, Plaintiff did not hold up his end of the interactive process. Plaintiff did not respond in any meaningful way to repeated calls, letters, and meetings. Defendant repeatedly, and reasonably, requested medical documentation about the specific need for the requested accommodations. Plaintiff never submitted any such documentation. As in Hoppe, Steffes, and Jackson, Plaintiff's refusal to participate in the interactive process entitles Defendant to summary judgment on the failure to make reasonable accommodations claim.

B. Retaliation
Plaintiff also alleges that Defendant unlawfully retaliated against him [*16]  for asserting a legally protected right. His complaint alleges that Defendant issued him an ECN in retaliation for requesting an accommodation and emailing HR about his accommodation requests. While the court concludes that the issuance of the ECN is the only retaliatory action claim requiring an analysis of its merits, the court will briefly discuss two claims that are not properly before the court: (1) Plaintiff's assignment to perform donor screening, and (2) the cancelling of the April 2016 training.
Plaintiff did not properly raise an argument that he was assigned to perform donor screening out of retaliation for requesting accommodations and emailing HR about them. The only retaliatory action mentioned in Plaintiff's complaint is the issuance of the ECN. In his deposition, Plaintiff claimed that the only retaliatory actions he recalled were: 1) the ECN, and 2) being assigned to perform donor screening after emailing HR in April 2016. Defendant's motion for summary judgment addressed both of those actions, but Plaintiff did not respond to the motion's extensive argument that the assignment to perform donor screening was not a retaliatory action. "Failure to set forth any evidence [*17]  or to develop any arguments in opposition to the moving party's summary judgment motion results in waiver of the nonmoving party's arguments and an abandonment of his claims." De v. City of Chicago, 912 F.Supp.2d 709, 734 (N.D. Ill. 2012). Because Plaintiff did not raise the argument in his complaint or develop any argument in opposition to Defendant's argument on this point, he waived or abandoned any claim that the donor screening assignment constituted unlawful retaliation and it is unnecessary to further address the retaliatory work assignment theory.
Nor did Plaintiff properly raise any argument that he was unlawfully denied training. In his response to Defendant's motion for summary judgment, Plaintiff argues that Defendant retaliated against him by cancelling a training session. However, Plaintiff did not state in his complaint or deposition that Defendant retaliated against him by rescinding his donor technician training. "[A] plaintiff may not amend his complaint through arguments in his brief in opposition to a motion for summary judgment." Grayson v. O'Neill, 308 F.3d 808, 817 (7th Cir. 2002) (internal quotations omitted). Thus, the court will not further address the argument.
Plaintiff's properly developed claim that Defendant issued him an ECN in retaliation for requesting an accommodation [*18]  and emailing HR about his request requires further analysis. In order to survive summary judgment on a disability retaliation claim, a Plaintiff must identify evidence showing that (1) he engaged in a statutorily protected activity; (2) he suffered an adverse employment action; and (3) there is a causal connection between the two. Guzman v. Brown County, 884 F.3d 633, 642 (7th Cir. 2018). The record must contain sufficient evidence to permit a reasonable fact finder to conclude that retaliatory motive caused the discharge. Lord v. High Voltage Software, Inc., 839 F.3d 556, 563 (7th Cir. 2016).
"[N]ot everything that makes an employee unhappy is an actionable adverse action." Nagle v. Vill. of Calumet Park, 554 F.3d 1106, 1116 (7th Cir. 2009). Rather, "an employee must show some quantitative or qualitative change in the terms or conditions of his employment or some sort of real harm." Id. at 1116-17 (internal quotations and citations omitted). Circuit precedent "firmly establishes" that "a letter of reprimand is not an adverse employment action unless the letter is accompanied by some other action, such as job loss or demotion." Krause v. City of La Crosse, 246 F.3d 995, 1000 (7th Cir. 2001) (emphasis in original).
If an employee introduces circumstantial evidence of a retaliatory motive and an adverse action, the employer may show that the adverse action would have been taken even absent the employee engaging in protected activity. Lord, 839 F.3d at 564. If the employer [*19]  can make that showing, then the employee "can avoid summary judgment if a material factual dispute exists on the question of pretext." Id. But, if a reasonable fact finder would be compelled to believe the employer's explanation for taking the adverse action, then summary judgment is appropriate. Id.
For the purposes of its motion for summary judgment, Defendant does not dispute that Plaintiff's requests for accommodations and his emails to HR about the denial of his accommodation requests constituted protected activity. Defendant argues that the undisputed evidence demonstrates that Plaintiff cannot show he suffered an adverse employment action, nor can he show the requisite causal connection to a protected activity.
The court agrees that Plaintiff cannot show he suffered an adverse employment action. The ECN did not result in a suspension or loss of pay. Nor do ECNs automatically bar employees from receiving training or obtaining a promotion. Moreover, even if the ECN were considered an adverse action, there is no evidence of a causal connection to a protected activity. Defendant argues that the nature of the ECN, the timing of the ECN, and the ECN's inconsistency with a prior evaluation [*20]  are "suspicious." The court disagrees. Defendant presented undisputed evidence as to why it issued the ECN. The ECN was issued based on complaints about Plaintiff's actions. All of the complaints concerned activity occurring after the Interim Evaluation, so the ECN was not inconsistent with that evaluation. There is no basis for a reasonable fact finder to conclude that Defendant's stated reasons for issuing the ECN were pretextual. Accordingly, because Plaintiff cannot show an adverse action or the requisite causal connection to a protected activity, Defendant is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's retaliation claim.
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED THAT:
(1) Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment (#26) is GRANTED. Judgment is entered in favor of Defendant and against Plaintiff.
(2) This case is terminated.
ENTERED this 26th day of April, 2018.
/s/ Colin S. Bruce
COLIN S. BRUCE
U.S. DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

