Flores v. Costco Wholesale Corp.
United States District Court for the Central District of California
September 29, 2017, Decided
CV 16-08380-JFW (FFM)

Reporter
2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 235148 *; 2017 WL 11634528
Maria Flores -v- Costco Wholesale Corp.
Counsel:  [*1] For Costco Wholesale Corporation, a Washington corporation, Defendant: Tara Wilcox, Sheppard Mullin Richter and Hampton, San Diego CA.
For Maria Flores, an individual, Plaintiff: Kaveh Sam Elihu, LEAD ATTORNEY, Karina Godoy, Mallory Sepler-King, Jae Hyun Kim, Employee Justice Legal Group LLP, Los Angeles CA.
For Costco Wholesale Corporation, a Washington corporation, Defendant: Matthew Scott McConnell, LEAD ATTORNEY, Sheppard Mullin Richter and Hampton, San Diego CA.
Judges: HONORABLE JOHN F. WALTER, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: JOHN F. WALTER
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES -- GENERAL

PROCEEDINGS (IN CHAMBERS): ORDER GRANTING DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT [Docket No. 19; filed 8/31/17]
On August 31, 2017, Defendant Costco Wholesale Corp. ("Costco") filed a Motion for Summary Judgment. On September 11, 2017, Plaintiff Maria Flores ("Plaintiff") filed an Opposition. On September 18, 2017, Defendant filed a Reply. Pursuant to Rule 78 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and Local Rule 7-15, the Court found the matter appropriate for submission on the papers without oral argument. The matter was, therefore, removed from the Court's October 2, 2017 hearing calendar and the parties were given advance notice. After considering the moving, opposing, and reply papers, and [*2]  the arguments therein, the Court rules as follows:

I. Factual and Procedural Background1
Costco is a membership warehouse club with locations across the United States. Plaintiff was hired by Costco on September 20, 2001 to work at its Burbank location. She was a daily department supervisor for a short period of time and then moved to an hourly position in the deli.
When Plaintiff was hired, she signed a document called "Member Service Standards", which states that a Costco employee's primary duty is "to provide an exceptional level of Member Service." The document also outlines specific actions an employee is required to follow—such as greeting members with a friendly smile, making an effort to assist and approach members, and thanking members for shopping at Costco—when interacting with Costco's members.
At some point after 2008, while Plaintiff was employed at Costco's Burbank location, she complained to a female manager that one of the male supervisors was harassing her. Plaintiff does not recall any specific details of her complaint against the supervisor. This was the only complaint Plaintiff made about discrimination, harassment, or retaliation while she was employed at Costco.
In [*3]  2009, Plaintiff applied for a cashier position and was accepted for the position. As a cashier, Plaintiff worked on the cash registers at the check out counter at the front of the store. In March of 2010, Plaintiff transferred to Costco's location in Pacoima, where she continued working as a cashier. At some point in 2010, Plaintiff filed a workers' compensation claim due to injuries she allegedly suffered on the job. On January 10, 2011, Plaintiff took a formal leave of absence from work due to her medical condition. While Plaintiff was on leave, she filed a claim for unemployment benefits with the California Employment Development Department (the "EDD"). Her claim was denied, but Plaintiff's appeal was successful and she was awarded benefits in 2012.
Plaintiff was cleared to return to work in October 2011, without any restrictions, but she was not allowed to return to her position as a cashier until May of 2012. According to Plaintiff, Costco allegedly delayed her return to work because she had filed a claim for workers' compensation. From the time Plaintiff returned to work in 2012 until the time she was terminated, Plaintiff was able to perform all of her usual cashier job duties. [*4] 
Costco's rules and procedures governing its relationship with its employees are set forth in the Costco Employee Agreement (the "Employee Agreement"), a handbook that is updated every three years. When an employee violates one of Costco's rules, Costco issues a written disciplinary warning, called a counseling notice ("CN"). Both the 2010 and 2013 versions of the Employee Agreement contain a provision that provides that an employee's accumulation of a certain number of CNs within a certain number of months constitutes "excessive policy violations" and is a terminable offense. While working at Costco, Plaintiff was familiar with the Employee Agreement and signed a form acknowledging that she received each new version of the Employee Agreement. Plaintiff also understood that violating the rules in the Employee Agreement could result in discipline, including termination.
Plaintiff received a CN on August 6, 2012 due to cash shortages on July 23, 2012 and July 29, 2012. She received additional CNs for cash shortages on September 18, 2012 and October 19, 2012. Because Plaintiff received three CNs for the same violation within a six month period, Costco issued a CN for her excessive policy [*5]  violations on October 22, 2012, and Plaintiff was suspended, without pay, for three days.
In the six months following Plaintiff's initial suspension, she received three additional CNs for cash handling violations. Accordingly, on May 30, 2014, she received a second CN for excessive policy violations and was suspended for a second time, without pay, for three days.
On July 2, 2014, Plaintiff received another CN for a cash handling violation. She accumulated additional CNs for cash handling violations in October and November. Because Plaintiff received three CNs for the same violation within a six month period, she was issued a CN for excessive policy violations on November 4, 2014 and suspended, for a third time, without pay, for three days.
When Plaintiff returned from her third suspension, she met with Liz Arellano, who had become the new Warehouse Manager of the Pacoima location in early November 2014. Although Plaintiff's numerous CNs constituted a terminable offense, Ms. Arellano advised Plaintiff that she would not be terminated. While meeting with Ms. Arellano, Plaintiff asked to step down from her position as a cashier to a position of a cashier assistant so that she would not [*6]  be working on the registers. During this meeting, Plaintiff also asked if she could work in the Bakery department. Ms. Arellano agreed to move Plaintiff into a cashier assistant position and to assign Plaintiff shifts in the Bakery. Plaintiff also acknowledged that she had received a CN for poor member service but stated that she was not concerned about it. Ms. Arellano emphasized to Plaintiff the importance of providing excellent service to Costco's members.
On December 10 or 11 of 2014, Plaintiff was working as a cashier's assistant and was involved in an incident that resulted in a member complaint. The member advised management that Plaintiff snapped at her disabled son because he was slow in unloading merchandise and Plaintiff failed to assist the child with unloading the items. The member advised that Plaintiff rudely responded to her comments on Plaintiff's inappropriate attitude towards her disabled son. As a result, Plaintiff received a CN on December 12, 2014 for being rude to the member. Because this was Plaintiff's fifth CN in a six month period—even though the CNs were not all for the same violations—she was issued a separate, additional CN for excessive policy violations [*7]  and suspended, for a fourth time, for three days without pay.
During this suspension, Ms. Arellano recommended that Plaintiff be terminated because of her repeated violations of Costco's policies. Ms. Arellano specifically noted that Plaintiff had incurred six CNs in six months and three suspensions over the past twelve months. Ms. Arellano sent the recommendation to her supervisor, Assistant Vice President/Regional Operations Manager Debbie Sarter. Ms. Sarter approved Ms. Arellano's recommendation to terminate Plaintiff's employment.
On December 16, 2014, Costco terminated Plaintiff's employment for excessive policy violations, which had resulted in suspensions. The notes on the termination form indicate that Plaintiff had received six counseling notices in a six month period and had been suspended three times in a twelve month period. According to Costco, at the time Plaintiff was terminated, neither Ms. Arellano nor Ms. Sarter knew whether Plaintiff was currently disabled, had previously taken a medical leave of absence, had sustained a work-related injury, or had previously brought a workers' compensation claim.
On August 1, 2015, Plaintiff's attorney Kaveh Elihu filed a complaint [*8]  on Plaintiff's behalf with the Department of Fair Employment and Housing (the "DFEH"). The complaint was filed in Mr. Elihu's name and Plaintiff was referred to only in the charging allegations of the complaint. On August 11, 2015, the DFEH sent Mr. Elihu a right to sue notice, erroneously naming him as the complainant.
Plaintiff filed this lawsuit on August 12, 2016 in Los Angeles Superior Court. Costco removed the case to federal court on November 11, 2016. In her Complaint, Plaintiff alleges seven causes of action against Costco: (1) discrimination in violation of the California Fair Employment and Housing Act ("FEHA"), Government Code §§ 12940 et seq..; (2) retaliation in violation of FEHA.; (3) failure to prevent discrimination and retaliation in violation of FEHA; (4) failure to provide reasonable accommodations in violation of FEHA; (5) failure to engage in good faith interactive process in violation of FEHA; (6) wrongful termination in violation of public policy; and (7) declaratory judgment.2 Costco moves for summary judgment as to all of Plaintiff's claims. Alternatively, Costco moves for partial summary judgment.

II. Legal Standard
Summary judgment is proper where "the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant [*9]  is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). The moving party has the burden of demonstrating the absence of a genuine issue of fact for trial. See Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 256, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). Once the moving party meets its burden, a party opposing a properly made and supported motion for summary judgment may not rest upon mere denials but must set out specific facts showing a genuine issue for trial. Id. at 250; Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c), (e); see also Taylor v. List, 880 F.2d 1040, 1045 (9th Cir. 1989) ("A summary judgment motion cannot be defeated by relying solely on conclusory allegations unsupported by factual data."). In particular, when the non-moving party bears the burden of proving an element essential to its case, that party must make a showing sufficient to establish a genuine issue of material fact with respect to the existence of that element or be subject to summary judgment. See Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). "An issue of fact is not enough to defeat summary judgment; there must be a genuine issue of material fact, a dispute capable of affecting the outcome of the case." Am. Int'l Group, Inc. v. Am. Int'l Bank, 926 F.2d 829, 833 (9th Cir. 1991) (Kozinski, dissenting).
An issue is genuine if evidence is produced that would allow a rational trier of fact to reach a verdict in favor of the non-moving party. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248. "This requires evidence, not speculation." Meade v. Cedarapids, Inc., 164 F.3d 1218, 1225 (9th Cir. 1999). The Court must assume the truth of direct evidence [*10]  set forth by the opposing party. See Hanon v. Dataproducts Corp., 976 F.2d 497, 507 (9th Cir. 1992). However, where circumstantial evidence is presented, the Court may consider the plausibility and reasonableness of inferences arising therefrom. See Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249-50; TW Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Pacific Elec. Contractors Ass'n, 809 F.2d 626, 631-32 (9th Cir. 1987). Although the party opposing summary judgment is entitled to the benefit of all reasonable inferences, "inferences cannot be drawn from thin air; they must be based on evidence which, if believed, would be sufficient to support a judgment for the nonmoving party." Am. Int'l Group, 926 F.2d at 836-37. In that regard, "a mere 'scintilla' of evidence will not be sufficient to defeat a properly supported motion for summary judgment; rather, the nonmoving party must introduce some 'significant probative evidence tending to support the complaint.'" Summers v. Teichert & Son, Inc., 127 F.3d 1150, 1152 (9th Cir. 1997).

III. Discussion

A. Plaintiff Did Not Fail to Exhaust Her Administrative Remedies
Costco argues that all of Plaintiff's FEHA claims are barred because she failed to properly exhaust her administrative remedies before filing this action. Specifically, the administrative complaint filed with the DFEH erroneously identified Plaintiff's attorney—not Plaintiff—as the complainant and the corresponding right to sue letter issued in response to the complaint only names Plaintiff's attorney. According [*11]  to Costco, because Plaintiff is not specifically named in the right-to-sue letter, she cannot pursue this action.
The Court concludes this argument is unpersuasive. The complaint filed with the DFEH names Kaveh S. Elihu, Plaintiff's attorney who was never employed by Costco, as the complainant, but the charging allegations of the complaint clearly state that the conduct complained of relates to Costco's actions towards Plaintiff. See Ex. 18. Although the right-to-sue letter was understandably issued to Mr. Elihu rather than Plaintiff, this procedural defect does not bar her claims. As California court's have noted, "a right-to-sue letter, while triggering certain rights in the plaintiff, is primarily notification that no further administrative action will be taken in a case." Martin v. Fisher, 11 Cal. App. 4th 118, 122, 13 Cal. Rptr. 2d 922 (1992). "Although its issuance is jurisdictional" a "plaintiff should not be bound by the caption of the administrative charge, which is reflected in the right-to-sue letter." Id. Accordingly, the Court concludes that because Plaintiff was identified in the body of the administrative complaint and it was obvious that the actions complained of involved Plaintiff and not her attorney, Plaintiff has not failed to exhaust [*12]  her administrative remedies.

B. Employment Discrimination
Plaintiff alleges that Costco discriminated against her on the basis of a disability, for engaging in a protected activity by filing for unemployment benefits, and for using medical leave in violation of FEHA when Costco terminated her employment.3 Costco argues that Plaintiff cannot establish a prima facie case of discrimination and that she cannot demonstrate that Costco's proffered reasons for terminating her were pretextual.

1. Plaintiff Cannot Establish a Prima Facie Case of Discrimination
In considering a motion for summary judgment on a discrimination claim in violation of FEHA, California courts apply the three-stage burden shifting test established by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). See Guz v. Bechtel Nat'l, Inc., 24 Cal. 4th 317, 354, 100 Cal. Rptr. 2d 352, 8 P.3d 1089 (2000). To establish a prima facie case of discrimination under FEHA, Plaintiff must prove: (1) she is a member of a protected class; (2) she was a qualified individual or otherwise qualified to do her job; and (3) she was subjected to an adverse employment action because of her protected status. Morgan v. Regents of Univ. of Cal., 88 Cal. App. 4th 52, 68-69, 105 Cal. Rptr. 2d 652 (2000); Faust v. Cal. Portland Cement Co., 150 Cal. App. 4th 864, 866, 58 Cal. Rptr. 3d 729 (2007). If Plaintiff is able to establish a prima facie case, the burden then shifts to Costco to show that it had a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for its [*13]  conduct. If Costco establishes a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for its conduct, the burden shifts back to Plaintiff to produce evidence that Costco's given reason was a pretext for discrimination.
Plaintiff argues Costco unlawfully terminated her employment because of her disability and/or perceived disability, her use of medical leave, and her filing for unemployment benefits with the EDD. Opp'n 6; Compl. ¶ 32. Assuming each of these conditions qualify her as a member of a protected class, Plaintiff has failed to present any evidence that she was subject to an adverse employment action because of her alleged disability, her use of medical leave or her filing for unemployment benefits, and thus has failed to establish a prima facie case of discrimination. Indeed, her own deposition testimony is dispositive of her claims.
Plaintiff testified that from the time she returned to work in May 2012 through her termination on December 16, 2014, she never communicated with anyone at Costco regarding her disability or told anyone at Costco that she could not perform any of her job duties because of her injuries. See Combined Statement of Facts ("UF") No. 100, Docket No. 26-5. In the absence [*14]  of any evidence that Costco was even aware of her alleged disability, Plaintiff cannot establish that she was subjected to an adverse employment action because of her disability. See Brundage v. Hahn, 57 Cal. App. 4th 228, 236, 66 Cal. Rptr. 2d 830 (1997) ("An adverse employment decision cannot be made 'because of' a disability, when the disability is not known to the employer.").
Plaintiff argues that Costco had been aware of her disability since 2010 because that is when she filed a workers' compensation claim. However, Plaintiff has not presented any evidence that Ms. Arellano or Ms. Sarter, the two Costco managers who approved her termination, were aware of the workers' compensation claim. Accordingly, the Court concludes that Plaintiff has not shown a prima facie case of disability discrimination.
The Court also finds that Plaintiff fails to establish a prima facie discrimination claim for use of medical leave and filing of unemployment benefits. In fact, Plaintiff admitted at her deposition that Costco took no action against her because she took a leave of absence. UF No. 99. Plaintiff also fails to present any evidence that Ms. Arellano or Ms. Sarter were aware of her claim for unemployment benefits or took action against her because she applied for [*15]  the benefits.

2. Plaintiff Has Not Established that Costco's Reasons for Terminating Her Were Pretextual
Even if Plaintiff could establish a prima facie case for disability discrimination, the Court concludes that Costco has articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for her termination. The evidence presented shows that Costco terminated Plaintiff for excessive policy violations, which led to multiple suspensions. Specifically, Plaintiff had received six counseling notices within a six month period and three suspensions in a 12-month period. The Causes for Termination section of Costco's Employment Agreement specifically states that an employee may be terminated for excessive policy violations including, but not limited to: three unpaid suspensions in a 12-month period; a third violation resulting in disciplinary action for the same or similar conduct within a six month period; and four counseling notices within a six month period, even if unrelated. Ex. 5. Accordingly, Plaintiff has the burden to establish that Costco's proffered reason is pretextual by either "persuading the [C]ourt that a discriminatory reason more likely than not motivated" Costco or showing that Costco's [*16]  explanation "is unworthy of credence." Ferretti v. Pfizer Inc., 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 4730, 2013 WL 140088, at *16 (N.D. Cal. Jan. 10, 2013). The Court concludes that Plaintiff has failed to satisfy her burden.
Plaintiff argues that Costco's proffered reasons for firing her are pretextual because Plaintiff did not receive any counseling notices from October 2012 through December 2013, but she received a "flurry" of notices after she underwent surgery in November 2013 for cervical cancer. According to Plaintiff, the lack of counseling notices from 2012-2013, followed by the issuance of several notices after she underwent surgery suggests that Costco may have issued subsequent counseling notices as a sham in order to terminate her because of her disability. The Court does not find Plaintiff's argument persuasive.
First, Plaintiff claims she was disabled because of cumulative injuries she suffered to her neck, arms, and back and the evidence demonstrates that her use of medical leave was related to injuries she suffered at work. Opp'n 8; UF No. 104. Thus, Plaintiff's argument that she received counseling notices after undergoing surgery to prevent cervical cancer is irrelevant. In addition, the evidence presented shows that neither Ms. Arellano nor Ms. Sarter knew at the time they terminated [*17]  Plaintiff whether Plaintiff was disabled, had taken a medical leave of absence, or had sustained a work-related injury. UF No. 103.
Moreover, although a plaintiff may rely on circumstantial evidence of pretext, the evidence must be "specific" and "substantial" to create a triable issue as to whether an employer intended to discriminate on improper basis. Morgan, 88 Cal. App. 4th at 68-69. Plaintiff's own speculation that Costco may have issued sham notices as a means to terminate her for her disability does not rise to the level of substantial circumstantial evidence needed to defeat summary judgment.
Plaintiff also argues there is a triable issue of material fact as to whether a discriminatory animus was imputed to Ms. Arellano from any manager at the Burbank location.4 But the evidence presented defeats Plaintiff's argument, as the record indicates that Ms. Arellano was not aware of any complaints that Plaintiff had made at the Burbank location. UF No. 116. Accordingly, the Court concludes that Costco is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's discrimination claim.

C. Retaliation
To prevail on a FEHA retaliation claim, a plaintiff must establish: (1) she was involved in a protected activity; (2) she suffered an adverse [*18]  employment action; and (3) casual link between the protected activity and the adverse employment action. Brooks v. City of San Mateo, 229 F.3d 917, 928 (9th Cir. 2000). If an employee establishes a prima facie case of retaliation, a court then employs the three-stage McDonnell Douglas burden shifting analysis to the employee's claim. Yanowitz v. L'Oreal USA, Inc., 36 Cal. 4th 1028, 1042, 32 Cal. Rptr. 3d 436, 116 P.3d 1123 (2005). Plaintiff contends she engaged in multiple protected activities, including complaining about Costco's discriminatory animus, requesting accommodations, using her medical leave, and filing a claim for unemployment with the EDD. Costco argues it is entitled to summary judgment because Plaintiff cannot prove the first and third elements of her claim.
As an initial matter, the Court concludes that filing a claim for unemployment with the EDD is not protected activity under FEHA. FEHA makes it unlawful for an employer to discharge or discriminate against an employee because he or she has "opposed any practices forbidden under [FEHA] or because the [employee] has filed a complaint, testified, or assisted in any proceeding under [FEHA]." Gov. Code § 12940(h). Thus, "protected activity takes the form of opposing any practices forbidden by FEHA or participating in any proceeding conducted by the DFEH or the Fair Employment and Housing Council [*19]  ["FEHC"]." Nealy v. City of Santa Monica, 234 Cal. App. 4th 359, 380, 184 Cal. Rptr. 3d 9 (2015); see also Cal. Code Regs., tit. 2 §§ 1002 (a), (b); 11021(a). Under FEHA, an employer may be liable for discriminating against an employee "seeking the advice of the DFEH or FEHC; assisting or advising any person in seeking the advice of the DFEH or FEHC; opposing employment practices the employee reasonably believes to exist and believes to be a violation of FEHA; participating in an activity perceived by the employer as opposition to discrimination; or contacting, communicating with, or participating in the proceeding of a local human rights or civil rights agency regarding employment discrimination." Nealy, 234 Cal. App. 4th at 380; see also Cal. Code Regs., tit. 2 § 11021(a)(1).
In addition, Plaintiff fails to demonstrate a causal link between her alleged protected activities and her termination. Indeed, the evidence presented shows that neither Ms. Arellano nor Ms. Sarter knew at the time they terminated Plaintiff whether Plaintiff was disabled, had taken a medical leave of absence or had sustained a work-related injury. UF No. 103. The evidence also shows that neither Ms. Arellano nor Ms. Sarter had any knowledge of any complaints Plaintiff may have filed while working at the Burbank location. UF No. 116. And, there is no evidence that either Ms. Arellano or Ms. Sarter knew that [*20]  Plaintiff had previously applied for unemployment benefits. UF Nos. 105-106; Arellano Decl. on Reply ¶ 2. Moreover, at her deposition, Plaintiff candidly admitted that she did not believe that Costco took any actions against her because she was disabled or because she took a leave of absence in 2011. UF Nos. 99, 102. She also admitted that she had no reason to believe that Costco took any action against her for making any complaints while she worked at the Burbank location. UF No. 114.
Plaintiff's self-serving declaration does not help her position. In her declaration, Plaintiff states that after she returned to work from her leave of absence, "Costco kept issuing counseling notices [to her] until October 22, 2012" and that she "believes this was in response to [her] constitutionally protected activity of applying for remedies under the EDD." Decl. Maria Flores ¶ 3. Even if Plaintiff's statement was not entirely inadmissible speculation, it does not advance her retaliation claim, as Plaintiff was terminated due to excessive policy violations that took place from December 2013 through December 2014. Accordingly, the Court concludes that Costco is entitled to summary judgment as to Plaintiff's [*21]  retaliation claim because Plaintiff cannot prove a causal link between any protected activity she engaged in and her termination.

D. Failure to Prevent Retaliation and Discrimination
Under Section 12940(k), it is unlawful for an employer to "fail to take all reasonable steps necessary to prevent discrimination and harassment from occurring." A plaintiff can not prevail on a claim under section 12940(k) unless she can establish that discrimination or harassment actually occurred. See Kohler v. Inter-Tel Techs., 244 F.3d 1167, 1174 n. 4 (9th Cir. 2001) (stating that this section only applies where a plaintiff proves actual discrimination or harassment occurred, as it does not provide "an independent basis for liability under FEHA."); see also Carter v. Cal. Dept. of Veterans Affairs, 38 Cal. 4th 914, 925 n. 4, 44 Cal. Rptr. 3d 223, 135 P.3d 637 (2006) ("courts have required a finding of actual discrimination or harassment under FEHA before a plaintiff may prevail under section 12940, subdivision (k)."). Similarly, a plaintiff cannot pursue a failure to prevent retaliation claim if her retaliation cause of action fails. See Scotch v. Art Inst. of Cal.-Orange Cnty., Inc., 173 Cal. App. 4th 986, 1021 (2009).
As previously discussed, Plaintiff cannot prove the essential elements of her discrimination or retaliation claims. Accordingly, Costco is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's failure to prevent retaliation and discrimination claim.

E. Failure to Provide Reasonable Accommodations
Under FEHA, employers [*22]  have an affirmative duty to make reasonable accommodations for a known disability of an employee, provided the accommodation does not create an undue hardship to the employer's operations. Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(m). To establish a prima facie case for failure to accommodate, a plaintiff must show: (1) that she suffers from a disability covered by FEHA; (2) that she is otherwise qualified to do her job; and (3) that the defendant failed to reasonably accommodate her disability. Jensen v. Wells Fargo Bank, 85 Cal. App. 4th 248, 256 (2000). A defendant cannot be liable for failure to provide reasonable accommodations, however, unless it was aware of the plaintiff's disability. See King v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 152 Cal. App. 4th 426, 443, 60 Cal. Rptr. 3d 359 (2007) ("[The] employee can[not] expect the employer to read his mind and know he secretly wanted a particular accommodation and sue the employer for not providing it."). Ordinarily, an employee is responsible for requesting accommodation for her disability unless the employer itself recognizes that the employee has a need for such accommodation. Brown v. Lucky Stores, 246 F.3d 1182, 1188 (9th Cir. 2001).
Plaintiff admitted at her deposition that after she returned to work in May 2012 from her leave of absence, she never communicated with anyone at Costco about her injuries or told anyone she could not perform her job duties because of her injuries. UF No. [*23]  117. She also admitted that she was not under any work restrictions and that she was able to perform all of her cashier job duties. UF No. 118. Thus, the evidence is clear that Plaintiff never notified Costco of her disability or requested reasonable accommodations.
Plaintiff attempts to avoid the damaging effect of her admissions by submitting a declaration stating that she "requested to be moved off the cash register department as the numerous cumulative work-place injuries [she] was suffering from since 2010, especially [to her] arms and wrists, was affecting her job performance in this department." Decl. Maria Flores ¶ 10. She also claims in her declaration that she "requested a permanent transfer to the bakery department as a reasonable accommodation." Decl. Maria Flores ¶ 10. Costco objects to these statements and argues they are inadmissible under the sham affidavit rule.
The "sham affidavit" rule provides that a "party cannot create an issue of fact by an affidavit contradicting . . . prior deposition testimony." Yeager v. Bowlin, 693 F.3d 1076, 1080 (9th Cir. 2012) (quotation marks and citation omitted). The Ninth Circuit has urged courts to apply this rule with caution and, therefore, has imposed two conditions on the application [*24]  of the rule. See Van Asdale v. Int'l Game Tech., 577 F.3d at 989, 998 (9th Cir. 2009). First, a court must "make a factual determination that the contradiction [is] actually a sham" and then it must conclude that the inconsistency is "clear and unambiguous." Id. A declaration that "elaborates upon, explains, or clarifies prior testimony" does not trigger exclusion. Id. (citations omitted).
In her deposition, Plaintiff testified that she asked to step down from her cashier position because she had received warnings about her cash handling and did not want to lose her job. Pl. Dep. 119:14-120:10. Plaintiff also testified that when she stepped down, she asked Ms. Arellano if she could spend time in the Bakery because she wanted to avoid the problems she encountered with her cash register duties. Pl. Dep. 121:14-122:22. Plaintiff also confirmed that she did not offer any other reasons for wanting to spend time in the Bakery. Pl. Dep. 122:23-25. The Court finds that Plaintiff's self-serving statements in her declaration that she requested to be moved to the Bakery due to her disability contradict her deposition testimony and are inadmissible under the sham affidavit rule.
As a result, the Court finds that Costco is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's [*25]  claim for failure to provide reasonable accommodations because Plaintiff cannot establish that Costco knew about her disability or that she requested reasonable accommodations.

F. Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process
It is a violation of FEHA for an employer "to fail to engage in a timely, good faith, interactive process with an employee to determine effective reasonable accommodations, if any, in response to a request for reasonable accommodation by an employee or applicant with a known physical or mental disability." Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(n).
As previously discussed, the Court finds that Plaintiff never requested reasonable accommodation from Costco. Accordingly, Costco is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's claim for failure to engage in the interactive process.

G. Wrongful Termination in Violation of Public Policy
To prevail on a wrongful termination in violation of public policy claim, a plaintiff must show: (1) an employer-employee relationship; (2) the employer terminated the plaintiff's employment; (3) the termination was substantially motivated by a violation of public policy; and (4) the discharge caused the plaintiff harm. Nosal-Tabor v. Sharp Chula Vista Med. Ctr., 239 Cal. App. 4th 1224, 1234-35, 191 Cal. Rptr. 3d 651 (2015). Plaintiff bases her wrongful termination claim on policies [*26]  against discrimination and retaliation, as set forth in FEHA.
As previously discussed, the Court finds that Plaintiff failed to prove that Costco discriminated against her based on her disability, use of medical leave, or application for unemployment benefits or that Costco retaliated against her for engaging in any of these activities. Accordingly, the Court concludes that Plaintiff cannot prove the third element of this cause of action. See Featherstone v. S. Cal. Permanent Med. Group, 10 Cal. App. 5th 1150, 1169 (2017) ("[U]nder California law, if an employer did not violate FEHA, the employee's claim for wrongful termination in violation of public policy necessarily fails."). Therefore, Costco is entitled to summary judgment as to Plaintiff's claim for wrongful termination in violation of public policy.

IV. Conclusion
For all the foregoing reasons, the Costco's Motion is GRANTED in its entirety. The parties are ordered to meet and confer and prepare a joint proposed Judgment which is consistent with this Order. The parties shall lodge the joint proposed Judgment with the Court on or before October 3, 2017. In the unlikely event that counsel are unable to agree upon a joint proposed Judgment, the parties shall each submit separate versions of a proposed Judgment [*27]  along with a declaration outlining their objections to the opposing party's version no later than October 3, 2017.
IT IS SO ORDERED.


End of Document

