Foley v. Morgan Stanley Smith Barney, LLC
United States District Court for the Southern District of Florida
February 27, 2014, Decided; February 27, 2014, Entered on Docket
CASE NO. 11-62476-CIV-WILLIAMS/SELTZER

Reporter
2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 202443 *
RYAN H. FOLEY, Plaintiff, vs. MORGAN STANLEY SMITH BARNEY, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, Defendant.MORGAN STANLEY SMITH BARNEY, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and MORGAN STANLEY SMITH BARNEY FA NOTES HOLDING, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, Counter-Plaintiffs, v. RYAN H. FOLEY, Counter-Defendant
Subsequent History: Adopted by, Motion granted by, Costs and fees proceeding at Foley v. Morgan Stanley Smith Barney, LLC, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 202434 (S.D. Fla., Sept. 23, 2014)
Prior History: Foley v. Morgan Stanley & Co., 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 173336 (S.D. Fla., Mar. 28, 2011)
Foley v. Morgan Stanley Smith Barney, LLC, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 28873 (S.D. Fla., Mar. 4, 2013)
Counsel:  [*1] For Ryan H. Foley, Plaintiff: William Robert Amlong, LEAD ATTORNEY, Amlong & Amlong, Fort Lauderdale, FL; Alison Leigh Churly, Broward County Clerk of Courts, Fort Lauderdale, FL; Mark Andrew Levy, Brinkley Morgan, Fort Lauderdale, FL.
For Morgan Stanely Smith Barney FA Notes Holdings LLC, Intervenor Plaintiff: Lauren Whetstone, LEAD ATTORNEY, Patricia Anne Leonard, Greenberg Traurig, West Palm Beach, FL.
For Morgan Stanley Smith Barney, LLC, Defendant, Counter Claimant: Lauren Whetstone, Tracy Lynn Gerber, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Patricia Anne Leonard, Greenberg Traurig, West Palm Beach, FL.
For Ryan H. Foley, Counter Defendant: William Robert Amlong, LEAD ATTORNEY, Amlong & Amlong, Fort Lauderdale, FL; Alison Leigh Churly, Broward County Clerk of Courts, Fort Lauderdale, FL; Mark Andrew Levy, Brinkley Morgan, Fort Lauderdale, FL; Paul L. Orshan, LEAD ATTORNEY, Orshan, P.A., Miami, FL.
Judges: BARRY S. SELTZER, UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE.
Opinion by: BARRY S. SELTZER
Opinion



REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION
THIS CAUSE is before the Court on the Motion for a Determination of Entitlement to Attorneys' Fees and Non-Taxable Costs and Expenses as Prevailing Party (DE 133) filed by Defendant/Counter-Plaintiff, Morgan Stanley Smith Barney, [*2]  LLC ("MSSB") and Counter-Plaintiff Morgan Stanley Smith Barney FA Notes Holdings LLC ("Notes Holdings)1 and the Verified Motion for Award of Attorneys' Fees and Non-Taxable Costs (DE 153) filed by MSSB and Notes Holding.2 These matters were referred to the undersigned Magistrate Judge pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 636 and the Magistrate Rules of the Local Rules of the United States District Court for the Southern District of Florida.
I. BACKGROUND
On October 24, 2008, Plaintiff/Counter-Defendant Ryan H. Foley ("Foley") began working as a financial advisor for Morgan Stanley.3 As part of his employment package, Morgan Stanley loaned Foley $2.2 million at a 3.25% annual rate of interest; Foley executed a promissory note, which provided that if Foley's employment were terminated for any reason (either voluntarily by Foley or involuntarily by Morgan Stanley) the note would become immediately due and payable.4 Foley and Morgan Stanley also entered into an Employment Agreement, which provided that Foley would have access to valuable and proprietary information, including computer software and hardware; such information was classified as "Trade Secrets." Pursuant to the Employment Agreement, Foley explicitly acknowledged [*3]  that Morgan Stanley takes all reasonable measures to maintain the confidentiality of its Trade Secrets, and he agreed that he would not remove such Trade Secrets or other company records (either originals or copies) from Morgan Stanley's premises, except in the ordinary course of business for, and subject to approval by, Morgan Stanley.5
On November 4, 2010, Foley removed the central processing unit (including the hard drive) of his office computer and took it to a friend's home; the friend was not a Morgan Stanley employee. The next day, Foley returned to work, took a computer from a colleague's cubicle, and placed it in his office. Morgan Stanley's Complex Risk Officer (Michelle Queen) learned of this and attempted to speak to Foley about his taking the colleague's computer; Foley would not speak to her and left the office. Upon further investigation, Morgan Stanley learned that Foley's computer was not on the premises; security camera footage showed him leaving the building with his hard drive on November 4. Kevin McCarty, who was responsible for the hiring and firing of all personnel in the four Miami area Morgan Stanley offices, was informed of the situation. On November 5, 2010, [*4]  various Morgan Stanley employees attempted to contact Foley. According to one employee who spoke to Foley that day, Foley denied that he had the computer and stated that he did not know where it was. That same day, Morgan Stanley placed Foley on paid administrative leave, pending further investigation.
On the morning of November 10, 2010, Foley again denied to Morgan Stanley representatives that he had taken the computer; later than same day, however, Foley informed Morgan Stanley that he had remembered the location of the computer. Foley retrieved the computer from his friend's home, and Morgan Stanley recovered it from Foley's home that afternoon. Morgan Stanley then terminated Foley's employment that same day (November 10).
Foley contends that he took the computer when he was in the midst of a psychotic episode (a manifestation of his bipolar disorder); he believed that Morgan Stanley had been spying on him through his computer. Foley acknowledges that he had never disclosed his disorder to Morgan Stanley before this incident and that he never requested an accommodation pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") before November 9, 2010. Morgan Stanley first learned of [*5]  Plaintiff's condition on November 7, 2010, from another financial advisor, who Foley's wife had called and reported Foley's condition. That financial advisor informed McCarty (by email) that Foley had been seen at South Miami Hospital and that he was being transferred to Hialeah Psychiatric Hospital for further evaluation.6
After terminating Foley's employment, Morgan Stanley made its demand upon Foley to repay the more than $1.7 million loan amount still owed by him under the promissory note he had signed when he began his employment. After receiving the demand letter, instead of repaying the amount due, on January 13, 2011, Foley filed in state court a two-count Complaint, alleging tortious interference and seeking a declaratory judgment and injunctive relief. On February 17, 2011, Morgan Stanley removed that law suit to this Court; that case was assigned to Judge Middlebrooks (Case No. 11-CV-60348). Judge Middlebrooks dismissed without prejudice that action and compelled arbitration. On March 18, 2011, Morgan Stanley filed a claim against Foley in the arbitration proceeding, seeking payment under the promissory note. Thereafter, on July 7, 2011, Foley filed an amended counterclaim [*6]  (in the arbitration proceeding), asserting claims for tortious interference, declaratory judgment regarding the promissory note, and breach of the Bonus Agreement (which are all arbitrable claims). On October 28, 2011, Foley brought an action against MSSB in the Circuit Court of the 17th Judicial Circuit, in and for Broward County, Florida. The original Complaint (DE 1-3) asserted claims against MSSB under the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") and the Florida Civil Rights Act of 1992 ("FCRA"). On November 18, 2011, MSSB removed the (instant) case to this Court on the basis of federal question jurisdiction. Because Foley's ADA and FCRA claims were non-arbitrable, the parties stipulated that all of their claims, counterclaims, and defenses that were then pending in the arbitration proceeding would be moved to this Court and asserted in this action with Foley's statutory claims.
On January 12, 2012, Foley filed a six-count Amended Complaint (DE 9), asserting the following claims; (1) violation of the ADA; (2) violation of the FCRA; (3) tortious interference with an advantageous business relationship; (4) breach of the Employment Agreement, Promissory Note, and Bonus Agreement; (5) [*7]  declaratory judgment regarding the Employment Agreement, Promissory Note, and Bonus Agreement and (6) breach of the Bonus Agreement. On February 6, 2012, Morgan Stanley moved to dismiss the Amended Complaint (DE 14). Instead of responding to the Motion to Dismiss, on February 24, 2012, Foley filed a Second Amended Complaint (DE 23), asserting the same claims that had been asserted in the Amended Complaint, with changes to some factual allegations and wording revisions.7 On March 6, 2012, Morgan Stanley moved to dismiss Foley's Second Amended Complaint (DE 28). Before the District Judge had an opportunity to rule on Morgan Stanley's Motion to Dismiss, however, Foley sought leave to file a Third Amended Complaint (DE 87).
On September 24, 2012, the District Court entered an Order Granting in Part Leave to Amend and Denying as Moot Motion to Dismiss (DE 95), wherein the Court ordered Foley to voluntarily dismiss with prejudice his claims for tortious interference with advantageous business relationships (Count III), breach of agreements (Count IV), declaratory judgment regarding agreements (Count V), and breach of Bonus Agreement (Count VI) that had been asserted in Foley's Second Amended [*8]  Complaint. The Court additionally permitted Foley to amend his claims for violation of the ADA (Count I) and violation of the FCRA (Count II) (with certain exceptions). Finally, the Court denied as moot Defendant's Motion to Dismiss the Second Amended Complaint. On September 25, 2012, Foley filed his Third Amended Complaint (DE 99) and dismissed with prejudice Counts III-VI of his Second Amended Complaint (DE 100) in compliance with the District Court's Order.
On October 15, 2012, Morgan Stanley filed its Answer and Affirmative Defenses and a Counter-Claim for breach of the promissory note and unjust enrichment (DE 104). On November 8, 2012, Foley answered the Counter-Claim (DE 109). And on December 14, 2012, Morgan Stanley moved for summary judgment on both Foley's ADA and FRCA claims asserted in the Third Amended Complaint and on its Counterclaim (DE 118).
On March 4, 2013, the District Court granted Morgan Stanley's Motion for Summary Judgment (DE 131). And on March 12, 2013, the District Court entered Final Judgment (DE 132) in favor of Morgan Stanley and against Foley on both claims (violations of the ADA and FCRA) of Foley's Third Amended Complaint and on Count I (breach of promissory [*9]  note) of Morgan Stanley's Counter-Claim.8 The Final Judgment also awarded Morgan Stanley $1,842,44.63 (principal and interest), with interest to accrue at the statutory rate.
Thereafter, Morgan Stanley filed the instant Motion for a Determination of Entitlement to Attorneys' Fees and Non-Taxable Costs and Expenses as Prevailing Party (DE 133). After the Motion was fully briefed, but before the Court had ruled on the entitlement issue, Morgan Stanley filed a Verified Motion for Award of Attorneys' Fees and Non-Taxable Costs (DE 153). Both Motions are now ripe for decision.
II. ENTITLEMENT TO ATTORNEYS' FEES AND NON-TAXABLE COSTS
As the prevailing party, Morgan Stanley requests that the Court determine that it is entitled to attorneys' fees and non-taxable costs9 for prosecuting its counter-claim for breach of the promissory note and for defending against Foley's claims for violation of the ADA and the FCRA.
A. Attorneys' Fees and Non-Taxable Costs Pursuant to Promissory Note
Morgan Stanley first argues that it is entitled to the attorneys' fees and non-taxable costs and expenses it incurred in successfully prosecuting its counter-claim for breach of the promissory note signed by Foley. The [*10]  express terms of the promissory note provide: "The undersigned [Foley] shall reimburse Morgan Stanley for any and all damages, losses, costs, and expenses (including attorney's fees) incurred or sustained by Morgan Stanley as a result of the breach by the undersigned of any terms of this Note." Promissory Note (DE 133-1).
Foley acknowledges that Morgan Stanley is entitled to recover attorneys' fees relating to its counter-claim concerning the promissory note. Foley, however, argues that fees incurred prior to Morgan Stanley's October 15, 2012 filing of its counter-claim should not be awarded. Morgan Stanley counters that it should be awarded fees incurred with respect to the promissory note at least as early as November 22, 2011. It explains that it first asserted its breach of promissory note claim in the arbitration proceeding on March 18, 2011. In that proceeding Foley had also sought a declaratory judgment that (despite his breach of the promissory note), the note was unenforceable due to Morgan Stanley's (alleged) employment discrimination. According to Morgan Stanley, as early as November 22, 2011, the parties had agreed that Morgan Stanley's promissory note claim (and Foley's [*11]  employment discrimination claim, which he had asserted as a defense to Morgan Stanley's claim in the arbitration proceeding) would be asserted in this action. Based on this agreement, both parties engaged in discovery relating to the promissory note from the beginning of this action. The undersigned, therefore, will not automatically exclude all pre-October 22, 2012 attorney time relating to the promissory note, as urged by Foley.
Foley additionally contends that Morgan Stanley is not entitled to litigation expenses. He argues that "[s]uch non-taxable expenses are recoverable solely by civil rights plaintiffs because of the liberal interpretation historically given to the fee-shifting statutes," relying soley on Dowdell v. City of Apopka, 698 F.2d 1181, 1188-89 and n.9 (11th Cir. 1983). Foley's argument is specious. The issue before the Dowdell Court was whether a prevailing plaintiff in a civil rights case could recover litigation expenses (as opposed to statutory costs). The Eleventh Circuit held that a prevailing civil rights plaintiff could recover such expenses under 42 U.S.C. § 1988; it did not foreclose an award of litigation expenses under any other statutory authority or pursuant to a contractual agreement. Here, by signing the promissory note, Foley expressly agreed [*12]  to pay Morgan Stanley litigation expenses in the event of a default on the promissory note. See Promissory Note (DE 133-1) ("The undersigned [Foley] shall reimburse Morgan Stanley for any and all damages, losses, costs, and expenses (including attorney's fees) incurred or sustained by Morgan Stanley as a result of the breach by the undersigned of any terms of this Note.") (emphasis added). Additionally, the ADA also expressly permits recovery of litigation expenses. See 42 U.S.C. § 12205.
B. Attorneys' Fees and Non-Taxable Costs Pursuant to the ADA and FCRA
The ADA affords a court discretion to award a prevailing party "reasonable attorney's fees, including litigation expenses and costs." 42 U.S.C. § 12205. The FCRA also affords a court discretion to award a prevailing party "a reasonable attorney's fee as part of the costs." Fla. Stat. § 760.11(5). Having obtained a summary judgment, Morgan Stanley is clearly the prevailing party on Foley's ADA and FCRA claims.
The Eleventh Circuit has adopted the standards set forth in Christiansburg Garment Co. v. EEOC., 434 U.S. 412, 422, 98 S. Ct. 694, 54 L. Ed. 2d 648 (1978), for assessing an award of fees under the ADA. Bruce v. City of Gainesville, Georgia, 177 F.3d 949, 950-51 (11th Cir. 1999). Similarly, under the FCRA, courts apply the Christiansburg standard. See Jones v. United States Alliance L.L.C., 494 F.3d 1306, 1310 (11th Cir. 2007) ("Florida has expressly adopted the Christiansburg standard for cases under the FCRA."); Fla. Stat. § 760.11(5) ("It is [*13]  the intent of the Legislature that this provision for attorney's fees be interpreted in a manner consistent with federal case law involving a Title VII action. . . .").
In Christiansburg, the Supreme Court ruled that although a prevailing plaintiff "is to be awarded attorneys' fees in all but special circumstances," 434 U.S. at 417, prevailing defendants may be awarded attorneys' fees only upon a finding that the plaintiff's claim "was frivolous, unreasonable or groundless, even though not brought in subjective bad faith." Id. at 421. This dual standard balances the competing policy interests of encouraging vigorous enforcement of the civil rights statutes and deterring groundless lawsuits. Id. at 420. The Supreme Court cautioned that in awarding defendants attorneys' fees courts should "resist the understandable temptation to engage in post hoc reasoning by concluding that, because a plaintiff did not ultimately prevail, his action must have been unreasonable or without foundation." Id. at 421-22. "The fact a plaintiff may ultimately lose his case is not in itself a sufficient justification for the assessment of fees." Id. at 421. A district court "must focus on the question whether the case is so lacking in arguable merit as to be groundless [*14]  or without foundation rather than whether the claim was ultimately unsuccessful." Sullivan v. Sch. Bd. of Pinellas County, 773 F.2d 1182, 1189 (11th Cir. 1985) (quoting Jones v. Texas Tech Univ., 656 F.2d 1137 (5th Cir. 1981)).
No "hard and fast" rules exist for determining whether a case is frivolous; such determination is to be made on a case-by-case basis. Sullivan, 773 F.2d at 1189. The Eleventh Circuit, however, has identified three factors that a court should consider: "(1) whether the plaintiff established a prima facie case; (2) whether the defendant offered to settle; and (3) whether the trial court dismissed the case prior to trial or held a full-blown trial on the merits." Id.; see also Turner v. Sungard Bus. Sys., Inc., 91 F.3d 1418, 1422 (11th Cir. 1996) (noting that courts "must examine" Sullivan factors). The Sullivan factors "are only guidelines and should not be applied in a rigid fashion." McKenzie v. EAP Mgmt. Corp., No. 98-6062-Civ, 1999 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 17716, 1999 WL 1427707, at *2 (S.D. Fla. Sept. 30, 1999) (Dimitrouleas, J.). Were the Sullivan factors applied conclusively, then any defendant who did not offer to settle and who prevailed at the summary judgment stage would be entitled to a fee award; more is required. Instead, the court must also determine whether a plaintiff's case was "so lacking in arguable merit as to be groundless." Sullivan, 773 F.2d at 1189.
Here, all three Sullivan factors clearly weigh in favor of a fee award to Morgan Stanley. Morgan Stanley did not offer to settle this [*15]  matter, and the District Court granted summary judgment in favor of Morgan Stanley before trial. With respect to the remaining factor — whether Plaintiff established a prima facie case to support his claims that he was terminated because of a disability — the District Court's found that he failed to do so.
To show a prima facie case of discrimination under the ADA and the FCRA, a plaintiff must demonstrate: (1) the existence of a disability or handicap; (2) that he is qualified (with or without a reasonable accommodation) to perform his essential job functions; and (3) that the defendant took an adverse employment action against the plaintiff because of his disability. Alvarez v. Royal Atl. Developers Inc., 610 F.3d 1253, 1264 (11th Cir. 2010). The District Court found that Foley satisfied the first prong; his bipolar disorder constitutes a disability within the meaning of the ADA. The Court, however, found that Foley failed to satisfy the second prong because he was not qualified to perform the essential function of protecting the assets of Morgan Stanley and its highly sensitive and proprietary information. Foley admitted that he breached Morgan Stanley's security policy — an integral part of its business — by removing his computer from the premises and [*16]  leaving it with a friend. The Court further found that Foley failed to satisfy the third prong; he failed to show that his employment was terminated because of his disability. Rather, Foley was terminated because he violated firm policy.10
Foley does not contest that all three Sullivan factors have been satisfied. Rather, he argues that the Court should not award attorney's fees because he presented an issue of first impression in the Eleventh Circuit, which he frames as follows: "whether the ADA and FCRA protect[ ] someone who is fired because he engaged in a single episode of behavior demonstrably caused by a condition, i.e. biolar affective disorder, that is a recognized disability." Response at 5 (DE 144). Foley argues, therefore, that "he should not be punished for raising an issue that needs to be addressed." Response at 144 (DE 144). According to Foley, he "frankly acknowledged the behavior in which he engaged and presented testimony by his treating psychiatrist that he engaged in the behavior that he [did] because he was suffering a bi-polar episode." Id. at 9. Foley argues that he thus "presented the Court with a clearly defined issue of significant import." Id. In support of this argument, [*17]  Foley cites two Eleventh Circuit cases in which the courts considered an award of sanctions under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 11, noting that the purpose of Rule 11 is to deter frivolous lawsuits and not to deter novel legal arguments or cases of first impression.11 Foley, however, has failed to cite any authority holding that presenting an issue of first impression precludes a finding of frivolity when considering a fee award pursuant to the ADA, the FCRA, or other civil rights statutes.
Foley also argues that "'[i]n cases where findings of frivolity have been sustained,' the plaintiffs 'typically' have failed to 'introduce any evidence to support their claims.'" Response at 7 (DE 144) (citing Sullivan, 773 F.2d 1182, 1189) ("Cases where findings of 'frivolity' have been sustained typically have been decided in the defendant's favor on a motion for summary judgment or a Fed.R.Civ.P. 41(b) motion for involuntary dismissal. In these cases, the plaintiffs did not introduce any evidence to support their claims."). Foley, however, fails to identify even a single piece of evidence that he contends supported his ADA and FCRA claims.
After carefully considering the parties' arguments, the undersigned concludes that Foley's ADA and FCRA claims were frivolous, [*18]  unreasonable, and groundless. Hence, Morgan Stanley is entitled to attorney's fees on these claims.
C. Attorney's Fees Relating to State Law Claims
In addition to the ADA and FCRA claims, Foley's Second Amended Complaint asserted four state law claims: (1) tortious interference with an advantageous business relationship (Count III); (2) breach of the agreements (Employment Agreement, Promissory Note, and Bonus Agreement) (Count IV); (3) declaratory judgment regarding the agreements (Employment Agreement, Promissory Note, and Bonus Agreement) (Count V); and (4) breach of the Bonus Agreement (Count VI).12 The tortious interference claim alleged that Foley had a business relationship with each of the clients for whom he rendered services, including those he had brought with him from his prior employment and that Morgan Stanley interfered with those relationships by: inducing him to bring his clients with him when he joined Morgan Stanley; representing that his employment with Morgan Stanley would continue so that Foley would receive the payments due pursuant to a Bonus Agreement to repay the promissory note; wrongfully terminating his employment thereby permitting Morgan Stanley to accelerate [*19]  the note and retain his clients; distributing his clients to other Morgan Stanley financial advisors; and preventing him from communicating with his clients through a non-solicitation agreement provision of the Employment Agreement. The breach of agreements claim alleged that the Employment Agreement, the Promissory Note, and the Bonus Agreement were simultaneously executed. It further alleged that these Agreements were interrelated because Foley was employed pursuant to the Employment Agreement, the advance made by Morgan Stanley to induce Foley to accept employment was secured by the Promissory Note, and the funds from which the Note was to be repaid were to be drawn from the funds Foley would receive pursuant to the Bonus Agreement. The claim alleged that Morgan Stanley breached the Agreements by wrongfully terminating Foley so as to cause the Note to be accelerated and his bonuses to cease. The breach of the Bonus Agreement claim was essentially the same, but related soley to the Bonus Agreement. The declaratory judgment claim sought a declaration "regarding whether [Foley's] employment has been 'terminated' pursuant to the Employment Agreement, and whether the sums due pursuant [*20]  to the Note have become accelerated and are due." Second Amended Complaint ¶ 55. More specifically, that claim alleged that Morgan Stanley terminated him because he suffers from a disability. It requests that the Court declare that the discriminatory discharge of Foley does not constitute "termination of employment" pursuant to the terms of the Employment and Bonus Agreements and that Morgan Stanley cannot accelerate payment of the Promissory Note because Foley's discharge was discriminatory. When he filed the Second Amended Complaint, Foley was represented by his original attorney, Andrew T. Lavin.
Morgan Stanley moved to dismiss the Second Amended Complaint, including the state law claims. Before the Court had an opportunity to rule on the motion, Foley retained his current counsel (Amlong & Amlong), who two weeks later moved to file a Third Amended Complaint that omitted all state law claims. At a subsequent hearing on that motion, Foley's counsel agreed that with the filing of a Third Amended Complaint, he would voluntarily dismiss the state law claims. See Transcript of September 24, 2012 Hearing at 3 (DE 160). In its Order permitting Foley to file a Third Amended Complaint, the [*21]  District Court required Foley to voluntarily dismiss the state law claims by a date certain. See Order Granting in Part Leave to Amend and Denying as Moot Motion to Dismiss (DE 95) Pursuant to hat Order, Foley filed a Notice of Dismissal with Prejudice of Counts III-VI of Plaintiff's Second Amended Complaint (DE 100). Upon the filing of this voluntary dismissal, Morgan Stanley became the prevailing party on the state law claims. See Nukote Int'l, Inc. v. Office Depot, Inc., No. 09-82363-CIV, 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 125898, 2010 WL 4942838, at *2 (S.D. Fla. Nov. 30, 2010) (Hurley, J.) ("[W]here a plaintiff voluntary dismisses an action, the defendant is the prevailing party."); Martinez v. TRG Oasis (Tower Two) Ltd, LP, No. 2:08-cv-611-FtM-29SPC, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 22030, 2009 WL 774094, at *1 (M.D. Fla. Mar. 19, 2009) ("Under Florida law . . . a defendant is considered a prevailing party when a plaintiff voluntarily dismissed his or her claims.").
Morgan Stanley contends that as the prevailing party it is entitled to an award of attorneys' fees for work expended on the state law claims. More specifically, Morgan Stanley argues:
Both Foley's Employment Agreement with Morgan Stanley [D.E. #104 at Exhibit A] and the Promissory Note [DE 104# at Exhibit B] contained prevailing party attorney's fees and costs provisions. Foley's tortious interference [*22]  claim was expressly premised on, and arose out of and related to, a provision in the Employment Agreement [DE #23]. Foley's claim for breach of agreements and declaratory judgment was based on the Promissory Note, the Employment Agreement, and the Bonus Agreement [DE #23]. Although the Bonus Agreement was the only one of the three agreements without a prevailing party attorney's fee provision, the defense of the breach of agreements and declaratory judgment claims were inextricably interwoven and required the same legal research with respect to the three agreements. Accordingly, Foley's state-law claims are well within the provisions of the Promissory Note and the Employment Agreement, entitling Morgan Stanley to its reasonable attorneys' fees and non-taxable costs and expenses.
Reply at 8-9 (DE 151).
The undersigned agrees with Morgan Stanley's reasoning. Indeed, Foley's own pleadings allege that the Agreements upon which he bases his state law claims are intertwined. According to the Second Amended Complaint:
The Agreements [Employment Agreement, Promissory Note, and Bonus Agreement] were simultaneously executed, and are interrelated. Plaintiff FOLEY was employed pursuant to the Employment [*23]  Agreement. The Advance made to induce Plaintiff FOLEY to accept employment with MORGAN STANLEY is evidenced by the Note. The funds from which the Note was to be repaid were to be paid by MORGAN STANLEY to FOLEY pursuant to the Bonus Agreement. If FOLEY'S employment "terminates," the Note becomes due and FOLEY'S entitlement to receive bonuses pursuant to the Bonus Agreement ceases."
Second Amended Complaint ¶ 46 (DE 23).
Foley argues that "[t]o the extent that Morgan Stanley seeks to recover fees for the various state-law claims raised by Mr. Foley's predecessor counsel, Andrew Lavin, Esq. - claims that Mr. Foley abandoned as soon as he obtained his current counsel — they should have sought to recover that payment from Mr. Lavin." Foley reasons that Morgan Stanley should have, and failed to, seek sanctions pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 11 and 28 U.S.C. § 1927 against attorney Lavin during his tenure and, therefore, "Mr. Foley should not bear any responsibility for that." Foley's argument, however, is unavailing. It "has long been settled that the actions of an attorney are imputed to the client so completely that the attorney legally is the alter ego of the client except in extreme circumstances . . . such as outright fraud [*24]  or a serious violation of professional ethics." Traylor v. State of Florida, 596 So. 2d 957, 979 (Fla. 1992). Accordingly, Morgan Stanley is entitled to attorneys' fees on the state law claims.
III. CALCULATION OF ATTORNEY'S FEES
Morgan Stanley seeks attorneys' fees in the amount of $419,229.50.13 This Circuit has adopted the lodestar method to determine reasonable attorneys' fee. Norman v. Hous. Auth. of City of Montgomery, 836 F.2d 1292 (11th Cir. 1988). To establish a lodestar amount, a court must ascertain the number of hours an attorney reasonably expended on the litigation and then multiply that figure by a reasonable hourly rate. Id. at 1299-1302. The lodestar amount may be adjusted to reach a more appropriate attorneys' fee. Id. at 1302. The fee applicant bears the burden of documenting the reasonableness of the number of hours expended and the reasonableness of the hourly rates charged. Id. at 1299; see also ACLU of Georgia. v. Barnes, 168 F.3d 423, 427 (11th Cir. 1999).
A. Reasonable Hourly Rates
The Court must first determine whether the hourly rates requested by Morgan Stanley are reasonable. "A reasonable hourly rate is the prevailing market rate in the relevant legal community for similar services by lawyers of reasonably comparable skills, experience, and reputation." Norman, 836 F.2d at 1299.
Throughout the litigation, Morgan Stanley was represented by the law firm of Greenburg Traurig P.A. Morgan Stanley has identified [*25]  the experience and qualifications of the attorneys for whom it seeks fees. Patricia A. Leonard is a shareholder in the firm. She has been a member in good standing of The Florida Bar since 1995 and is admitted to practice in the State of Florida. Additionally, Leonard is admitted to practice in this District and the United States District Courts for the Middle and Northern Districts of Florida, the United States Courts of Appeals for the Eleventh and Third Circuits, and the Supreme Court of the United States. Tracy L. Gerber is a shareholder in the firm's West Palm Beach office. She has been a member in good standing of The Florida Bar since 1994 and is admitted to practice in the State of Florida and in the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit. In addition to being admitted to practice in this District, Gerber is admitted to practice in the United States District Court for the District of Colorado. Lauren R. Whetstone and Alex J. Rosenthal are associates in the firm's West Palm Beach office. Whetstone has been admitted to practice in the State of Florida since 2007, and Rosenthal has been admitted to practice in the State of Florida since 2011. See Leonard Aff. [*26]  §§ 1,2, and 9 and attached attorney biographies (DE 153-1).
Morgan Stanley requests attorneys' fees for both shareholders Leonard and Gerber at an hourly rate of $375 for time expended from 2011 through May 31, 2012, and at an hourly rate of $394 for time expended from June 1, 2012 through 2013. Foley does not object to the hourly rates claimed for either of these attorneys. Based on the undersigned's own experience and familiarity with ADA and FCRA litigation, as well as the prevailing hourly rates charged in the Southern District of Florida, the undersigned concludes that these rates are reasonable. Nonetheless, because Morgan Stanley has identified only the total number of hours each attorney expended (as opposed to the number of hours charged at each hourly rate), in calculating the lodestar amount, the undersigned will use the lesser rate ($375) for Leonard and Gerber. For the associate attorneys, Laura R. Whetstone and Alex J. Rosenthal, Morgan Stanley claims a $323 hourly rate for each. Although Foley does not object to the $323 hourly rate, the undersigned believes it is excessive for associates. See Hermosilla v. Coca-Cola Co., No.10-21418, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 156499, 2011 WL 9364952, at *13 (S.D. Fla. July 15, 2011) (Torres, M.J.) (finding claimed hourly rates for associates ranging from $250 to [*27]  $385 unreasonable; applying a blended hourly rate of $225 for lodestar calculation) (report and recommendation adopted in No. 10-21418 (DE 200) (S.D. Fla. Aug. 8, 2011) (Moore, J.). The undersigned finds that a $250 hourly rate for senior associate Whetstone (admitted to practice in 2007) and a $225 hourly rate for junior associate Rosenthal (admitted to practice in 2011) is appropriate.
B. Reasonable Number of Hours
The Court must next determine the reasonable number of hours expended by Morgan Stanley's counsel in this matter. In support of its fee request, Morgan Stanley has submitted detailed time records reflecting the activities performed and the time expended on each activity and the affidavit of attorney Leonard. Morgan Stanley represents that its counsel expended a total of 1,178.4 hours14 in litigating the claims and defenses in this matter. More specifically, attorney Leonard expended 621.9 hours, attorney Gerber expended 82.3 hours, attorney Whetstone expended 310.2 hours, and attorney Rosenthal expended 164 hours.
Foley argues that Morgan Stanley's fee request should be substantially reduced for the following reasons: (1) billing of redundant hours; (2) block billing; (3) vague [*28]  time entries; (4) excessive fees for particular tasks; (5) overstaffing; (6) and performing clerical work. In his memorandum, Foley provides a few examples for most (but not all) of these objections, then simply notes beside each entry on Morgan Stanley's billing records conclusory objections, such as "block billing," "duplicate," or "vague."
Under Norman, 836 F.2d at 1301, a court is to enumerate the specific hours that are to be disallowed and articulate the reasons these hours would be improper. Subsequently, however, the Eleventh Circuit ruled that where a fee application is voluminous the court need not engage in an hour-by-hour analysis; rather, it may reduce a fee award either by reducing the number of hours before calculating the lodestar amount or by adjusting the lodestar amount itself. Loranger v. Stierheim, 10 F.3d 776, 783 (11th Cir. 1994) ("Where fee documentation is voluminous. . . an hour-by-hour review is simply impractical and a waste of judicial resources."); see also Cornett v. Lender Processing Servs, Inc., No. 3:12-cv-233-J-99TJC-MCR, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 176724, 2013 WL 6643873, at *5 (M.D. Fla. Dec. 17, 2013) ("In evaluating a party's fee request, a court may conduct an hour-by-hour analysis of the fees requested, or, if appropriate, apply an across-the-board reduction. An across-the-board [*29]  method is often preferable so as to avoid the 'pick and shovel work' of pouring through voluminous billing records.") (internal citation omitted). It is sufficient for the court to provide a concise, but clear, explanation of its reasons for the reduction. Id. at 784.
Here, Morgan Stanley's fee documentation is clearly voluminous. It seeks $419,229.50 for 1,178.4 hours, as reflected on nearly seventy (70) pages of time records. See Arias v. Alpine Towing, Inc., No. 10-20434-CIV, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 104438, 2011 WL 4102530, at *5 (S.D. Fla. Sept. 15, 2011) (O'Sullivan, M.J.) (finding $78,734.50 fee request voluminous so as not to require hour-by-hour analysis; reducing total fees by 10%); Parra v. Minto Townpack, LLC, No. 08-14168-CIV, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 81227, 2009 WL 2602678, at *5 (S.D. Fla. Aug. 21, 2009) (Graham, J) (finding $49,445.50 fee request voluminous; reducing total fees by 30%).
Upon an independent review, the undersigned finds that Morgan Stanley's billing entries are problematic in many respects. First, Morgan Stanley has included hours for work relating to the administrative proceedings.15 Morgan Stanley has not cited any authority that would permit this Court to award fees for work performed in the administrative proceeding. Accordingly, such time is not compensable.
The undersigned, however, does not agree with Foley's contention [*30]  that this case was overstaffed,16 particularly as Morgan Stanley has excluded time keepers who did not bill more than $10,000. The work was performed primarily by one shareholder (Leonard) and two associates ( Whetstone and Rosenthal). Yet, the undersigned finds that at least some of the time expended by shareholder Gerber (82.3 hours) is excludable. Most of Gerber's time was spent on "strategizing," "analyzing," and "vetting" issues.17 With few exceptions, Gerber performed little other independent substantive work.
More problematic is Morgan Stanley's block billing. "Block billing is the practice of grouping multiple tasks in a block summary under a single time entry." Henns v. Mony Life Ins. Co. of Am., No. 5:11-CV-55-C-37TBS, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 63622, 2012 WL 1599871, at *6 (M.D. Fla. Apr. 13, 2012), report and recommendation adopted, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 63620, 2012 WL 1599866 (M.D. Fla. May 7, 2012). As one court in this District has explained, "[r]ecords which 'lump together all tasks performed by an attorney on a given day without breaking out the time spent on each task, at least 'makes it difficult, if not impossible,' for a court to 'calculate with any precision the number of hours an attorney devoted to a particular task.'" Machado v. Da Vittorio, LLC, No. 09-23069-CIV, 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 84047, 2010 WL 2949618, at *3 (S.D. Fla. July 26, 2010) (Altonaga, J.) (quoting Barnes, 168 F.3d at 429). Moreover, block [*31]  billing is inconsistent with an attorney's obligation to "maintain billing time records in a manner that will enable a reviewing court to identify distinct claims." Hensley v. Eckerhart, 461 U.S. 424, 437, 103 S. Ct. 1933, 76 L. Ed. 2d 40 (1983). "While attorneys cannot be expected to account for every second of their time, they should be expected to explain in discrete entries the nature of the work that they want a client or opposing party to pay them hundreds of dollars to perform." Kearney v. Auto-Owners Ins. Co., 713 F. Supp. 2d 1369, 1378 (M.D. Fla. 2010) (emphasizing that block billing unnecessarily complicates a review of attorney time records and warrants a reduction of the hours claimed).
Morgan Stanley argues that the "mere fact that an attorney has included more than one task in a single billing entry is not, in itself, evidence of block billing. When those tasks are intertwined, including a thorough description of the activities performed clarifies, rather than obscures, the record." Reply at 4 (DE 167) (quoting Williams v. R.W. Cannon, Inc., 657 F. Supp. 2d 1302, 1312 (S.D. Fla. 2009) (Simonton, M.J.)). Morgan Stanley contends that most of its counsel's time entries are not "blocked billed." It contends that "the tasks listed in the time entries instead contain a more descriptive account of the activities performed, not a block billing of all the tasks performed in a single day." Id. The undersigned [*32]  disagrees.
A cursory review of Morgan Stanley's counsel's records reveals that the time entries are replete with block billing.18 The following time entries offer just a few examples of grouping multiple (unrelated) tasks under a single time entry:
Work with AJ Rosenthal re preparing Response to Motion to Compel; review letter from A. Lavin responding to June 1st letter re Foley's responses to MSSB's Request for Production of Documents; calls to G. DeBona and R. Alvarez re deposition dates; long call with A. Lavin re discovery issues; prepare letter to A. Lavin confirming contents of phone call; review Foley's supplemental disclosures and documents appended to same.
June 13, 2012 time entry for 2.7 hours;
Prepare follow-up letter to A. Lavin requesting dates for expert witness depositions; follow up e-mail to [redacted] discovery; review and prepare [redacted] draft responses to Foley's second set of Interrogatories and Second Requests for Production; several e-mails to T. Gerber and L. Whetstone re same; work with T. Gerber re computer issues; prepare list of items from Foley's deposition to support a Rule 11 letter and/or summary judgment motion; preparation for K. McCarty's deposition; call [*33]  with T. Gerber re same; review updated draft Response to Foley's Emergency Motion re the Computer and work on revisions to same.
July 1, 2012 time entry for 5.8 hours;
Email correspondence with K. McCarty re [redacted]; Strategy meeting with T Gerber re: status conference; emails with P Shultz and T Gerber re: conflict dates for trial; final preparation for and attendance at status conference; review proposed Third Amended Complaint sent by attorney W Amlong; work with T Gerber and P Shultz re: strategy re: same; follow up re: submitting K McCarty errata sheet.
August 31, 2012 time entry for 6.5 hours; and
Work with L. Whetstone re preparing motion for MSSB FA Notes Holding to intervene as counter-plaintiff; review and revise motion to intervene; work with T Gerber re promissory note [redacted] work on finalizing Answer, Affirmative Defenses and Counterclaim; e mail to P Shultz re same; e-mails with [redacted] re trial dates; finalize preparation for deposition of damages expert R. Dotson; work with AJ Rosenthal re materials to be compiled in response to magistrate's order on in camera inspection.
October 15, 2012 time entry for 6.9 hours.
Counsel's block billing makes it very difficult [*34]  — if not impossible — for the Court to identify "excessive, redundant, or otherwise unnecessary" time expended, as required by Norman. The multitude of redactions appearing in the time records19 only further complicates the Court's difficulty in this task. Although the manner in which counsel has prepared its fee application has impeded the undersigned's ability to identify excessive time expended on discrete tasks, the undersigned nonetheless finds that the total amount of attorneys' fees sought by Morgan Stanley is excessive. The primary issues herein were two-fold — whether Foley breached the promissory note by failing to repay the loan amount and whether Foley's termination for removing his computer from the business premises (due to his bipolar disorder) violated the ADA or the FCRA. Neither these legal issues nor the underlying facts (which were largely undisputed) were so complex as to support a fee request in excess of $400,000. For all these reasons, the undersigned concludes that a 30% reduction in the lodestar amount is warranted.
C. Lodestar Amount
Multiplying the reasonable number of hours Morgan Stanley's counsel expended by the reasonable hourly rates results in [*35]  a lodestar amount of $378,525.00, calculated as follows:

A 30% reduction (for the reasons stated above) results in attorneys' fees in the total amount of $264,967.50.
IV. RECOMMENDATIONS
Based on the foregoing, it is hereby RECOMMENDED that the District Judge:
1. GRANT the Motion for a Determination of Entitlement to Attorneys' Fees and Non-Taxable Costs and Expenses as Prevailing Party (DE 133) filed by Defendant/Counter-Plaintiff, Morgan Stanley Smith Barney, LLC, and Counter-Plaintiff Morgan Stanley Smith Barney FA Notes Holdings LLC;
2. GRANT the Verified Motion for Award of Attorneys' Fees and Non-Taxable Costs (DE 153) filed by Defendant/Counter-Plaintiff, Morgan Stanley Smith Barney, LLC, and Counter-Plaintiff Morgan Stanley Smith Barney FA Notes Holdings LLC; and
3. Award Defendant/Counter-Plaintiff, Morgan Stanley Smith Barney, LLC, and Counter-Plaintiff Morgan Stanley Smith Barney FA Notes Holdings LLC $264,967.50. in attorneys' fees.
The parties will have fourteen (14) days from the date [*36]  of being served with a copy of this Report and Recommendation within which to file written objections, if any, with the Honorable Kathleen M. Williams, United States District Judge. Failure to file objections timely shall bar the parties from a de novo determination by the District Judge of an issue covered in the report and shall bar the parties from attacking on appeal factual findings accepted or adopted by the District Judge except upon grounds of plain error or manifest injustice. See 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1); Thomas v. Arn, 474 U.S. 140, 149, 106 S. Ct. 466, 88 L. Ed. 2d 435 (1985); Henley v. Johnson, 885 F.2d 790, 794 (1989).
DONE AND SUBMITTED at Fort Lauderdale, Florida this 27th day of February 2014.
/s/ Barry S. Seltzer
BARRY S. SELTZER
CHIEF UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE
Table1 ()
Table1 ()


End of Document

