Fryer v. Coil Tubing Servs., L.L.C.
United States District Court for the District of Wyoming
November 19, 2009, Decided; November 19, 2009, Filed
Case No. 09-CV-004-D

Reporter
2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 141568 *
ARTHUR FRYER, Plaintiff(s), vs. COIL TUBING SERVICES, L.L.C., Defendant(s).
Subsequent History: Affirmed by Fryer v. Coil Tubing Servs., LLC, 415 Fed. Appx. 37, 2011 U.S. App. LEXIS 2637 (10th Cir. Wyo., Feb. 9, 2011)
Counsel:  [*1] For Arthur Fryer, Petitioner: Jeffrey C Gosman, LEAD ATTORNEY, Casper, WY USA; Tamara Kay Schroeder, WEINSTEIN PINSON & RILEY PS, Casper, WY USA.
For Coil Tubing Services Llc, Respondent: Bradley T Cave, LEAD ATTORNEY, HOLLAND & HART, Cheyenne, WY USA; Christine M White, LEAD ATTORNEY, PRO HAC VICE, Jones Walker, New Orleans, LA USA; Christopher E Moore, LEAD ATTORNEY, PRO HAC VICE, OGLETREE DEAKINS, Houston, TX USA.
Judges: William F. Downes, Chief United States District Judge.
Opinion by: William F. Downes
Opinion



ORDER GRANTING DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
This matter comes before the Court on defendant Coil Tubing Services' Motion for Summary Judgment. Having reviewed the parties briefs and heard oral argument thereon, the Court hereby FINDS:

I. Background
This case involves multiple claims by Plaintiff Arthur Fryer ("Fryer") against Defendant Coil Tubing Services ("CTS"). Fryer, an ex-employee of CTS, alleges CTS violated the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") with respect to his chronic Hepatitis C infection and interfered with his ERISA protected right to seek and obtain medical treatment. CTS denies all of Fryer's claims and under Fed. R. Civ. P 56(b), moves for summary judgement.
CTS is a Louisiana domiciled Limited [*2]  Liability Company and operates "down hole well services" in Wyoming. Fryer was hired by CTS around November 20, 2006 as a Service Tech II ("ST II") in Rock Springs. As an ST II, Fryer was responsible for operating DOT regulated vehicles to and from customer locations and at times was required to transport hazardous materials. In January of 2007, Fryer was diagnosed with Hepatitis C. He disclosed this diagnosis to CTS sometime in January, 2007. Fryer continued working at CTS through the end of March, 2007 when he was subject to a liver biopsy as part of the normal course of treatment for his disease. Fryer received the results of his biopsy in early April. The results indicated his disease had progressed to chronic Hepatitis C, stage 3 out of 4.
In late April 2007, Fryer's wife informed CTS that his disease had progressed. Fryer further informed CTS that he was depressed and that as a consequence of his treatment, he might experience suicidal thoughts and fatigue. Hearing this update, CTS requested that Fryer obtain a fitness-for-duty examination by a physician to evaluate his ability to perform the essential functions of the ST II job description. In the interim, Fryer was placed on [*3]  paid leave. He received his normal salary plus bonuses. CTS also maintained Fryer's health insurance during this period.
CTS allowed Fryer to obtain a release from a physician of his choosing. The release he ultimately obtained was from Amy Olsen, a physician assistant employed by Dr. Kurt Hunter. For a reason not explained in the parties' briefs, CTS was not satisfied with the release obtained by Olsen. CTS then contacted Dr. Hunt's office to inquire whether the Olsen release accounted for Fryer's depression and fatigue. On July 24, 2007, Fryer received a physical and clearance to work from Dr. Hunter himself. He was subsequently permitted to return to work as an ST II.
On approximately August 18, having been back at his job only a few weeks, Fryer injured his back working in his yard at home. He received medical treatment for his injury and was restricted from working until November 12, 2007. During that period, Fryer applied for and received short-term disability pay of approximately five hundred dollars per week through a benefits program offered by CTS. These benefits expired when he was released from his no-work restriction on November 17, 2007. Fryer's release did not, however, [*4]  afford him a clean bill of health for work purposes. Fryer remained restricted to lifting 20 pounds frequently, and 50 pounds occasionally; essentially a light-duty release. [Fryer Depo. at 149 and Exhibit 15 thereto). The 20/50 pound lifting restriction is inconsistent with the ST II job description—an ST II is not considered light-duty work and is required to lift 100 pounds to shoulder level frequently.
When Fryer attempted to return to work, he presented the light-duty release to CTS, however, there was no light-duty work available at that time. Learning there was no light-duty work available, Fryer returned to his doctor and received a release for regular work. The updated release contained the same weight restriction: "20 pounds frequently, [and] 50 pounds occasionally." Id. When Fryer presented the amended release to CTS which still contained the light-duty restrictions, it was apparent to the company that only the label of the release had changed. CTS again informed him that no light-duty work was available. On November 27, 2007, Fryer resigned his position at CTS because he had no income and it seemed unlikely that he would be able to return to work.

II. Discussion

Standard of [*5]  Review
Summary judgment is appropriate "if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue of material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). This Court views the evidence, and draws every reasonable inference therefrom, in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party." Jones v. United Parcel Serv., 502 F.3d 1176, 1183 (10th Cir. 2007).

Fryer's ADA Claims
CTS bases its motion for summary judgment on the following arguments: (1) Fryer has failed to establish a prima facie case under the ADA because (a) Fryer was never substantially limited from performing anything he considered a major life activity; (b) CTS never regarded Fryer as disabled; (c) Fryer was never a victim of discrimination; and (d) the medical evaluation required by CTS was job related and consistent with business necessity. CTS further argues that Fryer was neither constructively discharged nor can he establish a prima facie case of retaliation under the ADA. Fryer filed a response to some, but not all, of CTS' arguments and each will be addressed in turn.
The parties aver that the American with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. §12112, controls this action as [*6]  relates to Fryer's disability discrimination claims. To establish a prima facie case of discrimination under the ADA, Fryer must show (1) he is "disabled" within the meaning of the ADA; (2) he is qualified, with or without reasonable accommodation, to perform the essential functions of his job as an ST II; and (3) his employer discriminated against him because of his disability. MacKenzie v. City & County of Denver, 414 F.3d 1266, 1274 (10th Cir. 2005). "[E]ach of these elements is essential to an ADA claim." Hennagir v. Utah Dept. of Corrections, 581 F.3d 1256, 1262 (10th Cir. 2009).
The ADA defines disability as (A) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of the person; (B) a record of impairment; or (C) being regarded as having such impairment" 42 U.S.C. § 12102(2). Plaintiff's complaint alleges that he is disabled under (A) and (C), but not (B).

Actual Disability
Under Subsection (A), a plaintiff must show that a disability substantially limits at least one major life activity. See Doebele v. Sprint/United Mgmt. Co., 342 F.3d 1117, 1129 (10th Cir. 2003). Whether an individual is disabled is a question of law to be determined by the Court. Id. "Whether the conduct affected is a major life activity for purposes of the Act is also a legal question for the Court." Id. Defendant argues that plaintiff does not have an "actual" disability within the meaning of the ADA and that Fryer's [*7]  condition does not substantially limit a major life activity. For an impairment to be "substantially limiting," a plaintiff must be (1) unable to perform a major life activity the average person in the general population can perform; or (2) be significantly restricted as to the conditions, manner, or duration under which the plaintiff can perform a particular major life activity. Pack v. Kmart Corp., 166 F.3d 1300, 1305 (10th Cir. 1999). To be significantly restricted in performing a major life activity, the Court compares the Plaintiff's alleged restriction with the "condition, manner, or duration under which the average person in the general population can perform that same major life activity." MacKenzie, 414 F.3d at 1275-76 (citing 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(i)).
Addressing the actual disability element, CTS asserts that Fryer was never unable nor did he ever claim to be unable to perform a major life activity as a result of his condition. When asked about any perceived disability, Fryer stated that he never felt that his condition affected him from doing his job or any major life activity. [Fryer Depo. at pp. 143-144]. Fryer's response does not address this argument. In fact, his response brief focuses entirely on his "regarded as disabled" claim. Therefore, this Court must make the additional [*8]  determination that judgment for the moving party is "appropriate" under rule 56. See Reed v. Bennett, 312 F.3d 1190, 1195 (10th Cir. 2002).
Summary judgment is appropriate on an uncontested argument, only if the moving party demonstrates that no genuine issue of material fact exists and that it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Id. "By failing to file a response . . ., the nonmoving party waives the right to respond or to controvert the facts asserted in the summary judgment motion." Id. The court accepts as true all material facts asserted and properly supported in the summary judgment motion. Id. But only if those facts entitle the moving party to judgment as a matter of law should the court grant summary judgment. Id.
CTS has demonstrated that no genuine issue as to a material fact exists as to Fryer's actual disability claim. Further, having reviewed the evidence presented, the Court has determined that Fryer cannot demonstrate that he is actually disabled for purposes of the ADA.

Regarded as Disabled
For a plaintiff to prevail on a "regarded as disabled" claim, he must show that he has an impairment that "does not substantially limit major life activities but is treated by a covered entity as constituting such limitation." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2( l )(1). [*9]  See also Jones v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 502 F.3d 1176, 1190 (10th Cir.2007) (stating that in a regarded-as suit, "a plaintiff must show that an employer has mistaken beliefs about the plaintiff's abilities: the employer must believe either that one has a substantially limiting impairment that one does not have or that one has a substantially limiting impairment when, in fact, the impairment is not so limiting. ") (quoting Sutton v. United Air Lines, Inc., 527 U.S. 471, 119 S. Ct. 2139, 144 L. Ed. 2d 450 (1999)(internal quotation marks ommitted)).
Working is a "major life activity." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(i); EEOC v. Heartway Corp., 466 F.3d 1156, 1162 (10th Cir.2006). To prevail on a claim that his employer regarded him as substantially limited in the major life activity of working, Fryer must demonstrate that his employer regarded him as significantly restricted in performing either (1) a class of jobs; or (2) a broad range of jobs in various classes. See Heartway, 466 F.3d at 1163 (holding that "there must be sufficient evidence that the employer subjectively believed the employee to be significantly restricted as to a class of jobs or broad range of jobs in various classes."). The EEOC's regulations define a "class of jobs" as "[t]he job from which the individual has been disqualified because of an impairment, and the number and types of jobs utilizing similar training, knowledge, skills or abilities, within that geographical area, from which [*10]  the individual is also disqualified because of the impairment." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(3)(ii)(B). A "broad range of jobs" is defined as "[t]he job from which the individual has been disqualified because of an impairment, and the number and types of other jobs not utilizing similar training, knowledge, skills or abilities, within that geographical area, from which the individual is also disqualified because of the impairment." Id. § 1630.2(j)(3)(ii)(C).
Thus, the Court evaluates a "regarded as" claim under the ADA using a two-step inquiry. First, the Court must determine whether the employer regarded the employee as significantly restricted in performing his specific job because of an impairment. See Heartway, 466 F.3d at 1165. Next, the Court must determine whether the employer subjectively believed that the employee was significantly restricted in performing either a class of jobs or a broad range of jobs in various classes. Id. at 1163. Because this type of claim rests heavily on the employer's subjective state of mind, it is difficult to prove. Dillon v. Mountain Coal, L.L.C., 569 F.3d 1215, 1219 (10th Cir. 2009).
Fryer contends that CTS discriminated against him based on a mistaken belief that his Hepatitis C infection substantially limited him in the major life activity of working. He maintains that CTS regarded him as disabled when it [*11]  required him to obtain a work release after disclosing he had Hepatitis C and by not accepting the work release he obtained from Amy Olsen, a licensed physician's assistant. CTS denies that Fryer can show any evidence that would satisfy a "regarded as disabled" claim under ADA. It claims it needed to verify Fryer presented no safety threat to himself or others in the performance of his duties, not because CTS regarded Fryer as disabled, but because as part of his regular job duties he operated large trucks and at times hauled hazardous materials—a safety-sensitive position.
While the evidence does suggest that CTS was concerned about the safety of Fryer, its employees, and the general public, it does not demonstrate CTS' subjective impression that Fryer was significantly restricted in performing his job due to an impairment. If anything, requiring a fitness-for-duty evaluation was CTS' attempt to determine whether Fryer's condition would affect his performance. It does not demonstrate that CTS already had made that determination. Moreover, once Fryer presented a satisfactory release, he returned to work. Finally, the evidence does not demonstrate that CTS viewed Fryer as restricted [*12]  in either a class or broad range of classes of jobs. Accordingly, Fryer has not demonstrated that CTS subjectively regarded him as disabled.1

Qualified Individual
Fryer's asserts he was otherwise qualified for the ST II position. He "bears the burden of showing that []he is able to perform the essential functions of [his][]job with, or without reasonable accommodation." Hennagir, 581 F.3d at 1262 (citing Mason v. Avaya Commc'ns, Inc., 357 F.3d 1114, 1116 (10th Cir. 2004). "The ADA defines a "qualified individual with a disability" as "an individual with a disability who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds or desires." Kellogg, 544 F.3d Energy Safety Services, Inc., 544 F.3d 1121, 1127 (10th Cir. 2008); 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). As a condition to performing the essential functions of an employment position, however, an individual must first satisfy "the requisite skill, experience, education and other job-related requirements of the employment position." Id.; 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m). If a plaintiff fails to establish that he has met either of these requirement, he is not a "qualified individual" within the meaning of § 12111(8). Id.
CTS does not dispute Fryer's qualifications for the ST II position during the period prior to April, 2007. The company accepts, however, that after Fryer disclosed the potential side-affects [*13]  of his progressing illness and treatment, it sought a medical release to ensure he remained qualified for the ST II position. CTS' rationale for this action, as noted above, was to safeguard Fryer, the company, and the public. In essence, CTS argues that it was taking responsible action by requiring a medical release. CTS contends further, that when Fryer presented his light-duty work release in November, which included a weight restriction, he was unqualified for the ST II position. An ST II was required to lift more weight than Fryer's restriction permitted. Unable to lift the required amount, Fryer was no longer qualified for the ST II position. Failing to satisfy the job-related requirements of the ST II position, Fryer was not a qualified individual within the meaning of § 12111(8).
Fryer claims that he was a qualified individual and as such, CTS was obligated to avail him of reasonable accommodation when he presented a return-to-work order in May, 2007. He asserts further, that once presented, CTS should have allowed him to at least work in the shop. Fryer is not willing to accept, however, that being paid his normal salary, plus benefits and full bonuses was reasonable accommodation. The [*14]  Court does not agree.
The Court is satisfied that were CTS required to provide Fryer reasonable accommodation for his position as an ST II, it did so when it placed him on paid leave. The Court is also satisfied that when Fryer presented a sufficient return-to-work order signed by Dr. Hunter, CTS immediately began to schedule Fryer. The Court finds that the back injury Fryer received only weeks after returning to work was not a disability for which CTS was required to provide reasonable accommodation under the ADA. To his welfare, Fryer took advantage of the short-term benefits program during this time made available to CTS employees. In respect to the lack of light-duty work at CTS, Fryer produced no evidence, beyond unsupported allegation, that other employees received light-duty work as accommodation for a non-work-related injuries. Accordingly, Fryer has failed to show a genuine issue of dispute as to any material fact relative to the qualified individual element.

Discrimination
As a threshold matter, having failed to establish that he is disabled or was regarded as disabled for purposes of the ADA, Fryer's discrimination claims fail. See Hennagir, 581 F.3d at 1262. Assuming for the sake of argument, however, [*15]  that Fryer has established that CTS regarded him as disabled he still has not shown that he was a victim of discrimination. Fryer must state with particularity the kind of discriminatory conduct to which he was subjected. See Mackenzie v. Denver, 414 F.3d 1266, 1276 (10th Cir. 2005). Fryer contends that CTS discriminated against him by not providing him work in the yard after he disclosed that his disease had progressed. He argues that human resource personnel discriminated against him when in response to his disclosure about the possibility of depression and fatigue, the company placed him on paid leave pending a full medical release. Fryer also asserts CTS discriminated against him when he unsuccessfully attempted to return to work from his non-work related back injury by denying him light-duty work in the yard.
CTS contends that it did not discriminate against Fryer and points out that Fryer continued to work from January 2007 through the end of April 2007 without any incident of discrimination whatsoever. Further, Fryer was permitted to return to work after receiving appropriate clearance from his physician. According to CTS, even Fryer admits that the company performed exactly as promised which shows that CTS regarded him as able, not [*16]  disabled, thus precluding a claim of discrimination. Furthermore, CTS denies it discriminated against him by denying him light-duty work.
After Fryer injured his back at home, he sought and received short term disability benefits. He testified that at no time did he think he was disabled nor did he seek any accommodation for his back injury. CTS proffers that there were no light-duty assignments available, despite Fryer's allegations to the contrary. In fact, assuming Fryer was entitled to some form of accommodation, CTS posits that he was not entitled to the accommodation of his choice, he was entitled to reasonable accommodation, which includes unpaid leave.
Addressing Fryer's discrimination claim as relates to his Hepatitis C disclosure, the Court finds that CTS did not act in a discriminatory manner. Since Fryer was hired to operate DOT regulated vehicles, CTS was required to ensure he satisfied DOT's safety standards. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.15(e); Rice v. Genova Prod., Inc., 978 F.Supp. 813, 822 (N.D. Ind. 1997). This point is even more significant considering an ST II was often required to haul hazardous material. Thus, given the serious safety concerns raised by Fryer's self-disclosures, the Court finds that placing him on paid leave pending a satisfactory work release [*17]  was a reasonable response. Even though requiring a medical examination places the employee in an uncomfortable position, it does not rise to the level of discrimination, particularly since the medical examinations were job related and consistent with business necessity.2 Similarly, the Court finds Fryer's claim that CTS' denial of light-duty work falls short of being discriminatory conduct because it took no action against him.

Retaliation
In order to establish a prima facie case of retaliation under the ADA, Fryer must show that (1) he engaged in protected opposition to discrimination; (2) a reasonable employee would have found the challenged action materially adverse; and (3) casual connection exists between the protected activity and the materially adverse action. See Proctor v. United Parcel Serv., 502 F.3d 1200, 1208 (10th Cir. 2007).
The Court is not persuaded that CTS retaliated against Fryer. Although he engaged in protected activity on July 24, 2007, when he submitted a "Charge of Discrimination" to the Wyoming Fair Employment Program, having received Fryer's medical release, CTS began scheduling him as an ST II again. A few weeks later, he injured himself at home and was not permitted to work until early November. When he was permitted to [*18]  return to work he was subject to weight restrictions that precluded him from working as an ST II. At that time, he was informed that there was no light-duty work available. Although Fryer asserts that other's were afforded light-duty work, he offers nothing as support beyond allegation and his own testimony and that he took offense to working in the shop for the few weeks he worked in August. The Court disagrees that this evidence supports a finding that a reasonable employee would have found these actions materially adverse. Finally, the Court disagrees with Fryer's inference that a causal connection exists due the close timing of his filing a discrimination charge and the denial of light-duty work. In as much as these events pertain to Fryer, their relatedness ends there. Furthermore, Fryer has offered nothing more than the conclusion that a causal connection exists between these events. Thus, even viewing the evidence in a light most favorable to Fryer, it is not enough to create a material issue of genuine fact sufficient to survive summary judgment.

Constructive Discharge
"Constructive discharge occurs when the employer by its illegal discriminatory acts has made working conditions [*19]  so difficult that a reasonable person in the employee's position would feel compelled to resign." Sandoval v. City of Boulder, 388 F.3d 1312, 1325 (10th Cir.2004). In evaluating whether the employee's working conditions would cause such a feeling in a reasonable person, "[the Court applies] an objective test under which neither the employee's subjective views of the situation, nor her employer's subjective intent ... are relevant." Tran v. Trs. of State Colleges. in Colo., 355 F.3d 1263, 1270 (10th Cir.2004). "The question is not whether the employee's resignation resulted from the employer's actions, but whether the employee had any other reasonable choice but to resign in light of those actions." Id. The plaintiff's burden in a constructive discharge case is substantial. Showing that the employer's conduct meets the definition of "tangible employment action" or "adverse employment action" is "not necessarily sufficient to establish a constructive discharge because a constructive discharge requires a showing that the conditions imposed by the employer are not only tangible or adverse, but intolerable." Id. at 1270-71; see also Penn. State Police v. Suders, 542 U.S. 129, 146, 124 S. Ct. 2342, 159 L. Ed. 2d 204 (2004) ("A hostile-environment constructive discharge claim entails something more [than conduct that amounts to actionable harassment]"); Garrett v. Hewlett-Packard Co., 305 F.3d 1210, 1221 (10th Cir.2002) (stating that "[t]he bar is quite high in such cases.").
CTS denies that Fryer [*20]  was constructively discharged. CTS contends that Fryer alleges no unlawful conduct on its part and that he resigned voluntarily. Further, CTS alleges that since Fryer was subject to lifting restrictions that were lower than those of an ST II, he was no longer a qualified individual with a disability for purposes of the ADA. As such, CTS could not have discriminated against him by failing to provide light-duty work and allegedly forcing him to quit. Fryer responds that he lost his short-term disability income when he produced a back to work order from his physician, that he had been denied light-duty work, and he was subject to unusual scrutiny and isolation when he returned to work in July. He further contends that he could not afford to go without work and as a result, felt compelled to resign.
Under the instant facts, the Court cannot find that Fryer was constructively discharged. First, Fryer offers no factual circumstances that rise to the level that a reasonable person would find intolerable. Second, the Court is skeptical that Fryer was left with no alternative but to resign, particularly since he admits that he never inquired into other alternatives. Accordingly, Fryer has not [*21]  shown a genuine issue of material fact exists as to his constructive discharge claim.

Fryer's Erisa claims
ERISA § 510, codified at 29 U.S.C. § 1140, precludes any person, among other things, from discharging or otherwise discriminating against a plan participant "for the purpose of interfering with the attainment of any right to which such participant may become entitled under the plan. 29 U.D.C. § 1140. To prevail under § 510, an employee must demonstrate that the defendant had the specific intent to interfere with his ERISA rights. Winkel v. Kennecott Holdings, Corp., 3 Fed.Appx. 697, 706 (10th Cir. 2001) (citing Phelps v. Field Real Estate, Co. 991 F.2d 645, 649 (10th Cir. 1993). The employee can satisfy his burden by relying on either direct or circumstantial proof of the defendant's intent. Id. (citing Garrat v. Walker, 164 F.3d 1249, 1256 (10th Cir. 1998).
Although Fryer alleges in his complaint that CTS was aware that Fryer was a candidate for Interferon treatments and that Interferon treatments are expensive, he fails to address CTS' arguments against his claim at the summary judgment phase. CTS, however, asserts that Fryer received total health benefits while on paid leave and that an allegation of interference is preposterous. Additionally, CTS contends that during the time Fryer was out of work for his non-work-related back injury, he applied for and received short term benefits. Upon termination [*22]  of his short term benefits he failed to inquire about the possibility of long term benefits. Finally, Fryer admits that he never experienced a lapse in his benefits and he denies that CTS intended to interfere with his receipt of Interferon treatments In sum, CTS contends that absent evidence to the contrary, CTS is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
Curiously, Fryer did not address this claim in his response brief. This Court, however, cannot grant summary judgment on CTS' brief alone. It must make the additional determination that judgment for the moving party is "appropriate" under rule 56. Reed v. Bennett, 312 F.3d 1190, 1195 (10th Cir. 2002). Thus, summary judgment is appropriate only if CTS demonstrates that no genuine issue of material fact exists and that it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. See id
CTS asserts that it did not interfere with Fryer's ERISA protected rights. To the contrary, CTS asserts that it provided Fryer every benefit without hesitation. The Court agrees. Nothing in the evidence now before the Court indicates that CTS interfered with Fryer's medical treatment. Further, Fryer's has not demonstrated that CTS had the specific intent to interfere with his ERISA protected rights. Accordingly, the Court is [*23]  satisfied no genuine issue as to any material fact exists and that CTS is entitled to judgment as a matter of law as to Fryer's ERISA interference claim.
III. Conclusion
Summary judgment is appropriate in favor of CTS on all Fryer's claims. Accordingly, it is hereby ORDERED that Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment is GRANTED.
DATED this 19th day of November, 2009.
/s/ William F. Downes
Chief United States District Judge


End of Document

