Godinez v. Alta-Dena Certified Dairy, LLC
United States District Court for the Central District of California
February 25, 2016, Decided; February 25, 2016, Filed
CV 15-01652 RSWL (SSx)

Reporter
2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 23290 *; 2016 WL 756460
ROSI GODINEZ, an individual, Plaintiff, v. ALTA-DENA CERTIFIED DAIRY, LLC, a limited liability company; MARIA FLORES, an individual and DOES 1 to 20, inclusive, Defendants.
Subsequent History: Decision reached on appeal by Godinez v. Alta-Dena Certified Dairy, 2018 U.S. App. LEXIS 5890 (9th Cir. Cal., Mar. 8, 2018)
Prior History: Godinez v. Alta-Dena Certified Dairy LLC, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 83913 (C.D. Cal., June 17, 2014)
Counsel:  [*1] For Rosi Godinez, an individual, Plaintiff: Allison Leah Stone, C Michael Alder, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Marni Beth Folinsky, AlderLaw PC, Los Angeles, CA; Donald C Potter, LEAD ATTORNEY, Law Offices of Donald Potter, Pasadena, CA.
For Alta-Dena Certified Dairy, LLC, a limited liability company, Defendant: Daniel Harris Handman, LEAD ATTORNEY, Sayaka Karitani, Hirschfeld Kraemer LLP, Santa Monica, CA.
Judges: HONORABLE RONALD S.W. LEW, Senior United States District Judge.
Opinion by: RONALD S.W. LEW
Opinion



ORDER Re: DEFENDANT'S MOTION IN LIMINE NO. 1 [60]; DEFENDANT'S MOTION IN LIMINE NO. 2 [62]; DEFENDANT'S MOTION IN LIMINE NO. 3 [61].

I. INTRODUCTION
Currently before the Court is Defendant Alta-Dena Certified Dairy, LLC's ("Defendant") Motion in Limine No. 1 to Exclude Testimony Re: Coworkers Offered to Assist with Plaintiff's Job Duties [60]; Defendant's Motion in Limine No. 2 to Exclude Testimony Re: Accomodation(s) Not Requested [62]; and Defendant's Motion in Limine No. 3 to Exclude Evidence Re: Additional Payments for Negative Tax Consequences [61]. The Court, having reviewed all papers and arguments submitted pertaining to these Motions, NOW FINDS AND RULES AS FOLLOWS: The Court hereby DENIES Defendant's Motions in [*2]  Limine Nos. 1 and 2, and GRANTS Defendant's Motion in Limine No. 3.

II. DISCUSSION
A. Defendant's Motion in Limine No. 1
Defendant seeks to preclude Plaintiff Rosi Godinez ("Plaintiff") from presenting evidence "regarding the potential to reallocate some of [Plaintiff's] job functions to other employees." Def.'s Mot. in Limine No. 1, 2:3-7, ECF No. 60, 3:3-10. Plaintiff seeks to introduce such evidence in support of her claim that Defendant failed to reasonably accommodate her disability in violation of the California Fair Employment and House Act ("FEHA"). Defendant contends that its Motion "is made on the grounds that such a reallocation is, as a matter of law, not an accommodation that Defendant need provide. As such, any evidence is irrelevant and would tend to be more prejudicial than probative." Id. at 3:3-10. Defendant brings this motion on the grounds of Federal Rules of Evidence 401, 402, and 403.
The Federal Rules of Evidence make clear that only evidence that is relevant is admissible. Fed. R. Evid. 402; see also U.S. v. Kosmisaruk, 885 F.2d 490, 493-94 (9th Cir. 1989)(court may exclude irrelevant evidence from presentation to the jury). Even if evidence is deemed relevant, it may still be excluded if its probative value is substantially outweighed by the dangers of unfair prejudice, [*3]  confusions of the issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or needless presentation of cumulative evidence. Fed. R. Evid. 403.
Defendant argues that "[i]t is fundamental accommodation law that an employer never has to reallocate essential functions to other employees as a reasonable accommodation for a disabled employee." Def.'s Mot. in Limine No. 1, ECF No. 60, 3:12-14 (emphasis added) (citing Dark v. Curry County, 451 F.3d 1078, 1089 (9th Cir. 2006)). However, in Defendant's Motion, Defendant seeks to exclude a broader category of evidence, specifically "testimony or other evidence regarding the potential to reallocate certain of [Plaintiff's] job functions to other employees." Id. at 3:5-7 (emphasis added). Defendant's Motion is problematic as it does not further specify which testimony or evidence it seeks to exclude, and as such is likely over-inclusive. For this initial reason, the Court DENIES Defendant's Motion in Limine No. 1 [60].
Furthermore, as this Court discussed in its previous Order granting in part Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment [54], there remains a triable issue as to what the "essential functions" of Plaintiff's position are, and consequently, whether or not Defendant failed to provide reasonable [*4]  accommodations in accordance with FEHA. See Order dated 1/29/16, ECF No. 54, 16:5-6. Accordingly, upon the jury's determination of which functions of Plaintiff's position were "marginal" and which were "essential," evidence as to whether Defendant could have reallocated other employee's marginal job functions to accommodate Plaintiff's disability will be directly relevant to her reasonable accommodation and interactive process claims against Defendant. Further, this Court finds that such evidence would be far more probative of Plaintiff's claims than prejudicial to Defendant. Accordingly, for this additional reason, this Court DENIES Defendant's Motion in Limine No. 1 [60].
B. Defendant's Motion in Limine No. 2
Defendant seeks to "exclude testimony or other evidence regarding [Plaintiff's] proposed accommodations that she failed to suggest or even mention during the interactive process." Def.'s Mot. in Limine No. 2, ECF No. 62, 3:5-8. Defendant brings this Motion on the grounds of Federal Rules of Evidence 401, 402, and 403, namely, that such evidence should be excluded because it is both irrelevant and tends to be more prejudicial than probative.
Pursuant to section 12940(n) of FEHA, both an employee and employer is required to participate  [*5] in good faith in the interactive process. Specifically, the interactive process imposes burdens on both the employer and employee. An employee need only give notice of his or her disability and potential need for accommodation in order to trigger the employer's duty to engage in a cooperative, interactive process. See Prilliman v. United Airlines, 53 Cal. App. 4th 935, 950-951, 62 Cal. Rptr. 2d 142 (1997). "Once the interactive process is initiated, the employer's obligation to engage in the process in good faith is continuous." Scotch v. Art Institute of California-Orange County, Inc., 173 Cal. App. 4th 986, 1013, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d 338 (2009). "[T]he employer's obligation to engage in the interactive process extends beyond the first attempt at accommodation and continues when the employee asks for a different accommodation or where the employer is aware that the initial accommodation is failing and further accommodation is needed. This rule fosters the framework of cooperative problem-solving contemplated by the ADA,1 by encouraging employers to seek to find accommodations that really work . . . ." Humphrey v. Memorial Hospitals Ass'n, 239 F.3d 1128, 1138 (9th Cir. 2001).
Significantly, the employee [*6]  does not bear an exclusive burden of identifying reasonable accommodations. "To put the entire burden for finding a reasonable accommodation on the disabled employee or, effectively, to exempt the employer from the process of identifying reasonable accommodations, conflicts with the goals of the ADA." Barnett v. U.S. Air, Inc., 228 F.3d 1105, 1113-14 (9th Cir. 2000) (vacated on other grounds, U.S. Airways, Inc. v. Barnett, 535 U.S. 391, 122 S. Ct. 1516, 152 L. Ed. 2d 589 (2002)). The Ninth Circuit has reasoned: "Employees do not have at their disposal the extensive information concerning possible alternative positions or possible accommodations which employers have. Putting the entire burden on the employee to identify a reasonable accommodation risks shutting out many workers simply because they do not have the superior knowledge of the workplace that the employer has." Id.
Accordingly, in the present case, Plaintiff did not have an exclusive affirmative duty to raise reasonable accommodations during the interactive process in order to sustain her claims for violation of FEHA sections 12940(n) and (m). Rather, Defendant has a correlating duty to identify and raise alternative reasonable accommodations, in furtherance of the aims of FEHA's interactive process.2
Furthermore, the employee need not raise all reasonable accommodations during the interactive process, but may instead identify additional accommodations during the litigation, so long as these accommodations were available during the interactive process. Scotch, 173 Cal. App. 4th at 995. In Scotch, the court analyzed three leading cases on the issue, and determined: "In light of the FEHA's remedial purpose, we reconcile these cases and hold to recover under section 12940, subdivision (n), the employee must identify a reasonable accommodation that was available at the time the interactive process should have occurred. We recognize that during the interactive process itself the employee does not have the same access to information about possible accommodations as the employer does. But, we also hold, [*8]  through the litigation process, including discovery, the employee must be able to identify a reasonable accommodation that would have been available during the interactive process." Id. at 995.
As discussed in this Court's Order granting in part Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment, it is clear from the record that Plaintiff has raised accommodations that were "reasonable on their face" and available during the interactive process. Order dated 1/29/16, ECF No. 54, 16:1-15 (citing Airways, Inc. v. Barnett, 535 U.S. 391, 401, 402, 122 S. Ct. 1516, 152 L. Ed. 2d 589 (2002)). Upon review of the relevant case law, evidence and testimony proffered by Plaintiff at the litigation stage relating to previously available reasonable accommodations is clearly permissible. Further, such evidence is certainly relevant to Plaintiff's claims against Defendant for failure to accommodate and failure to engage in the interactive process. As such, this evidence cannot not be excluded pursuant to Federal Rules of Evidence 401 and 402. Finally, this Court finds no indication that the testimony at issue in the present Motion would be unfairly prejudicial or otherwise in violation of Federal Rule of Evidence 403. This Court thus DENIES Defendant's Motion in Limine No. 2 [62].
C. Defendant's Motion in Limine No. 3
Defendant seeks to exclude "testimony or other evidence [*9]  regarding any potential adverse tax consequences [Plaintiff] might suffer as a result of a lump sum damages award." Def.'s Mot. in Limine No. 3, 3:17-19, ECF No. 61. Defendant brings this Motion "on the grounds that such tax consequences are irrelevant, and by their speculative nature would be more prejudicial than probative." Id. at 3:19-21. Defendant contends that "[t]here is nothing in the FEHA or the case law that supports including negative tax consequences in a damages award to a prevailing FEHA plaintiff. Given the absence of statutory or case law, and the fact that [Plaintiff's] economist cannot predict, with any reasonable certainty, the future federal and state tax rates or tax positions of [Plaintiff] and her husband, the evidence and argument regarding any potential negative tax consequences should be excluded." Id. at 3:21-27.
If the jury finds in Plaintiff's favor, Plaintiff will receive an award of back pay and front pay as part of a lump-sum damages award. Such an award would push Plaintiff into a higher tax bracket and cause her to pay more taxes than she otherwise would have paid. The question presented by Defendant's Motion in Limine No. 3 is whether a "gross up" of damages [*10]  calculated by Plaintiff's economics expert, to compensate Plaintiff for the potential negative tax consequences of a lump sum damages award, should be excluded at trial. This Court finds such evidence to be speculative, prejudicial, and neither probative of damages nor appropriate to present to the jury.
FEHA permits individual suits for damages to enforce its provisions, but it does not specify what damages are recoverable. See Gov. Code § 12965(b), (c). The plain language of FEHA is thus silent as to any "gross up" of damages to compensate for any potential negative tax consequences of a lump sum FEHA damages award.
This Court finds that Plaintiff has proffered no compelling reasoning or authority to warrant a presentation of such a "gross up" of Plaintiff's tax consequences to the jury, for either back pay or front pay. Plaintiff simply argues that "[i]n order to make [Plaintiff] whole for the injury caused by her wrongful termination, [Defendant] is liable for the additional taxes she will have to pay." Pl.'s Opp. to Def.'s Mot. in Limine No. 2, ECF No. 65, 2:10-12. Plaintiff does not support this contention with sufficient or applicable authority. Furthermore, this Court finds that a presentation [*11]  to the jury of possible negative tax consequences resulting from a favorable damages award is inherently speculative and thus must be excluded in its entirety pursuant to Federal Rule of Evidence 403. In order to proffer such evidence to the jury, Plaintiff would have to establish with "reasonable certainty" what damages Plaintiff would incur. Eckert Cold Storage, Inc. v. Behl, 943 F.Supp. 1230 (E.D. Cal. 2006).
Finally, the Ninth Circuit has refused to allow similar tax "gross ups," finding that everyone has an obligation to pay taxes and that such taxes are imposed by the Internal Revenue Code, not by the defendant's wrongful conduct. DCD Programs, Ltd. v. Leighton, 90 F.3d 1442 (9th Cir. 1996). In short, the tax implications of a lump-sum damage award are not probative of Plaintiff's alleged damages resulting from Defendant's conduct, and thus are an inappropriate and prejudicial issue to put before a jury. Accordingly, this Court GRANTS Defendant's Motion in Limine No. 3 [61].
IT IS SO ORDERED.
DATED: February 25, 2016
/s/ RONALD S.W. LEW
HONORABLE RONALD S.W. LEW
Senior U.S. District Judge


End of Document

