Gonzales v. Pipe
United States District Court for the Western District of Texas, Waco Division
June 23, 2020, Decided
CASE NO. 6:19-cv-00181-ADA-JCM

Reporter
2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 268642 *; 2020 WL 13609936
JOE ANGEL GONZALES, Plaintiff, v. CHARLOTTE PIPE AND FOUNDRY COMPANY, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Joe Angel Gonzales, Plaintiff: David G. Langenfeld, Leichter Law Firm, Austin, TX USA.
For Charlotte Pipe and Foundry Company, Defendant: Andrew R. Gray, LEAD ATTORNEY, Littler Mendelson PC, Austin, TX USA; Steven R. McCown, LEAD ATTORNEY, Littler Mendelson, P.C., Dallas, TX USA; Eric Lance Vinson, Littler Mendelson, P.C., Austin, TX USA.
Judges: JEFFREY C. MANSKE, UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE. HONORABLE ALAN D ALBRIGHT, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: JEFFREY C. MANSKE
Opinion



REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE
TO: THE HONORABLE ALAN D ALBRIGHT
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE
This Report and Recommendation is submitted to the Court pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(C), Fed. R. Civ. P. 72(b), and Rules 1(f) and 4(b) of Appendix C of the Local Rules of the United States District Court for the Western District of Texas, Local Rules for the Assignment of Duties to United States Magistrate Judges. Before the Court are Defendant Charlotte Pipe and Foundry Company's Motion to Strike Plaintiff's Expert Report (hereafter the "Motion to Strike," ECF No. 24) and Defendant Charlotte Pipe and Foundry Company's Motion for Summary Judgment (hereafter "Summary Judgment Motion," ECF No. 16). For the following reasons, the Court ORDERS Defendant's Motion to Strike DENIED and RECOMMENDS Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment be GRANTED.

I.

INTRODUCTION
Plaintiff Joe [*2]  Angel Gonzales (hereafter, "Plaintiff") is an individual and resident of the State of Texas. Pl.'s Am. Comp. at 1, ECF No. 13. Plaintiff began his employment with Defendant Charlotte Pipe and Foundry Company (hereafter, "Defendant"), a corporation doing business in Texas, in 1998. Id. at 1-2. Defendant is primarily in the business of manufacturing cast iron and plastic pipe and fittings. Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. at 2, ECF No. 16. At the time of his termination, Plaintiff was employed as a "blender" or "mixer." Pl.'s Am. Comp. at 3.
In approximately 2010, Plaintiff was diagnosed with diabetes. Id. at 2. Plaintiff testifies to the fact that he experiences an urgent need to urinate, which is a common symptom of diabetes. Pl.'s Resp. to Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. at 8, ECF No. 21. It is undisputed that Defendant was not aware of this diabetes-related limitation prior to the incident, but there is a dispute as to whether Defendant was made aware of it after the incident. Def.'s Mot. Summ J. at 8; Pl.'s Am. Comp. at 4.
On June 28, 2017, while performing his normal job responsibilities, Plaintiff entered the "pump station" to check some pipes and gauges while a train car was being unloaded. Id. at 3. [*3]  It was at this time that Plaintiff alleges to have experienced a sudden and urgent need to urinate. Id. Believing that he could not reach the nearest restroom in time, Plaintiff decided to urinate through a gap between the metal wall and concrete floor of the pump station (so that the urine would not remain inside the building). Id. When he finished urinating, Plaintiff turned around to find one of his supervisors, Matt Feggestad1 standing behind him. Id.
Later that same day, Plaintiff was called into Mr. Feggestad's office to discuss the incident with Mr. Feggestad and Plaintiff's immediate supervisor, Julius Decipulo. Id. at 4. As mentioned above, the parties disagree as to whether Plaintiff expressed in this meeting that his urgent need to urinate was caused by his diabetes. Plaintiff posits that he told his supervisors that his "diabetes sometimes causes him to have a very urgent need to urinate and [that] at times he does not have much warning before this happens." Id. Defendant alleges that Plaintiff merely stated that he urgently needed to use the restroom and made no mention of his diabetes. Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. at 8.
After this meeting, Mr. Feggestad contacted [*4]  Defendant's human resources department in North Carolina. Id. at 9. Mr. Feggestad explained the incident to Fred Griffin, an employee in Defendant's human resources department, and provided his own statement, as well as that of Mr. Decipulo. Id. A decision was reached that Plaintiff had engaged in "disorderly or immoral conduct on Company Property," which was grounds for immediate termination. Id.
The parties disagree as to who was involved in making this decision. Plaintiff alleges that Mr. Feggestad was directly involved in the termination decision. Pl.'s Resp. to Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. at 17. Defendant, on the other hand, states that only the human resources department and Defendants's Senior Vice President made the decision. Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. at 9. It appears undisputed that the human resources department had no knowledge of Plaintiff's diabetes, but Mr. Feggestad's knowledge of Plaintiff's diabetes is unclear. See Def.'s Mot. Summ J. at 8; see also Pl.'s Am. Comp. at 4. Mr. Feggestad then informed Plaintiff of his termination on July 6, 2017. Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. at 9.
On March 1, 2019, Plaintiff filed the present suit, asserting causes of action under Title I of the Americans [*5]  with Disabilities Act (hereafter "ADA"), 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101, et seq. and the Texas Commission on Human Rights Act, Tex. Lab. Code §§ 21.001 et seq. The specific violations alleged are (a) terminating the employment of Plaintiff because of his disability, or, in the alternative, (b) not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical impairment of Plaintiff, who was an employee and otherwise qualified individual with a disability. Pl.'s Am. Comp. at 4.
Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment argues that Plaintiff's first claim should fail due to the fact that: (1) Plaintiff is not "disabled" for ADA purposes; (2) Plaintiff did not face an adverse employment decision on account of his disability, because Plaintiff never made his supervisors aware of the fact that his medical condition played a role in causing him to lose control of his bladder; and (3) Plaintiff cannot show that he was replaced by or treated less favorably than a non-disabled employee. Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. at 1, 17. Alternatively, Defendant argues that, even if Plaintiff can make a prima facie case of discrimination, summary judgment is still proper due to the fact that Defendant had a legitimate, non-discriminatory [*6]  reason for terminating Plaintiff's employment, and it cannot be shown that this purported reason was mere pretext for discrimination. Id. at 18-19.
Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment also argues that Plaintiff's "failure to accommodate" claim should fail because Plaintiff: (1) never requested an ADA accommodation prior to the incident; (2) affirmatively disclaimed any need for a future accommodation after the incident; and (3) proposes a form of accommodation that has been soundly rejected by the Fifth Circuit. Id. Plaintiff timely filed a response opposing Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment. Pl.'s Resp. to Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. Defendant then filed a Reply in Support of their Motion for Summary Judgment. Def.'s Reply in Supp. Of Def.'s Mot. Summ. J., ECF No. 23.
Also at issue is the admissibility of Plaintiff's expert report, a declaration of Dr. Rina Patel (hereafter, "Expert Report"). Pl.'s Resp. to Def.'s Mot. Summ. J., Ex. C, ECF No. 21-3. The Expert Report was filed in support of the Plaintiff's Response to Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment and stands for three main propositions:
(1) Plaintiff was suffering from uncontrolled type 2 diabetes mellitus which caused uncontrolled [*7]  urination; (2) Diabetes substantially limits Plaintiff's major bodily functions such as his endocrine system and elimination of bowel and bladder; and (3) The urination incident that led to the termination of Plaintiff's employment was caused by the diabetes which substantially limited major bodily functions of Plaintiff.
Pl.'s Resp. to Def.'s Mot. to Strike Pl.'s Expert Report at 2, ECF No. 26.
Defendant argues Dr. Patel's Expert Report should be excluded because her opinions: "(1) constitute impermissible legal conclusions; (2) run directly counter to Plaintiff's sworn testimony and the very medical records Dr. Patel purported to review in support of her opinion; and (3) are unduly prejudicial." Def.'s Mot. to Strike Pl.'s Expert Report at 2, ECF No. 24. Plaintiff then timely filed a response to Defendant's Motion to Strike. Pl.'s Resp. to Def.'s Mot. to Strike Pl.'s Expert Report. Defendant timely filed a supplemental reply to their Motion to Strike. Def.'s Reply in Supp. of Def.'s Mot. to Strike Pl.'s Expert Report, ECF No. 28.

II.

RELEVANT LAW

A. Federal Rule of Evidence 702
Federal Rule of Evidence 702 governs the admissibility of expert testimony and provides:
if scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge will assist the trier [*8]  of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue, a witness qualified as an expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education, may testify thereto in form of an opinion or otherwise, if (1) the testimony is based upon sufficient facts and data, (2) the testimony is the product of reliable principles and methods, and (3) the witness has applied the principles reliably to the facts of the case.
This rule requires a proffered expert's testimony be both scientifically reliable and relevant to a disputed issue. Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. 579, 579, 113 S. Ct. 2786, 125 L. Ed. 2d 469 (1993). Regarding the former, the reasoning or methodology underlying the testimony must be scientifically valid. Curtis v. M & S Petroleum, Inc., 174 F.3d 661, 668 (5th Cir. 1999). The expert at issue must also be qualified to apply the reasoning or methodology reliably. Daubert, 509 U.S. at 592-93; Donald Palmer Co., Inc. v. C.I.R., 84 F.3d 431, 431 (5th Cir. 1996) (per curiam).
Regarding the latter, the reasoning or methodology must be applicable to the specific facts of the case. Daubert, 509 U.S. at 592-93. The district court, as part of its "gatekeeper" function, is tasked with determining whether these requirements have been met. Id. at 589. The burden of establishing the admissibility and relevance of the expert testimony is on the party offering the testimony. Paz v. Brush Engineered Materials, Inc., 555 F.3d 383, 388 (5th Cir. 2009).
The Supreme Court identified several factors for expert reliability, including: (1) [*9]  whether the expert's theory can be or has been tested; (2) whether the theory or technique has been subjected to peer review and publication; (3) the known or potential rate of error of a technique or theory when applied; (4) the existence and maintenance of standards controlling the technique's operation; and (5) whether the theory or method has been generally accepted by the scientific community. Daubert, 509 U.S. at 593-94.
These factors are far from a "definitive checklist[]" and instead must be flexibly applied. Kumho Tire Co. v. Carmichael, 526 U.S. 137, 141, 119 S. Ct. 1167, 143 L. Ed. 2d 238 (1999). Further, the Fifth Circuit has held that the Daubert factors are "generally not appropriate for use in assessing the relevance and reliability of clinical medical testimony." Moore v. Ashland Chemical, Inc., 126 F.3d 679, 689 (5th Cir. 1997). "Instead, the trial court as gatekeeper should determine whether the doctor's proposed testimony is soundly grounded in the principles and methodology of his clinical field of medicine." Id. at 689-90.
Alternatively, the relevance of expert testimony is set by the "baseline" standard of Federal Rule of Evidence 402. Daubert, 509 U.S. at 587. Expert testimony is relevant if it has "any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be without the evidence." Fed. R. Civ. P. 401. Importantly, the relevant testimony must [*10]  also satisfy the reliability standard above: "scientific validity for one purpose is not necessarily scientific validity for other, unrelated purposes." Daubert, 509 U.S. at 591. As the Court noted, "Rule 702's 'helpfulness' standard requires a valid scientific connection to the pertinent inquiry as a precondition of admissibility." Id.

B. Summary Judgment — Fed. R. Civ. P. 56
Summary judgment is appropriate "if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). A dispute is not genuine if the trier of fact could not, after an examination of the record, find for the nonmoving party. Matsushita Elec. Indus., Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 587, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986). The burden of demonstrating that no genuine dispute of material fact exists lies with the moving party. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986).
That said, the moving party can satisfy its burden either by producing evidence negating a material fact or pointing out the absence of evidence supporting a material element of the nonmovant's claim. Duplantis v. Shell Offshore, Inc., 948 F.2d 187, 190 (5th Cir. 1991). Throughout this analysis, the court must view the movant's evidence and all factual inferences therefrom in a light most favorable to the party opposing summary judgment. Tolan v. Cotton, 572 U.S. 650, 656, 134 S. Ct. 1861, 188 L. Ed. 2d 895 (2014).

C. Americans with Disabilities Act
The ADA "prohibits an employer from discriminating against a [*11]  'qualified individual' with a disability on the basis of that disability." EEOC v. LHC Group, Inc., 773 F.3d 688, 694 (5th Cir. 2014). Under the ADA, a party seeking to establish a prima facie case of discrimination "must prove: (1) that he has a disability; (2) that he was qualified for the job; and (3) that he was subject to an adverse employment decision on account of his disability." Clark v. Champion Nat'l Sec., Inc., 952 F.3d 570, 582 (5th Cir. 2020). Defendant suggests that the test also contains a fourth element — that the employee was replaced by or treated less favorably than a non-disabled employee. See Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. at 11.
However, the majority of recent Fifth Circuit cases favor the above-described, three-part test for discrimination under the ADA. See Clark, 952 F.3d at 582; LHC Group, Inc., 773 F.3d at 697; Gonzalez v. UPS, 777 F. App'x 735, 737-38 (5th Cir. 2019). In EEOC v. LHC Group, Inc., the Fifth Circuit disavowed the purported fourth element because it "requires plaintiffs to prove causation twice. This requirement is inconsistent with McDonnell Douglas and at odds with the underlying purpose of anti-discrimination legislation." LHC Group, Inc., 773 F.3d at 696-97. For this reason, this disability discrimination analysis will proceed under the three-part test.
To make a prima facie case, the employee "may either present direct evidence that [he] was discriminated against because of h[is] disability or alternatively proceed [*12]  under the burden-shifting analysis first articulated in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green." LHC Group, Inc., 773 F.3d at 694. Under the McDonnell Douglas approach, the plaintiff first must establish a prima facie case of discrimination. McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 802, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). If the plaintiff succeeds in doing so, the burden then shifts "to the defendant to articulate some legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason" for the adverse employment decision. Id. If the defendant does so, the burden then shifts back to the plaintiff to demonstrate that the defendant's proffered reason is in fact pretext for the claimed discrimination. Id. at 804.
In the alternative, Plaintiff also presents a failure to accommodate claim under the ADA. The Fifth Circuit has held, citing U.S.C. § 12112(a), that discrimination for ADA purposes includes the "failure to make reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability ... unless such covered entity can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship." Feist v. Louisiana, 730 F.3d 450, 452 (5th Cir. 2013). In order to establish a failure to accommodate claim, a plaintiff must prove the following: "(1) the plaintiff is a 'qualified individual with a disability;' (2) the disability and its consequential limitations were 'known' by the covered employer; and (3) the employer [*13]  failed to make 'reasonable accommodations' for such known limitations." Id.

III.

ANALYSIS

A. Defendant's Motion to Strike Plaintiff's Expert Report
As discussed above, Defendant argues Dr. Patel's opinions: (1) constitute impermissible legal conclusions; (2) run directly counter to Plaintiff's testimony and the medical records Dr. Patel purported to review in support of her opinion, and thus are not based on sufficient facts or data; and (3) are unduly prejudicial. Def.'s Mot. to Strike Pl.'s Expert Report at 2. For the following reasons, the Court ORDERS Defendant's Motion to Strike DENIED.

1. Dr. Patel's declaration does not contain impermissible legal conclusions.
First, Defendant argues that Dr. Patel's declaration should be excluded because it contains impermissible legal conclusions. Def.'s Mot. to Strike Pl.'s Expert Report at 4. When expert testimony takes the form of legal opinions or conclusions, it invades the "province of the court." Perez v. Texas, No. 11-CA-360-OLG-JES-XR, 2014 WL 12480146 at *2 (W.D. Tex. July 9, 2014). Experts are not permitted to assert what law governs an issue or what the applicable law means. Askanase v. Fatjo, 130 F. 3d 657, 673 (5th Cir. 1997). While Dr. Patel's declaration does make mention of the ADA and ADA Amendments Act of 2008 (hereafter, "ADAAA"), it does more than simply assert what [*14]  law governs the issue at bar.
Expert opinions constitute inadmissible legal conclusions when they "do little more than tell the jury what result to reach." Woods v. Lecureux, 110 F.3d 1215, 1220 (6th Cir. 1997). As Plaintiff points out, however, the jury could accept all of Dr. Patel's opinions as true and still find in favor of Defendant. Pl.'s Resp. to Def.'s Mot. to Strike Pl.'s Expert Report at 5. Dr. Patel's testimony can be summarized as follows: (1) Plaintiff was diagnosed with diabetes; (2) frequent urination is a common symptom of diabetes; and (3) in her medical opinion, Plaintiff's diabetes caused the urination incident at issue, which led to the termination of Plaintiff's employment. Pl.'s Resp. to Def.'s Mot. Summ. J., Ex. C. Even if every statement by Dr. Patel is given full weight, liability is not per se established against the Defendant. A reasonable juror could find that either Defendant lacked notice of Plaintiff's disability, or Plaintiff was not fired because of his disability.
In its reply, Defendant also argues that Dr. Patel's testimony is an impermissible legal conclusion because it reaches a case-determinative issue. Def.'s Reply in Supp. of Def.'s Mot. to Strike Pl.'s Expert Report at 4. This argument fails, because [*15]  Federal Rule of Evidence 704 expressly permits expert opinions to embrace ultimate issues in a case. FED. R. EVID. 704(a). Dr. Patel's testimony, therefore, does not offer "impermissible legal conclusions" and should not be stricken on that ground.

2. Dr. Patel's opinions are based on sufficient facts and data.
Second, Defendant argues that Dr. Patel's declaration should be excluded because it runs counter to Plaintiff's testimony and medical records, and therefore is not based on sufficient facts and data. Def.'s Mot. to Strike Pl.'s Expert Report at 5. This argument is similarly unavailing. Under Federal Rule of Evidence 702 and Daubert, the district court is required to act as a "gatekeeper" regarding expert testimony. Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. at 589. The Fifth Circuit has held, however, that the application of the Daubert reliability factors is generally inappropriate for assessing the reliability of clinical medical testimony. Moore, 126 F. 3d at 689. Dr. Patel's testimony is not a scientific study; instead, it is a clinical diagnosis. See generally Pl.'s Resp. to Def.'s Mot. Summ. J., Ex. C. In such cases, the Fifth Circuit clarifies that the focus should be on "whether the doctor's proposed testimony is soundly grounded in the principles and methodology of his clinical field of medicine." Id. at 689-90. Under this standard, the Fifth [*16]  Circuit has afforded great weight to whether a medical expert has reviewed a plaintiff's medical history in determining whether to admit that expert's testimony. See, e.g., McNabney v. Lab. Corp. of Am., 153 F. App'x 293, 295 (5th Cir. 2005).
Judge Rodriguez's opinion in Mosley v. Bexar Cty. illustrates the application of this standard. No. SA-17-CV-00583-XR, 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 20924 (W.D. Tex. Feb. 5, 2020). Mosley, like the present case, involved medical expert testimony where the doctor never met with the plaintiff, and instead only relied on review of the plaintiff's medical records in forming the opinions in question. See id. In Mosley, the court did not find the lack of a meeting between doctor and plaintiff to militate in favor of striking the doctor's testimony. See id. Instead, the court held that review of a plaintiff's medical records, combined with the expert's medical experience, was sufficient to ensure the reliability of that expert's testimony. See id. Given the factual similarities between the two cases, the Court is persuaded that a similar result is warranted here.
Defendant's remaining arguments are also unpersuasive. First, Defendant speaks of a "fit" between the expert opinion and the data it is based on, in the context of Plaintiff's sworn testimony. Def.'s Mot. to Strike Pl.'s Expert Report at 6. [*17]  This is misguided. Dr. Patel makes clear that her opinion is based on Plaintiff's medical records as opposed to Plaintiff's testimony. See Pl.'s Resp. to Def.'s Mot. Summ. J., Ex. C. The necessary fit is between the opinion and the facts or data that it is based on. Moore, 151 F.3d at 276.
More significantly, Defendant discusses at length its objections to the admission of Dr. Patel's Report on the grounds that Dr. Patel's testimony is inaccurate. Id. at 7. The accuracy of conclusions reached is not the proper focus in deciding the admissibility of expert testimony. Daubert, 509 U.S. at 595 (stating that the focus under Rule 702 "must be solely on principles and methodology, not on the conclusions that they generate"). The veracity of Dr. Patel's conclusions is best left for cross examination. Id. at 596.
As a general rule, questions relating to the bases and sources of an expert's opinion affect the weight to be assigned to that opinion rather than its admissibility and should be left for the jury's consideration. Viterbo v. Dow Chem. Co., 826 F.2d 420, 422 (5th Cir. 1987). Therefore, the Court finds that Dr. Patel's testimony is admissible.

3. Admission of Dr. Patel's declaration would not be unduly prejudicial
Defendant's final argument in support of its Motion to Strike Dr. Patel's Report is admission [*18]  of Dr. Patel's opinions would be unduly prejudicial, making exclusion under Federal Rule of Evidence 403 proper. Def.'s Mot. to Strike Pl.'s Expert Report at 9. The Court disagrees. As discussed, Dr. Patel's testimony is sufficiently reliable to warrant admission, since it is based on her review of Plaintiff's medical records along with her medical experience. See McNabney, 153 F. App'x at 295.
Moreover, there are adequate safeguards in place against any prejudicial effect of Dr. Patel's testimony. For instance, the jury will be instructed that they are not required to believe Dr. Patel, and further that they are free to assign whatever weight they deem appropriate to the testimony. See Daubert, 509 U.S. at 596.; see also U.S. v. Ramos-Garcia, 184 F.3d 463, 465 (5th Cir. 1999) (stating that "the jury is free to choose among reasonable constructions of the evidence"); U.S. v. Rodriguez, 275 F.3d 42 (5th Cir. 2001) (stating that "it is the sole province of the jury to determine the weight and credibility of the evidence"). Further, Defendant will, as discussed, have the opportunity to discredit Dr. Patel's testimony on cross examination. See Daubert, 509 U.S. at 596. Because her testimony is sufficiently reliable, it must be presumed true for summary judgment purposes. See Tolan, 572 U.S. at 656. All of Defendant's objections to Dr. Patel's Report are without merit. Therefore, the Court DENIES Defendant's Motion [*19]  to Strike.

B. Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment Should Be Granted with Respect to Plaintiff's Discrimination Claim
Defendant argues that Plaintiff's discrimination claim should fail because: (1) Plaintiff is not "disabled" for ADA purposes; (2) Plaintiff did not face an adverse employment decision on account of his disability because Defendant lacked notice of Plaintiff's disability; and (3) Plaintiff cannot show that he was replaced by or treated less favorably than a non-disabled employee. Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. at 1, 17. Alternatively, Defendant argues that even if Plaintiff can make a prima facie case of discrimination, summary judgment is still proper because Defendant had a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for terminating Plaintiff's employment that was not merely pretextual. Id. at 18-19.
The Court finds that Plaintiff has established a prima facie case of discrimination under the ADA. Defendant, however, has offered a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for Plaintiff's termination, and Plaintiff has failed to show that Defendant's reason is mere pretext for discrimination. The Court, therefore, RECOMMENDS that Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment be GRANTED with [*20]  respect to Plaintiff's discrimination claim.

1. Plaintiff has sufficiently established the "Disability" element of an ADA discrimination claim.
Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment first argues Plaintiff is not disabled for ADA purposes. Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. at 12. In defining "disability," the ADA includes any "physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities." 42 U.S.C. § 12102(1)(A). Defendant correctly points out that, in the Fifth Circuit, diabetes is not considered a "per se" disability; instead, "the analysis of when and under what conditions diabetes is considered a disability for ADA purposes is a matter of degree." Griffin v. UPS, 661 F.3d 216, 223 (5th Cir. 2011); see also Arrington v. Southwestern Bell Tel. Co., 93 Fed. App'x 593, 598 (5th Cir. 2004).
Defendant cites several cases where diabetes was found not to be a disability under the ADA. Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. at 12-13. Nonetheless, Defendant fails to address the significance of the changes made under the ADAAA. The ADAAA was passed primarily in response to two Supreme Court cases that restricted the meaning of "disability" under the ADA: Sutton and Toyota. See Sutton v. United Airlines, Inc., 527 U.S. 471, 119 S. Ct. 2139, 144 L. Ed. 2d 450 (1999); Toyota Manufacturing, Kentucky, Inc. v. Williams, 534 U.S. 184, 122 S. Ct. 681, 151 L. Ed. 2d 615 (2002). In enacting the ADAAA, Congress recognized that both Sutton and Toyota unduly narrowed the scope of protection that was intended under the ADA, "eliminating protection for many individuals [*21]  whom Congress intended to protect." Pub. L. No. 110-325, § 2(a)(1), (4)-(6).
In following Sutton and Toyota, lower courts "incorrectly found in individual cases that people with a range of substantially limiting impairments are not people with disabilities." Id. In enacting the ADAAA, Congress intended "that the primary object of attention in cases brought under the ADA should be whether entities covered under the ADA have complied with their obligations and ... that the question of whether an individual's impairment is a disability under the ADA should not demand extensive analysis." Neely v. PSEG Texas, Ltd. P'ship, 735 F.3d 242, 244 (5th Cir. 2013) [citing Pub. L. No. 110-325, § 2(b)(5)].
With this broader approach in mind, Congress expressly included the operation of major bodily functions in "major life activity." 42 U.S.C. §12102(2)(B). Major bodily functions include, "but [are] not limited to, functions of the immune system, normal cell growth, digestive, bowel, bladder, neurological, brain, respiratory, circulatory, endocrine, and reproductive functions." Id. Inclusion of the bladder and endocrine functions are highly relevant to the present case.
Further, the "ADAAA directs that 'substantially limits' should not be as strictly construed as some courts have required in the past." Weed v. Sidewinder Drilling, Inc., 245 F. Supp. 3d 826, 834 (S.D. Tex. 2017) (quoting Pub. L. No. 110-325, § 2(b)(5)). The Fifth Circuit has stated that, as a result of [*22]  the ADAAA's enactment, cases relying on pre-ADAAA law "will be superseded in whole or in part as applied to cases arising under [the ADAAA]." Amsel v. Tex. Water Dev. Bd., 464 F. App'x 395, 399 n.2 (5th Cir. 2012). Thus, Defendant's reliance on several pre-ADAAA cases is misplaced.
A grant of summary judgment is improper if a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the non-moving party. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, 477 U.S. 243 (1986). Here, Plaintiff was diagnosed with diabetes in 2011, was prescribed medication, and subsequently experienced changes in his weight. Pl.'s Resp. to Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. at 10. Dr. Patel's admissible report expresses that, in her medical opinion, Plaintiff's diabetes caused his urgent need to urinate. Pl.'s Resp. to Def.'s Mot. Summ. J., Ex. C. Assuming the truth of Dr. Patel's testimony, a reasonable jury could find that Plaintiff is disabled under the ADA, and thus summary judgment is improper on this prima facie element.

2. Adverse employment decision element of an ADA discrimination claim
Defendant's next argument is, even if Plaintiff's diabetes is a disability for ADA purposes, Plaintiff was not subject to an adverse employment decision due to his disability. Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. at 14. It is undisputed that Plaintiff was terminated for urinating in the workplace. [*23]  Pl.'s Resp. to Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. at 11. Defendant states that the urination was a violation of company policy. Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. at 14.
In response, Plaintiff first argues that the company policy is vague and previously unenforced. Pl.'s Resp. to Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. at 11. Further, Plaintiff cites a case from the Northern District of California for the proposition that, if an employee's violation of a company rule is caused by a disability, the employer can only discipline the employee if the rule is "consistent with business necessity" and other employees are held to the same standard. Pl.'s Resp. to Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. at 13 (citing Equal Emp't Opportunity Commission v. Walgreen Co., 34 F. Supp. 3d 1049, 1055 (N.D. Cal. 2014)).
Without reaching the "business necessity" issue, it is clear that several fact issues exist that render summary judgment inappropriate on this prima facie element. For instance, the following fact issues remain unresolved: (1) whether the urination incident was triggered by Plaintiff's diabetes; (2) whether Plaintiff told his supervisors in the post-incident meeting that the urination was caused by his diabetes; and (3) whether the termination decision was made solely by Defendant's human resources department, or if Plaintiff's supervisors, who [*24]  may or may not have known about Plaintiff's diabetes in relation to the incident, were involved. See Pl.'s Resp. to Def. Mot. Summ. J. at 17; Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. at 8-9; Def.'s Rep. in Supp. Of Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. at 6. Because these material fact questions remain unresolved, summary judgment is inappropriate on this element. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a).

3. Plaintiff does not need to show that he was replaced by or treated less favorably than a non-disabled employee.
Defendant also argues in its Motion for Summary Judgment that there is a fourth prima facie element that Plaintiff also fails to establish: that he was replaced by or treated less favorably than a non-disabled employee. Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. at 17. As discussed in section II(C), supra, the Fifth Circuit does not utilize the fourth element. See Clark, 947 F.3d 275, LHC Group, Inc., 773 F.3d at 69, Gonzalez v. UPS, 777 F. App'x 735, 737-38 (5th Cir. 2019). For this reason, the Court need not analyze Defendant's arguments directed at the fourth element.

4. Defendant has alleged a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for terminating Plaintiff's employment.
Because Plaintiff has established all three prima facie elements of his ADA discrimination claim, the burden shifts to Defendant to articulate a "legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse employment [*25]  action." Owens v. Calhoun County Sch. Dist., No. 12-60897, 2013 U.S. App. LEXIS 20498, at *8 (5th Cir. 2013). If Defendant does so, the burden then shifts back to Plaintiff to show that Defendant's non-discriminatory reason is mere pretext for discriminatory intent. Id.
Here, the non-discriminatory reason articulated by Defendant is that Plaintiff's urination violated company policy. Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. at 18. This company policy states that termination of employment upon the first offense without written warning is the required outcome for "engaging in disorderly or immoral conduct on Company Property." Id. at 3. Plaintiff admits he was bound by these guidelines. Id.
It is clear that, in the Fifth Circuit, employee misconduct is a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for termination. See, e.g., Newberry v. E. Tex. State Univ., 161 F.3d 276, 279 (5th Cir. 1998) (holding that termination is permissible on the "basis of the conduct itself," even if the employer believes the conduct may be symptomatic of a disability); Henry v. Spectrum, L.L.C., 793 F. App'x 273, 276 (5th Cir. 2019) (holding that termination for company policy violation is acceptable, even if the violation resulted from a disability, as long as the disability was not a factor in the termination decision); see generally Clark, 952 F.3d 570 (holding that an employer is not required to withhold discipline for a violation of company policy, even if the violation stems [*26]  from a disability). Thus, Defendant has met its burden of establishing a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for Plaintiff's termination.

5. Plaintiff fails to show that Defendant's proffered reason is mere pretext for discrimination.
Since Defendant has met its burden, the burden shifts back to Plaintiff to show that Defendant's proposed legitimate, non-discriminatory reason is merely pretext for discrimination. McDonnell Douglas Corp., 411 U.S. at 804. "Pretext is established either through evidence of disparate treatment or by showing that the employer's proffered explanation is false or unworthy of credence." Delaval v. PTech Drilling Tubulars, L.L.C., 824 F.3d 476, 480 (5th Cir. 2016).
Plaintiff declines to undertake either of these approaches. Instead, Plaintiff's only argument on this front is that Defendant's proffered reason is neither legitimate nor nondiscriminatory and, therefore Plaintiff need not show pretext. Pl.'s Resp. to Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. at 18. As discussed above, however, Defendant has offered a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for Plaintiff's termination, replete with case law establishing it as such. Plaintiff, therefore, is required to make a showing of pretext to survive summary judgment. In the context of summary judgment, evidence is viewed in the light most favorable [*27]  to the non-moving party, but this requires that some evidence be offered. See Tolan, 572 U.S. at 656. Plaintiff's decision to not offer any evidence on this point is fatal. For this reason, the Court RECOMMENDS that summary judgment be GRANTED on Plaintiff's discrimination claim.

C. Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment should be granted with respect to Plaintiff's Failure to Accommodate Claim.
Plaintiff also alleges a "failure to accommodate" claim under the ADA. Pl.'s Am. Comp. at 4. In moving for summary judgment, Defendant argues that this claim should fail because Plaintiff: (1) never requested an ADA accommodation prior to the incident; (2) affirmatively disclaimed any need for a future accommodation after the incident; and (3) proposes a form of accommodation that has been soundly rejected by the Fifth Circuit. Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. at 20-21. For the reasons below, this Court RECOMMENDS that Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment be GRANTED with respect to Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim.

1. Plaintiff never requested an accommodation
Plaintiff argues Defendant failed to adequately accommodate his disability under the ADA. Pl.'s Resp. to Def.'s Mot. Summ. J. at 18. In order to establish a failure [*28]  to accommodate claim, Plaintiff must show that: (1) he is a qualified individual with a disability; (2) his diabetes and its related limitations were known by Defendant; and (3) Defendant failed to make "reasonable accommodations" for such known limitations. See Feist v. La. Dep't. of Justice, Office of the Att'y Gen., 730 F.3d 450, 452 (5th Cir. 2013). Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim fails on the third prong, making summary judgment appropriate.
In order to determine what a "reasonable accommodation" is in a given circumstance, it is often necessary for the employer and employee to engage in an "interactive process." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3). The general rule is that this interactive process is not triggered unless the employee specifically requests an accommodation. See Jurach v. Safety Vision, LLC, 642 F. App'x 313, 318 (5th Cir. 2016). Plaintiff cites Greer v. Richardson Indep. Sch. Dist., where the Fifth Circuit held that "a disabled person's failure to expressly request an accommodation is not fatal to an ADA claim where the defendant otherwise had knowledge of the individual's disability and needs but took no action." 472 F. App'x 287, 296 (5th Cir. 2012).
However, there are two essential distinctions between Greer v Richardson Indep. Sch. Dist. , 2012 U.S. App. LEXIS 5356 and the present case that render Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim appropriate for summary judgment. See id. at 287. First, the disability at issue in Greer is significantly [*29]  different than the alleged disability in the present case. In Greer, the plaintiff was wheelchair-bound. Id. The Fifth Circuit has held that "there may be some situations in which the reasonable accommodation is so obvious that a solution may be developed without either party consciously participating in some interactive process." Loulseged v. Akzo Nobel Inc., 178 F.3d 731, 736 (5th Cir. 1999) (citing 29 C.F.R. pt. 1630 app. § 1630.9 at 360 (1998))).
Greer's wheelchair-bound plaintiff is a perfect example of a very obvious need for an accommodation. See Greer, 472 F. App'x at 287. It is easily observable when someone utilizes a wheelchair and, further, the associated accommodations are equally evident, such as the need for ramps to access the building and wider bathroom stalls.
Diabetes, on the other hand, is distinct from being wheelchair-bound. Not only is diabetes not visible and obvious to others, but reasonable and appropriate accommodations are equally difficult to discern. See Taylor v. Principal Financial Group, Inc., 93 F.3d 155, 165 (5th Cir. 1996) (stating "where the disability, resulting limitations, and necessary reasonable accommodations ... are not open, obvious, and apparent to the employer, the initial burden rests primarily on the employee ... to specifically identify the disability and resulting limitations, and to suggest the [*30]  reasonable accommodations").
What is a required accommodation for one diabetic person may be of no benefit to another. See Griffin, 661 F.3d at 216 (where the requested accommodation was being transferred from night shift to day shift); see also Daugherty v. City of El Paso, 56 F.3d 695, 697 (5th Cir. 1995) (where the requested accommodation was a waiver of a Department of Transportation regulation). Diabetes is simply not the type of disability where it is reasonable to require the employer to trigger the "interactive process," or make accommodations, without the employee first expressly requesting an accommodation. See Taylor, 93 F.3d at 165.
Because of the unobvious nature of Plaintiff's alleged disability in the present case, the burden to request an accommodation ultimately falls on Plaintiff, not on his employer. Id.; Picard 423 Fed. App'x at 470. Plaintiff testified that he never requested any such accommodations from Defendant. Def.'s Mot. Summ J., Ex. A. (Pl.'s Dep. At 12:2-8; 76:1-4; 102:17-19). For this reason, Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim fails. The Court RECOMMENDS that Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment be GRANTED with respect to Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim.

V.

RECOMMENDATION
Accordingly, the Court ORDERS Defendant's Motion to Strike Plaintiff's Expert Report DENIED. Further, [*31]  the undersigned RECOMMENDS Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment be GRANTED on both Plaintiff's discrimination claim and Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim. As such, no claims remain and final judgement should issue.

VI.

OBJECTIONS
The parties may wish to file objections to this Report and Recommendation. A party filing objections must specifically identify those findings or recommendations to which objections are made. The district court need not consider frivolous, conclusory, or general objections. Battle v. U.S. Parole Comm'n, 834 F.2d 419, 421 (5th Cir. 1987).
A party's failure to file written objections to the proposed findings and recommendations contained in this Report within fourteen (14) days after the party is served with a copy of the Report shall bar that party from de novo review by the District Court of the proposed findings and recommendations in the Report and, except upon grounds of plain error, shall bar the party from appellate review of unobjected-to proposed factual findings and legal conclusions accepted by the District Court. 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(C); Thomas v. Arn, 474 U.S. 140, 150-53, 106 S. Ct. 466, 88 L. Ed. 2d 435 (1985); Douglass v. United Servs. Auto. Ass'n, 79 F.3d 1415 (5th Cir. 1996) (en banc).
SIGNED this 23rd day of June, 2020.
/s/ Jeffrey C. Manske
JEFFREY C. MANSKE
UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE


End of Document

