Greene v. Walgreen Co.
United States District Court for the District of Maryland
July 11, 2011, Decided; July 11, 2011, Filed
Civil No. — JFM-11-88

Reporter
2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 74560 *
TONEY GREENE v. WALGREEN CO.
Counsel:  [*1] Toney Greene, Plaintiff, Pro se, Waldorf, MD.
For Walgreen Co., trading as Walgreen's Pharmacy, Defendant: Stephanie Dawn Kinder, LEAD ATTORNEY, Law Office of Stephanie D Kinder PA, Baltimore, MD; Helen N Baker, John Curtis Hammerle, PRO HAC VICE, Freeborn and Peters LLP, Chicago, IL; R Delacy Peters, Jr, PRO HAC VICE, Freeborn Peters LLP, Chicago, IL.
Judges: J. Frederick Motz, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: J. Frederick Motz
Opinion



MEMORANDUM
Defendant has moved to dismiss many of the claims asserted against it by plaintiff. 1 Plaintiff, who is appearing pro se, has responded to the motion. He agrees to the dismissal of his claim for wrongful discharge and for any claim based upon race, age, ethnic heritage, or religious discrimination. The only issue that remains ripe for determination is plaintiff's request that he be permitted to file an amended complaint for his claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress asserted in Count III.
Plaintiff's  [*2] request for leave to file an amended complaint is denied. It may be that plaintiff's claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress is preempted. See Baird v. Haith, 724 F. Supp. 367, 375-76 (D. Md. 1988). Even if the claim is not preempted, however, it is clear that any amendment to plaintiff's complaint would be futile because the wrongful conduct alleged against defendant - the failure to accommodate his disability — is not sufficiently "outrageous" to give rise to a cause of action under Maryland law. Although the alleged misconduct may be actionable, it is remedial solely through the Americans With Disabilities Act.
Despite the informal nature of this letter, it should be flagged as an opinion and docketed as an order.
Date: July 11, 2011
/s/
J. Frederick Motz
United States District Judge


End of Document

