Grive v. Clark County
United States District Court for the District of Nevada
December 2, 2019, Decided
Case No.: 2:17-cv-03109-JAD-VCF

Reporter
2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 239197 *; 2019 WL 12875432
Sonia Grive, Plaintiff v. Clark County, a political subdivision, and municipality, including its department, Clark County Election Department, Defendant
Subsequent History: Dismissed by Grive v. Clark County, 2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 25431 (D. Nev., Feb. 10, 2021)
Counsel:  [*1] For Sonia Grive, Plaintiff: Michael P. Balaban, Law Offices of Michael P. Balaban, Las Vegas, NV.
Judges: Jennifer A. Dorsey, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Jennifer A. Dorsey
Opinion



Order Granting in Part and Denying in Part Motion for Summary Judgment
Sonia Grive sues her former employer, the Clark County Election Department (CCED), for terminating her employment in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), the Pregnancy Discrimination Act (PDA) of Title VII, and Nevada's public policy against retaliation.1 CCED moves for summary judgment on all claims, arguing that Grive cannot show that CCED discriminated against her because she triggered CCED's progressive-discipline policy when she took unauthorized leave, did not request an accommodation, and cannot prove knowledge as required by the ADA and PDA.2 Because there is a genuine issue of material fact about whether CCED knew about Grive's medical condition when it denied her leave and subsequently terminated her, summary judgment is not available on Grive's ADA and PDA claims. But I grant relief on her retaliation claim because it is intertwined with her ADA claim and Nevada law does not allow a plaintiff to rely on a mixed-motives theory to prove retaliation, and I order the partied to a mandatory settlement conference [*2]  with the magistrate judge.

Background

A. CCED's Time and Attendance Policy prohibited Grive from obtaining unauthorized leave after exhausting her FMLA and paid-leave banks.
While employed as an office assistant at the Clark County Elections Department, Grive obtained approved intermittent leave under the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA) for her Fibromyalgia and Celiac disease.3 CCED approved her FMLA request for leave from August 20, 2015, to August 19, 2016, allotting her 480 hours of leave.4 The County's Time and Attendance Policy provided that, during FMLA leave, Grive was required to first exhaust her accrued paid leave before defaulting to leave-without-pay status for each subsequent leave.5 Once Grive exhausted both her paid-and unpaid-leave banks, she was not entitled to additional leave without pay without first obtaining approval from her department head, Joseph Gloria.6 Were Grive to take unapproved leave thereafter, "she would face administrative action, which may include progressive discipline" and eventually lead to termination.7

B. Grive's absences triggered administrative action and progressive discipline.
By May 2016, Grive had exhausted her FMLA leave bank, triggering administrative action and progressive [*3]  discipline for subsequent, unauthorized leave.8 She received a "documented oral warning" on May 9 for calling out on May 6.9 On June 23, she received an "admonishment" for taking unscheduled, unauthorized leave without pay on June 16.10
That August, she experienced two medical events that led to further discipline and her subsequent termination. On August 3, Grive pulled a back muscle as she was lifting herself up from her chair in a training room.11 She did not return to work the next day because she was still in pain, which she associated with her Fibromyalgia.12 Her doctor confirmed that her pain was not related to her Fibromyalgia and was instead a "Lumbar Strain and Lumbar Radiculopathy." The doctor gave her a "Work/School Certificate of Disability" so that she could be excused from work on August 3 and 4.13 From August 3 to 7, Grive "was unable to put weight on [her] right side" and stayed home.14
On August 9, she filed a workers' compensation claim with CCED's risk management department.15 That same day, she received a "written reprimand" for leave taken on August 4.16 And because she also missed work on August 5, CCED issued her a "final written warning."17 CCED warned [*4]  that "[t]he next incident of [unscheduled leave without pay] . . . shall result in a one (1) day suspension."18
Grive suffered a miscarriage the following week.19 She went to an emergency room due to abdominal pain and vaginal bleeding late on August 16.20 The hospital admitted her that night, and her husband called CCED at 6 a.m. the next day to inform her supervisors that she would not be at work because of the miscarriage.21 He left messages for Grive's supervisor, Catherine Smith-McIntosh; her department head, Joseph Gloria; and the human-resources staffer, Lorena Portillo.22 Portillo called Grive two hours later to inform her that her absence constituted unauthorized leave without pay.23 When Grive asked "if [she] could be accommodated since [she] just had a miscarriage[, Portillo] said no."24 She also emailed on August 17 requesting leave without pay for August 17 through 22 for "a medical condition that require[d her] to be on bed rest" that was "per Dr [sic] orders," which it appears Gloria also denied.25 Grive also called her union representative, Randy Peters, and he told her that he would "take care of it."26 Grive's absence on August 17 caused CCED to issue a one-day suspension to be served [*5]  on August 19, and CCED warned that the next incident of unscheduled leave without pay would result in "administrate leave pending termination."27
Upon her release from the hospital, Grive's doctor ordered her to be on bed rest from August 18 to 22.28 When Grive missed work on August 18, CCED placed her on "administrative leave without pay pending the Step One pre-termination meeting" beginning August 22.29 Upon her return on August 23, Grive's doctor restricted her from lifting.30 Unlike the doctor's note for her back injury, however, the discharge note requested that she be excused from work until August 22 without mentioning a disability.31 But Grive procured FMLA paperwork from her doctor on August 22 indicating that she needed leave until August 30 to recover from "vaginal bleeding [and a] possible miscarriage."32 Still, the risk-management department denied Grive's FMLA request for pregnancy-related leave, stating that she was ineligible because she had "used all of the [f]ederal FMLA leave."33
At the pre-termination hearing, Grive and her union representative challenged the discipline she received for her absences on August 4 and 5, arguing that those absences were [*6]  not subject to progressive discipline because they were related to the workers' compensation claim she filed and could not constitute unscheduled leave without pay.34 But CCED confirmed after the meeting that those absences were eligible for progressive discipline because risk management would be denying her workers' compensation claim.35 CCED ultimately terminated Grive's employment.36
Grive appealed the termination and the parties held a "Step 2" meeting as required by the collective-bargaining agreement.37 Grive's union representative argued that her absences on August 17 through 19 were "out of her control" because she had a miscarriage,38 and Grive had requested leave without pay for those dates—but Gloria denied those requests.39
Gloria testified that the department "had no knowledge" that Grive's leave request on the 17 was because of her miscarriage and that "she had never indicated that she was pregnant prior to submitting her doctor's leave requests."40 He also testified that he did not recall Grive's husband's message to him explaining that she would be absent because of the miscarriage.41 He acknowledged having received the email requesting time off for her "medical condition" [*7]  but testified that the email did not mention pregnancy or a miscarriage, and, despite the FMLA request stating her need to obtain leave because of the miscarriage, he did not know about her condition when he denied the leave.42 Gloria agreed that eventually both he and the department discovered that Grive had been pregnant, but he maintained that the department did not know that when it denied the leave.43 Regardless, he explained he denied the leave because of "repetitive issues," and because they "were at a critical time in election preparation . . . there was no reason for [him] to approve that leave."44 He explained that, even if he had known about the miscarriage, he would have denied the leave.45
In its letter summarizing the Step 2 meeting, CCED's Human Resources Director, Sandy Jeantete, explained that Grive requested the leave "directly in the middle of an especially busy election cycle wherein [leave without pay] is historically denied due to operational necessity," and that Grive was subject to progressive discipline for those absences because Gloria had not previously approved them.46 Jeantete also explained that Gloria gave Grive clear directives about the department's [*8]  progressive discipline policy and her use of unauthorized leave without pay, but that Grive did not comply with those directives.47 With that, CCED upheld the termination.

Discussion

A. Summary-judgment standard
Summary judgment is appropriate when the pleadings and admissible evidence "show there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law."48 When considering summary judgment, the court views all facts and draws all inferences in the light most favorable to the non-moving party.49 If reasonable minds could differ on material facts, summary judgment is inappropriate because its purpose is to avoid unnecessary trials when the facts are undisputed, and the case must then proceed to the trier of fact.50
If the moving party satisfies Rule 56 by demonstrating the absence of any genuine issue of material fact, the burden shifts to the party resisting summary judgment to "set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial."51 The nonmoving party "must do more than simply show that there is some metaphysical doubt as to the material facts"; she "must produce specific evidence, through affidavits or admissible [*9]  discovery material, to show that" there is a sufficient evidentiary basis on which a reasonable fact-finder could find in her favor.52
An employee's response to a motion for summary judgment in the employment-discrimination context is subject to the burden-shifting analysis described in the United States Supreme Court's decision in McDonnell Douglas Corporation v. Green and its progeny.53 "Although intermediate evidentiary burdens shift back and forth under this framework, the ultimate burden of persuading the trier of fact that the defendant intentionally discriminated against the plaintiff remains at all times with the plaintiff."54 "The facts necessarily will vary in [employment discrimination] cases, and the specification above of the prima facie proof required from respondent is not necessarily applicable in every respect to different factual situations."55
The McDonnell—Douglas analysis involves three steps, the first of which requires the employee to establish a prima facie case of discrimination.56 "Establishment of a prima facie case in effect creates a presumption that the employer unlawfully discriminated against the employee."57 The standard for "establishing a prima facie case of disparate [*10]  treatment is not onerous" and need only "give rise to an inference of unlawful discrimination."58 An employee "need produce very little evidence in order to overcome an employer's motion for summary judgment" because the ultimate question of discrimination is "one that can only be resolved through a searching inquiry—one that is most appropriately conducted by a factfinder, upon a full record."59

B. Grive's ADA claims
Grive pleads claims under the ADA for discrimination, retaliation, and failure to accommodate. The ADA prohibits employment discrimination against qualified individuals with a disability.60 To establish a prima facie case of discrimination and failure to accommodate under the ADA, a plaintiff must demonstrate that she: (1) is disabled within the meaning of the ADA; (2) is a qualified individual able to perform the essential functions of the job with reasonable accommodation; and (3) suffered an adverse employment action because of her disability.61 "To establish a prima facie case of retaliation under the ADA, an employee must show that: (1) . . . she engaged in a protected activity; (2) suffered an adverse employment action; and (3) there was a causal link [*11]  between the two."62 "Often the two claims are, from a practical standpoint, the same. For the consequence of the failure to accommodate is, as here, frequently an unlawful termination."63

1. Whether Grive was a qualified individual with a disability
To satisfy the first element, the employee must show that she has "(A) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities . . . ; (B) a record of such an impairment; or (C) [is] regarded as having such an impairment."64 "[W]hether an individual meets the definition of disability . . . should not demand an extensive analysis."65 The ADA's implementing regulations encourage a broad construction of "disability" and focus on determining "whether covered entities have complied with their obligations and whether discrimination had occurred."66
CCED's motion for summary judgment focuses on refuting Grive's claim that her miscarriage was a disability.67 Grive responds that she had two disabilities—her back injury and the miscarriage68—both of which substantially limited her major life activities (e.g., her ability to go to work) and required her to stay home as prescribed by her doctors.69 I discuss each in turn. [*12] 

a. Whether Grive's miscarriage was a pregnancy-related impairment that qualified as a disability
Grive argues that her miscarriage qualified as a disability because it was arguably a reproductive function as defined under 42 U.S.C. § 2000e(k)70 that substantially limited a number of her major life activities—namely, eating, sleeping, eliminating bodily waste, caring for herself, and working.71 CCED responds that Grive was not a qualified individual with a disability because she never requested an accommodation and she did not know that she was pregnant until after she received her final written warning.72 It adds that her medical provider did not place her on disability after the miscarriage, pointing to the short-term duration of her condition as a second reason why Grive is not qualified.73
In support of her claim that the miscarriage constituted a disability, Grive relies on the United States Supreme Court's opinion in Young v. United Parcel Service74 and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission's (EEOC) guide on pregnancy-related discrimination. In Young, the defendant United Parcel Service claimed that it could not accommodate a pregnant employee with a lifting restriction because her pregnancy was not [*13]  a disability under the ADA.75 The Young court noted that the 2008 amendments to the ADA,76 which came two years after the employee's pregnancy, "expanded the definition of 'disability' under the ADA to make clear that 'physical or mental impairment[s] that substantially limi[t]' an individual's ability to lift, stand, or bend are ADA-covered disabilities," but it passed on answering whether the employee would have been entitled to such an accommodation under the pre-amended version of the ADA.77 Thus, Young does not help Grive's prima facie case, but it suggests that the ADA now provides more protection for pregnant women.
Following the 2008 amendments, the EEOC promulgated regulations and established guidelines to address pregnancy discrimination under the PDA and ADA. They require employers to treat "[d]isabilities caused or contributed to by pregnancy . . . or related conditions . . . the same as disabilities caused or contributed to by other medical conditions" for employment-related purposes, such as disability leave and leave without pay.78 An employee policy that causes the termination of an employee who is temporarily disabled and has insufficient (or no) leave available [*14]  violates Title VII of the Civil Rights Act "if it has a disparate impact on employees of one sex and is not justified by business necessity."79 Because the ADA does not require "that an impairment last a particular length of time to be considered substantially limiting," pregnancy-related impairments may constitute a disability.80 The focal inquiry is whether the impairment, albeit temporary, has a substantially limiting effect on the individual.81 "'Substantially limits' is not meant to be a demanding standard."82
A normal pregnancy without complications is not usually a disability under §12102(1)(A) or (B),83 but susceptibility to miscarriage and other pregnancy-related complications may qualify an individual under subsection (C), the "regarded as" provision.84 The Ninth Circuit lacks clear guidance on whether a miscarriage would qualify as a disability under the ADA. But other courts, post-2008, have held that pregnancy-related impairments that require certain work restrictions, early pregnancy leave, emergency-room visits, or bed rest could qualify as disabilities.85 Courts in other jurisdictions that have disqualified similar short-term, pregnancy-related impairments were interpreting the pre-amended version of the [*15]  ADA.86 Thus, it appears that, under the amended version of the ADA, a miscarriage would qualify as a disability if the plaintiff could show that she was substantially impaired in daily life activities as a result of that impairment.
Grive presented substantial evidence that her miscarriage qualified as a disability. She argued that the miscarriage substantially impaired her ability to eat, sleep, eliminate bodily waste, care for herself, and work, among other activities.87 These impairments can be readily discerned from the emergency-department records showing that she was seen for vaginal bleeding and abdominal pain on the night of August 16, 2016.88 She was diagnosed with a "threatened miscarriage vs. early pregnancy."89 And both she and her husband testified that she had a miscarriage and was unable to work.90 The doctor's note advises that she should be excused from work from August 16 to 22 to recover on bed rest.91 FMLA paperwork certifies that she needed two weeks off for the "vaginal bleeding, possible miscarriage."92 Her provider advised that she would be unable to lift upon her return.93
CCED's argument against her miscarriage qualifying as a disability is [*16]  that a doctor was required to certify it as one and also require an accommodation.94 This argument is not supported by law establishing that an employee needs a certified diagnosis to satisfy the "regarded as" element under 24 U.S.C. §12102(1)(C). The focus is on the effect the impairment has on the individual, not on the diagnosis.95 Even if a certified disability were required, CCED ignores Grive's doctor's FMLA paperwork and the doctor's note stating that she needed to be on bed rest for a two-week period. It also ignores the EEOC regulations providing that a disability need not be of long duration96 and meaning that a permanent disability is not required. And it ignores the lifting restriction her doctor recommended.97 Thus, Grive has established a prima facie case that her miscarriage constituted a disability under the ADA.

b. Whether Grive's back injury qualified as a disability
Grive has also satisfied her summary-judgment burden to show that her back injury made her a qualified individual with a disability. There is evidence that she was "regarded as having such an impairment," as required under 24 U.S.C. § 12102(1)(C). CCED conceded that "[i]t is up to [Grive's] medical providers" to decide whether she is disabled,98 and here, Grive's [*17]  doctor gave her a "Certificate of Disability" that required her to miss work because she was unable to put weight on her right side.99 This certificate also qualifies as evidence that Grive's back injury was an impairment that "substantially limits" a major life activity—here, work—under 24 U.S.C. § 12102(1)(A) because her doctor certified that she could not work for two days. That the back injury impaired Grive for only two days does not disqualify it as a disability because 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(1)(ix) states that it is not necessary for an impairment to last longer than six months to qualify as a disability.
CCED has not provided any evidence to contradict that Grive was "substantially limit[ed]" because of the back injury. Instead, it offers the deposition of a former employee from the County's risk management department who testified that Grive would have had to obtain FMLA paperwork to qualify the injury as a disability,100 but CCED does not support this assertion with any authority. And though it rejected Grive's workers' compensation claim, this does not take away from the fact that she could not work for two days. Indeed, whether Grive had a disability and whether she had FMLA hours or a legitimate workers' compensation claim are [*18]  different issues. Accordingly, CCED is not entitled to summary judgment on the issue of whether Grive's back injury constituted a disability under the ADA.

2. Whether CCED participated in the interactive process
To show that the employee was able to perform job functions with an accommodation, the employee must show that she requested an accommodation that "would [not] impose an undue hardship on the operation of [its] business."101 An undue hardship is one that imposes a "significant difficulty or expense," on the covered entity.102 "[O]nce an employee requests an accommodation . . . the employer must engage in an interactive process with the employee to determine the appropriate reasonable accommodation."103 And when the interactive process breaks down, the employer is only liable for failing to provide reasonable accommodations if it caused the breakdown.104

a. Whether Grive requested unpaid leave as an accommodation for her disabilities
CCED argues that Grive's ADA claim fails because she never requested an accommodation. CCED relies exclusively on Grive's deposition testimony where, in response to the question of whether she had "request[ed] an ADA accommodation," she stated, "I didn't even [*19]  know I could."105
Grive responds that she requested leave without pay as an accommodation for both her back injury and the miscarriage, both of which CCED denied.106 Grive adds that those requests were reasonable, relying on two Ninth Circuit cases for the proposition that unpaid leave is a reasonable accommodation.107 And she adds that CCED cannot show that it would suffer an undue hardship for granting her leave requests.108
In its reply, CCED maintains that it was not required to provide an accommodation because it did not know that Grive had a disability or had requested an accommodation.109 With regard to her back injury, it argues that it was not required to provide an accommodation because Grive's doctor instructed her to return to work with no restrictions.110 As for the miscarriage, it argues that Grive did not submit a doctor's certification for an accommodation and notes that none of her providers placed her on disability.111 CCED attached a blank form,112 entitled "Medical Certification by Licensed Healthcare Provides (For Accommodation Assessment for a condition related to pregnancy, childbirth or a related medical condition)," but it offers no explanation as to how this form works and it [*20]  cites no legal authority for how the court should consider it. Moreover, the form states that it is a "PDA Medical Certification Form[ ]," so it is not apparent how it applies to Grive's ADA claim.
"In general . . . it is the responsibility of the individual to inform the employer that an accommodation is needed."113 "An employee is not required to use any particular language when requesting an accommodation but need only inform the employer of the need for an adjustment due to a medical condition."114 "[O]nce an employee requests an accommodation . . . , the employer must engage in an interactive process with the employee to determine the appropriate reasonable accommodation."115 This requires "(1) direct communication between the employer and the employee to explore in good faith the possible accommodations; (2) consideration of the employee's request; and (3) offering an accommodation that is reasonable and effective."116
Grive provided sufficient evidence to show that she requested an accommodation. As to the back injury, Grive testified that she was injured at work, and she provided CCED with a Work/School Certificate of Disabilities and a Progress Report/Certificate of Disability [*21]  that excused her from work, along with a workers' compensation claim for the injury.117 CCED also confirmed that it received her calls stating that she would not be in the office the two days after her back injury.118 CCED maintains that the only accommodation it could have provided was upon her return, but none was needed because she returned to work with no restrictions for her back injury.119 However, Grive's request was for leave, not a workplace accommodation. And the note shows that the requested leave was for a "medical condition."120 CCED does not refute that it received Grive's request for leave for her back injury.
Grive has also demonstrated a genuine issue of fact about whether she requested an accommodation for her miscarriage. CCED is correct that Grive testified that she did not know she could request "an ADA accommodation,"121 but the law does not require these magic words. It was sufficient for Grive to request leave for "a medical condition." Her declaration and deposition state that she emailed CCED and that her husband called to inform Lorena Portillo, Joseph Gloria, and Catherine Smith-McIntosh about her need to stay home.122 Her husband's declaration states that he specifically [*22]  informed her supervisors about the miscarriage.123 Grive also testified that Portillo returned the call confirming she had received the message and had explained to Gloria the events, but told Grive "there's nothing they could do."124 Emails to Gloria on August 17 and 19 show that Grive informed him she was requesting leave without pay "per Dr orders,"125 and "for a medical condition that require[d her] to be on bed rest,"126 but Gloria denied the request.127 Additionally, the doctor's note and Grive's FMLA paperwork, dated August 22, 2016, and work restriction note, dated August 18, 2016, show that Grive could not work for two weeks after she was discharged and would need a lifting accommodation upon her return.128 Finally, a letter from risk management denying her FMLA request shows that the request was for the miscarriage.129
Notwithstanding this evidence, CCED maintains that it did not know that Grive had a miscarriage. Gloria testified that "nobody mentioned anything about a pregnancy" when he denied her leave request.130 Thus, Gloria seems to deny that Portillo informed him of Grive's miscarriage, but he testified that he discovered just days later that her leave request was for a miscarriage [*23]  just days later and at least by the Step 2 meeting where CCED upheld her termination.131 Regardless of whether CCED knew that the request was specifically for a miscarriage, there is sufficient evidence showing that the request was for medical purposes. And even if Gloria did not know the request was for a miscarriage when it denied the leave, CCED soon became aware of that fact and terminated her anyway. Based on this record, genuine issues of material fact preclude summary judgment on the issue of whether Grive requested an accommodation.

b. Whether CCED considered the ADA when it denied Grive unpaid leave
Grive argues that CCED failed to engage in the required interactive process to accommodate her unpaid leave request.132 Once initiated, the accommodation process is designed to be an enterprise in "cooperative problem-solving," and is thus a continuing duty which may not be exhausted by one effort.133 This good-faith process prohibits either side from delaying or obstructing the process.134 Thus, an employer incurs liability for failing to reasonably accommodate an employee only where it is responsible for the breakdown in the communications process.135
The cases that Grive cites are instructive. [*24]  In Humphrey v. Memorial Hospitals Association, an employee with obsessive-compulsive disorder obtained an accommodation (a late start), but it soon became clear that she needed a leave of absence or a work-from-home position.136 The Ninth Circuit explained that a leave of absence for medical treatment can be a reasonable accommodation under the ADA if it "would reasonably accommodate an employee's disability and permit him, upon his return, to perform the essential functions of the job."137 It also explained that the employer had an ongoing duty to explore other options and that it violated that duty when it denied the employee's request for an alternative accommodation, particularly when the requested leave accommodation was reasonable.138 Similarly, the Ninth Circuit explained in Nunes v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. that unpaid medical leave, "extended medical leave, or an extension of an existing leave period, may be a reasonable accommodation if it does not pose an undue hardship on the employer."139 To determine whether the leave accommodation request is reasonable, courts should balance the "risk and alternative" to discern whether there is a triable issue of fact.140 Both of Humphrey and Nunes suggest [*25]  that a request for leave without pay can be a request for a reasonable accommodation.
Grive has presented a genuine issue of fact about whether CCED failed to engage in the interactive process when it denied her leave request based on her exhausted FMLA leave bank. Leave under the ADA is different from leave under the FMLA; "the ADA allows an indeterminate amount of leave, barring undue hardship, as a reasonable accommodation," whereas the FMLA caps allowable leave at 12 weeks.141 That Grive had exhausted her FMLA leave for her fibromyalgia and Celiac disease has no bearing on the leave she could have received under the ADA. CCED did not consider the possibility that Grive could have qualified for an accommodation under the ADA.
CCED's second reason for denying leave—that Grive requested the leave "directly in the middle of an especially busy election cycle wherein [leave without pay] is historically denied due to operational necessity"142—also shows that CCED failed to consider whether the ADA was implicated. And, despite the "busy election cycle," CCED has not shown that it engaged in the interactive process or that it would have been an undue hardship for it to allow Grive leave to recover [*26]  from her injury and the miscarriage, thus precluding summary judgment in favor CCED.

3. Whether Grive suffered an adverse employment action because of her disability
It is undisputed that CCED terminated Grive. CCED relies on its Time and Attendance Policy as the basis for its termination decision.143 Grive argues that a causal link of discrimination can be inferred from the termination because CCED denied the requested leave for her disabilities and terminated her.144 When an employer's failure to accommodate a known disability results in a termination based on "performance inadequacies resulting from that disability," like absenteeism, the employee can create a triable issue of fact about whether termination was linked to the disability.145 "Unlike a simple failure to accommodate claim, an unlawful[-]discharge claim requires a showing that the employer terminated the employee because of his disability."146 In other words, the employee "must show that the adverse employment action would not have occurred but for the disability."147
Grive has presented sufficient evidence to create a triable issue of fact whether her unauthorized leave requests were linked to her disabilities, given the outright denial, [*27]  failure to engage in the collaborative process, and timeliness of the termination. Thus, a jury must determine whether a causal link exists between her disabilities and the absences that led to her termination.

C. Grive's Title VII pregnancy-discrimination and failure-to-accommodate claims
The PDA amended Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to prohibit employers from discriminating against "'women affected by pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions.'"148 Such women must "'be treated the same for all employment-related purposes . . . as other persons not so affected but similar in their ability or inability to work.'"149 This includes disability benefits or sick leave for pregnancy-related reasons if the employer also provides such benefits to employees unable to work for other medical reasons.150
A plaintiff can establish a prima facie case of pregnancy discrimination with either direct evidence of discriminatory intent or using the McDonnell-Douglas burden-shifting framework.151 When defending against summary judgment, the plaintiff need only show "minimal proof" that supports the "'inference of unlawful discrimination.'"152 Direct evidence is "evidence that a workplace policy, practice, or decision relies [*28]  expressly on a protected characteristic."153
It does not appear that Grive is challenging a specific policy, only CCED's denial of her accommodation request, so only the McDonnell-Douglas test applies. Under that test, she must provide evidence to support an inference of discriminatory intent.154 She must show "that she belongs to the protected class, that she sought accommodation, that the employer did not accommodate her, and that the employer did accommodate others similar in their ability or inability to work."155

1. Grive's prima facie case
CCED argues that Grive cannot establish a prima facie case of pregnancy discrimination because CCED issued its final written warning on August 10, 2016—six days before Grive had a miscarriage.156 In other words, CCED argues that it could not have terminated Grive because of her pregnancy if it didn't know about it. It points to Grive's deposition testimony in which she testified that she discovered she was pregnant when she saw a doctor for her injured back but didn't have the chance to tell CCED she was pregnant because "it was like a day, and [she] was in meetings getting write-ups."157 CCED also argues that Grive failed to provide evidence that CCED treated [*29]  other similarly situated pregnant employees favorably.158
Grive can readily establish that she was pregnant and therefore entitled to Title VII protection. As explained above, there is also sufficient evidence that Grive requested leave without pay as an accommodation for her miscarriage: she and her husband called or emailed several of her supervisors to request leave on multiple days. CCED denied her accommodation requests, and it denied her FMLA claim. Instead, CCED gave her a one-day suspension and placed her on leave pending termination for failing to obtain Gloria's approval, her calls and emails notwithstanding. These facts, Grive argues, support an inference of discrimination because CCED knew she had had a miscarriage and terminated her anyway.159
Grive satisfies the first three elements of her prima facie case but struggles with the last. Her only argument in support of the "similarly-situated" element is that CCED knew it was unlawful to discriminate against an employee in her circumstances, relying on Title 29 of Code of Federal Regulations § 825.702(b), which provides that an employer must treat separately a disability under the ADA from one under the FMLA and provide "an indeterminate amount of leave, barring undue hardship, [*30]  as a reasonable accommodation." In any event, CCED is incorrect to argue that Grive was required to present evidence that CCED treated other pregnant women more favorably. Disparate treatment of pregnant women is measured by how an employer treats those women as compared to "other persons not so affected but similar in their ability or inability to work."160 Grive did not submit any evidence to show that CCED treated similarly situated individuals more favorably. But, because she presented sufficient evidence as to the other elements to create a genuine issue of material fact, I cannot grant CCED summary judgment on the PDA claim.

2. CCED's non-discriminatory explanation for denying the accommodation
An employer's legitimate, nondiscriminatory explanation for denying an accommodation cannot be merely that it was "more expensive or less convenient" to include pregnant women in the type of employees it accommodates.161 An employer may "implement policies that are not intended to harm members of a protected class, even if their implementation sometimes harms those members, as long as the employer has a legitimate, nondiscriminatory, nonpretextual reason for doing so."162
CCED leans on its attendance [*31]  policy and Grive's unauthorized absences as its nondiscriminatory explanation for denying Grive leave without pay for her miscarriage.163 While I note that CCED informed Grive that it denied the leave because she requested it during the busy election period and Gloria testified that he would have denied it even if he had known about her miscarriage, there is no evidence to support CCED's claim of its staffing needs or its uniform application of the policy.164 Grive responds that the PDA and other protections165 allowed her additional leave for her miscarriage, and that it would defeat the purpose of those statutory protections if CCED could rely on its attendance policy to deny leave to women who suffer pregnancy complications. Neither party supports its argument with any law or evidence in the record, and it is not this court's function to "paw over files without the assistance from the parties" in order to make a party's claim.166 Because CCED has not met its initial burden, I deny it summary judgment on this issue.

3. Whether CCED's explanation was a pretext for discrimination
If the employer provides a nondiscriminatory explanation for denying an accommodation to the plaintiff, [*32]  the plaintiff can then demonstrate that this explanation is a pretext "'by showing that the employer's proffered explanation is unworthy of credence.'"167 A plaintiff "may reach a jury on this issue by providing sufficient evidence that the employer's policies impose a significant burden on pregnant workers" that is not justified by employer's nondiscriminatory explanation "but rather—when considered along with the burden imposed—give rise to an inference of intentional discrimination."168 The inference of intentional discrimination can be based on circumstantial evidence from "suspicious timing, ambiguous statements oral or written, [and] behavior toward or comments directed at other employees in the protected group," among other facts.169 Thus, even though the employer met its burden of production for its nondiscriminatory explanation, a jury may still consider the plaintiff's evidence "establishing the plaintiff's prima facie case 'and inferences properly drawn therefrom . . . on the issue of whether the defendant's explanation is pretextual.'"170
Assuming that CCED could demonstrate that it had a nondiscriminatory reason for denying Grive's leave, summary judgment for CCED would still [*33]  be improper because Grive has presented sufficient circumstantial evidence to show that CCED's explanation is "unworthy of credence."171 She has demonstrated that CCED knew about her miscarriage before it terminated her and at least by the time the parties participated in the Step 2 meeting upholding the termination.172 The closeness in time between her unauthorized absences for the miscarriage, escalated discipline despite a doctor's note requiring bed rest, and CCED's denial of her FMLA request for the miscarriage tend to support an inference of pretext, as does Gloria's testimony that it would have denied the leave regardless of Grive's need for it. So it is for a jury to determine whether CCED intentionally discriminated against Grive despite this circumstantial evidence.173

D. Grive's tortious-discharge claim fails because it is based on a mixed-motives theory of recovery.
In her third cause of action, Grive claims that CCED tortiously discharged her in violation of state public policy.174 The Nevada Supreme Court "has repeatedly held that 'public policy tortious discharge actions are severely limited to those rare and exceptional cases where the employer's conduct violates strong and compelling [*34]  public policy.'"175 "The essence of a tortious discharge is the wrongful, usually retaliatory, interruption of employment by means which are deemed to be contrary to the public policy of this state."176 "An employer commits a tortious discharge by terminating an employee for reasons [that] violate public policy."177
The Nevada Supreme Court held in Hansen v. Harrah's that "Nevada's workmen's compensation laws reflect a clear public policy favoring economic security for employees injured while in the course of their employment."178 And failing "to recognize the cause of action of retaliatory discharge for filing a workmen's compensation claim would only undermine Nevada's [Workmen's Compensation] Act and the strong public policy behind its enactment."179 Allowing employers to discharge employees for filing workers' compensation claims would "force employees to choose between a continuation of employment or the submission of an industrial claim,"180 effectively "nullify[ing] the basic purposes of Nevada's workmen's compensation system."181 The court then adopted "the narrow exception to the at-will employment rule [*35]  recognizing that retaliatory discharge by an employer stemming from the filing of a workmen's compensation claim by an injured employee is actionable in tort."182
Grive theorizes that CCED terminated her in retaliation for filling a workers' compensation claim for injuring her back at work and for requesting time off to treat that injury.183 "Recovery for retaliatory discharge under state law may not be had upon a 'mixed motives' theory; . . . the use of the 'mixed motives' concept in the context of wrongful termination cases would have the effect of undermining the Nevada legislature's intent in creating the 'at-will' doctrine."184 Thus, an employee must show that filing the workers' compensation claim "was the proximate cause of [the] discharge."185
CCED argues that Grive had previously exhausted her FMLA leave when she missed work for her back injury, thus subjecting herself to discipline under CCED's attendance policy.186 It claims that it was Grive's absences and this progressive discipline—and not the subsequent filing of a workers' compensation claim—that resulted in her termination.187 Grive attempts to avoid summary judgment by arguing that CCED should not have disciplined her for her [*36]  absences because she had a doctor's certificate of disability for the absences, but this argument is based on the same allegation as her ADA failure-to-accommodate claim. Grive's termination is thus inextricably linked to her absences and CCED refusing to approve additional leave. Because Grive cannot use a mixed-motives theory for her retaliation claim, I grant CCED summary judgment on this claim.

Conclusion
Accordingly, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the defendant's motion for summary judgment [ECF No. 24] is GRANTED in part and DENIED in part. Defendant is entitled to summary judgment on Grive's state-law public-policy tort claim, but genuine issues of material fact preclude summary judgment on any other claim. So this case proceeds to trial on Grive's ADA and PDA claims. But first, it is FURTHER ORDERED that this matter is referred to the magistrate judge to schedule a mandatory settlement conference.
Dated: December 2, 2019
/s/ Jennifer A. Dorsey
U.S. District Judge Jennifer A. Dorsey


End of Document

