Gunter v. Bemis Co.
United States District Court for the Eastern District of Tennessee
March 15, 2017, Filed
Case No. 4:16-CV-37

Reporter
2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 231762 *
TONY A. GUNTER, Plaintiff, v. BEMIS COMPANY, INC., Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Tony A. Gunter, Plaintiff: Anne Hunter, Heather Moore Collins, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Collins & Hunter PLLC, Brentwood, TN USA.
For Bemis Company Inc, Defendant: Jonathan O Harris, LEAD ATTORNEY, Thomas Wyly Whitworth, Ogletree, Deakins, Nash, Smoak & Stewart, P.C. (Nashville), Nashville, TN USA.
For Lisa Ramsay Cole, Movant: Jonathan J Cole, Baker, Donelson, Bearman, Caldwell & Berkowitz (Nashville), Nashville, TN USA.
Judges: TRAVIS R. MCDONOUGH, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE. Magistrate Judge Christopher H. Steger.
Opinion by: TRAVIS R. MCDONOUGH
Opinion



MEMORANDUM OPINION AND ORDER
Before the Court is Defendant Bemis Company, Inc.'s motion for summary judgment. (Doc. 36.) For the reasons stated herein, Defendant's motion will be GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART.

I. BACKGROUND
Defendant operates a manufacturing facility in Shelbyville, Tennessee, that produces flexible packaging for food and consumer companies. (Doc. 38-1, at 3, 57.) To manufacture its packaging, Defendant utilizes large machine presses that print on plastic film. (Id.) A team of two to three employees—a press helper, a press assistant, and/or a press operator—operates each press. (Id. at 8; Doc. 38-2, at 14-15.)
Defendant employed Plaintiff as a press helper [*2]  and, later, as a press assistant to work on its presses. (Doc. 38-1, at 2.) In his capacity as press assistant, Plaintiff was responsible for, among other things, operating the press in a safe and efficient manner, loading raw material, unloading and packaging finished goods, and running the press in the press operator's absence. (Id. at 61.) To fulfill these duties, the press assistant job description specifies that a press assistant must meet certain physical requirements, including being able to carry, lift, and "handl[e]" forty-five pounds and being able to push and pull one hundred pounds.1 (Id. at 62.) The job description further provides that the press assistant must be able to meet certain reach requirements while carrying, climbing, pushing, and pulling. (Id.) Plaintiff does not dispute that the press assistant position requires physical activity, but notes that, to perform these duties, he and his co-workers regularly used equipment like hoists, tow motors, carts, and platform ladders to assist in performing their duties. (Id. at 3-4; Doc. 38-2, at 15-17; Doc. 42-1, at 3-7, 9.)
In January of 2013, Plaintiff injured his shoulder while working and, as a result, filed a workers' compensation claim. (See [*3]  Doc. 38-1, at 5-7; Doc. 38-2, at 40-51.) After physical therapy proved ineffective, and after changing doctors, Plaintiff underwent shoulder surgery in August 2013. (Doc. 38-1, at 6-7.) Plaintiff returned to work approximately four to six weeks after his surgery. (Id. at 12.) Upon return, Defendant placed Plaintiff on "light duty" work for approximately three months, during which time he drove a tow motor and helped clean Defendant's warehouse. (Id. at 12, 14.) In early 2014, Plaintiff returned to his job working on the presses, subject to the restriction that he was not to conduct any overhead work with his right arm. (Id. at 14; Doc. 42-2, at 4.) According to Plaintiff, after returning to work on the press, he learned to work around his shoulder limitations. (Doc. 38-1, at 8.) Plaintiff's shift supervisors, David Todd Moulder and Clarence Jennings, both testified that Plaintiff could do his job and was capable of working around his shoulder issues. (Doc. 38-2, at 14, 16-17; Doc. 42-1, at 7, 16.) Additionally, Moulder and Charles Bills, a press helper, testified that it was not uncommon for employees working on Defendant's presses to help each other if someone needed assistance. (Doc. 38-2, at 15, 39.)
On May 22, 2014, Plaintiff underwent a functional capacity evaluation ("FCE") at the request of Defendant's workers' compensation provider. (Doc. 38-1, at 21, 35-36; Doc. 38-3, at 50.) During the FCE, a Certified Functional Evaluator and Ergonomic Specialist tested Plaintiff on his ability to perform a variety of tasks, including lifting and carrying [*4]  weights. (Doc. 38-3, at 50-65; Doc. 38-4, at 1-11.) The evaluator who conducted Plaintiff's FCE subsequently issued a report, which Defendant received sometime between June 27, 2014, and July 2, 2014. (Doc. 38-1, at 38, 45.) In the report, the evaluator recommended that Plaintiff be placed on the following lifting and positional restrictions: (1) lifting from floor to waist - 40 pounds occasionally, 20 pounds frequently; (2) lifting from waist to shoulder - 20 pounds occasionally, 0 pounds frequently; (3) lifting from waist to overhead — never; (4) no overhead reaching; and (5) occasional right upper extremity reaching in all places below shoulder level. (Doc. 38-3, at 50.) Additionally, the FCE report stated:
Based upon his demonstrated dynamic lifting and carrying abilities, Mr. Gunter is classified in the LIGHT PDC strength level for work. Based on a formal job description provided via case management, his job as a Press Operator for Bemis Company is classified in the Medium PDC strength level for work. Mr. Gunter DOES NOT MEET the strength/lifting/carrying or the right UE positional demands for his job.
(Id.) Plaintiff concedes that the Press Operator job is a "medium PDC strength [*5]  level" job. (Doc. 38-1, at 25.)
It is undisputed that, after Defendant received the FCE report, three meetings occurred. First, sometime between June 27, 2014, and July 3, 2014, Defendant's management team, including Human Resources Manager Kathy Young, Environmental Health and Safety Manager Wayne Eaton, and Interim Plant Manager Chris Burns, met and decided to place Plaintiff "out of work," meaning Defendant would not permit Plaintiff to continue working on its presses. (Doc. 38-1, at 38-39.) At a second meeting, Defendant's management team met and determined that it could not accommodate Plaintiff's disability. (Id.) Third, on July 18, 2014, Young and Eaton met with Plaintiff to discuss his disability and the FCE report. (Id. at 22, 37; Doc. 38-4, at 13-14.) Young specifically testified that she could not recall whether the second meeting—where the management team decided they could not accommodate Plaintiff—occurred before or after she and Eaton met with Plaintiff on July 18, 2014. (Doc. 38-1, at 38-39.)
According to Eaton and Young, at the meeting with Plaintiff on July 18, 2014, they: (1) discussed the results of Plaintiff's FCE and compared his restrictions with the essential functions of [*6]  his job; (2) asked Plaintiff if he could think of any accommodations that would enable him to continue working on the press machines; and (3) asked Plaintiff if he could think of any open positions that he could perform. (Doc. 38-4, at 13.) Plaintiff recalls Eaton asking him how Defendant could accommodate him "on the back of the press." (Doc. 38-1, at 23.) Plaintiff, however, asserts that he did not understand Eaton's question and was under the impression that Eaton was asking if the press could be reconfigured so that he did not have to reach above his head. (Id.) Plaintiff responded: "I had been able to do my job without complaint for the past nine months and that I did not think they could accommodate me." (Id.) According to Plaintiff, during the meeting, he requested that Defendant permit him to stay in his job working the back of the press or assign him to a different job, like driving a tow motor or cutting cores. (Id. at 30.) Plaintiff testified, however, that he was unaware of any open tow motor jobs in July 2014, and Young testified that Defendant did not have any positions for which an employee's only duty was to cut cores. (Id. at 24, 42.) Defendant ultimately concluded that, given the limitations [*7]  identified in the FCE report, it could not accommodate Plaintiff's disability. (Id. at 39: Doc. 38-2, at 9.)
Although Plaintiff was not permitted to return to work, Defendant did not immediately terminate his employment. Instead, Defendant allowed Plaintiff to go on leave. (Doc. 38-1, at 25, 43.) Young testified that the purpose of putting Plaintiff on leave was so that he could remain employed in case other jobs came open that he could perform. (Id. at 43-44.) Nonetheless, sometime in September or October of 2014, Plaintiff filed for unemployment benefits with the Tennessee Department of Labor. (Id. at 25-28.) The Tennessee Department of Labor, however, informed Plaintiff that he was not eligible for such benefits because Defendant had not terminated his employment. (Id.) As a result, on October 15, 2014, Plaintiff's attorney in his worker's compensation lawsuit wrote a letter to Defendant requesting a separation notice. (Doc. 38-4, at 19-20.) Accordingly, on November 3, 2014, Defendant officially terminated Plaintiff's employment. (Doc. 38-1, at 45; Doc. 38-4, at 21-23.) On Plaintiff's separation notice, Defendant states that the circumstances of Plaintiff's separation are: (1) "[p]er employee request we are providing [*8]  this separation notice"; and (2) "[e]mployee has permanent restrictions which we are unable to accommodate." (Doc. 38-4, at 22.)
At least one of Plaintiff's former supervisors is skeptical of Defendant's motivation for terminating Plaintiff. Jimmy Smotherman, a plant manager for Defendant from 2012 to 2015, averred that, in his experience, "if an employee got injured, [Defendant] would look for a reason to fire the employee," and that, with respect to Plaintiff, he "knew that [Defendant] did not want him to come back and continue to have benefits after his worker's compensation injury and surgery." (Doc. 42-2, at 72.)
Plaintiff initiated this action on July 2, 2015. (Doc. 1.) In his amended complaint, Plaintiff asserts claims against Defendant for: (1) violations of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), as amended by the ADA Amendments Act of 2008 ("ADAAA");2 (2) violation of the Tennessee Disability Act ("TDA"), Tenn. Code Ann. § 8-50-103; (3) common law workers' compensation retaliatory discharge; and (4) violation of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 ("FMLA"), 29 U.S.C. § 2601, et seq. (Doc. 5.) Defendant has moved for summary judgment on Plaintiff's claims.

II. STANDARD OF LAW
Summary judgment is proper when "the movant [*9]  shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). The Court views the evidence in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party and makes all reasonable inferences in favor of the nonmoving party. Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co., Ltd. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 587, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986I ); Nat'l Satellite Sports, Inc. v. Eliadis Inc., 253 F.3d 900, 907 (6th Cir. 2001).
The moving party bears the burden of demonstrating that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986); Leary v. Daeschner, 349 F.3d 888, 897 (6th Cir. 2003). The moving party may meet this burden either by affirmatively producing evidence establishing that there is no genuine issue of material fact or by pointing out the absence of support in the record for the nonmoving party's case. Celotex Corp., 477 U.S. at 325. Once the movant has discharged this burden, the nonmoving party can no longer rest upon the allegations in the pleadings; rather, it must point to specific facts supported by evidence in the record demonstrating that there is a genuine issue for trial. Chao v. Hall Holding Co., Inc., 285 F.3d 415, 424 (6th Cir. 2002).
At summary judgment, the Court may not weigh the evidence; its role is limited to determining whether the record contains sufficient evidence from which a jury could reasonably find for the non-movant. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248-49, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). A mere scintilla of evidence is not enough; the Court must determine whether a fair-minded jury could return a [*10]  verdict in favor of the non-movant based on the record. Id. at 251-52; Lansing Dairy, Inc. v. Espy, 39 F.3d 1339, 1347 (6th Cir. 1994). If not, the Court must grant summary judgment. Celotex, 477 U.S. at 323.

III. ANALYSIS

A. ADA and TDA
i. Disability Discrimination Under the ADA and TDA
The ADA forbids employers from discriminating based on an employee's disability. 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a); see also Moorer v. Baptist Mem'l Health Care Sys., 398 F.3d 469, 479 (6th Cir. 2005). A disability discrimination claim brought under the TDA is analyzed under the same principles as those utilized for the ADA. Cardenas-Meade v. Pfizer, Inc., 510 F. App'x 367, 369 n.2 (6th Cir. 2013).
A plaintiff asserting disability discrimination may prove his case by presenting direct evidence of discrimination; that is, evidence that the employer "relied upon the plaintiff's handicap in making its employment decision."3 Ferrari v. Ford Motor Co., 826 F.3d 885, 891 (6th Cir. 2016). In cases where there is direct evidence that the plaintiff suffered an adverse employment action because of his or her disability, the plaintiff "bears the burden of establishing that he or she is 'disabled'" and "'otherwise qualified' for the position despite his or her disability: a) without accommodation from the employer; b) with an alleged 'essential' job requirement eliminated; or c) with a proposed reasonable accommodation." Id. (quoting Monette v. Elec. Data Sys. Corp., 90 F.3d 1173, 1178 (6th Cir. 1996)). "Once the plaintiff has established these elements, the employer "bear[s] the burden of proving that a challenged job [*11]  criterion is essential . . . or that a proposed accommodation will impose an undue hardship upon the employer." Id.
Alternatively, a plaintiff may prove a claim for disability discrimination by offering indirect evidence of discrimination and proceeding under the framework established in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). Under the McDonnell Douglas framework, a plaintiff must first establish a prima facie case for disability discrimination by proffering evidence that: (1) he is disabled; (2) he was otherwise qualified, with or without an accommodation; (3) he suffered an adverse employment decision; (4) the defendant knew or had reason to know of his disability; and (5) the position remained open while Defendant sought other applicants. Whitfield v. Tennessee, 639 F.3d 253, 259 (6th Cir. 2011). If the plaintiff satisfies his burden at the prima facie stage, the burden shifts to the defendant to offer a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for its decision to terminate the plaintiff's employment. See Ferrari, 826 F.3d at 894. If the defendant provides a legitimate explanation for the decision, then the burden shifts back to Plaintiff, who must then "introduce evidence that the proffered explanation is pretextual." Id. at 892; Blazek v. City of Lakewood, 576 F. App'x 512, 516 (6th Cir. 2014).
Noting the different analytical frameworks, the United States Court of Appeals [*12]  for the Sixth Circuit has directed courts to distinguish between cases that involve direct evidence of discrimination and cases in which a plaintiff is proceeding under an indirect-evidence theory. Ferrari, 826 F.3d at 892. Specifically, the Sixth Circuit has explained that "[w]hen an employer acknowledges that it relied upon the plaintiff's handicap in making its employment decision . . . the McDonnell Douglas burden shifting approach is unnecessary because the issue of the employer's intent, the issue for which McDonnell Douglas was designed, has been admitted by the defendant . . . and the plaintiff has direct evidence of discrimination on the basis of his or her disability." Id. (quoting Monette, 90 F.3d at 1186).
In this case, Defendant acknowledges that it relied upon Plaintiff's disability, at least in part, in deciding to terminate Plaintiff's employment. Specifically, Plaintiff's separation notice confirms that Defendant terminated Plaintiff because it could not reasonably accommodate his disability. (Doc. 38-4, at 22.) Although Defendant also asserts that it terminated Plaintiff because it received a request for a separation notice from his workers' compensation attorney, Defendant's admission that it did not believe it [*13]  could reasonably accommodate Plaintiff's disability qualifies as direct evidence that it terminated Plaintiff because of his disability. Accordingly, Plaintiff's disability discrimination under the ADA and TDA will be analyzed utilizing the direct-evidence framework.
Proceeding under the direct-evidence framework, Plaintiff bears the burden of establishing that he is: (1) disabled; and (2) otherwise qualified to work as a press assistant or press helper, with or without a reasonable accommodation, or with an essential job requirement eliminated. Ferrari, 826 F.3d at 891. Defendant does not dispute that Plaintiff is disabled, but argues that he was not qualified to work as a press assistant, because the recommended restrictions identified in the FCE report prevented him from performing the essential functions of his job. (Doc. 37, at 20-25.)
An employee is a "qualified individual" if he can perform the essential functions of his job with or without a reasonable accommodation. 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). In determining whether a particular function is essential to a position, the ADA directs that:
consideration shall be given to the employer's judgment as to what functions of a job are essential, and if an employer has prepared a written [*14]  description before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job, this description shall be considered evidence of the essential functions of the job.
Id. Additionally, federal regulations implementing and interpreting the ADA direct that the following non-exhaustive list of factors should be considered in determining whether a job function is essential to a position: (1) the employer's judgment; (2) the written job description; (3) the amount of time spent performing the function; (4) the consequences of not requiring performance of the function; (5) the work experience of past incumbents of the position; and (6) the current work experience of incumbents in similar jobs. 29 C.F.R. § 1630(n)(3); Camp v. Bi-Lo, LLC, 662 F. App'x 357, 361 (6th Cir. 2016). "Whether a job function is essential is a question of fact that is typically not suitable for resolution on a motion for summary judgment." Keith v. Cty. of Oakland, 703 F.3d 918, 926 (6th Cir. 2013).
In determining whether Plaintiff could perform the essential functions of his job with or without a reasonable accommodation, Camp v. Bi-Lo, LLC is instructive. 662 F. App'x 357 (6th Cir. 2016). In Bi-Lo, the trial court granted summary judgment in favor of the defendant-employer, finding that the plaintiff-employee could not perform the essential functions of his stock-clerk position because his disability [*15]  prevented him from lifting more than thirty-five pounds. Id. at 360. In reversing the trial court's grant of summary judgment, the Sixth Circuit explained that there was conflicting evidence in the record as to whether the ability to lift more than thirty-five pounds was an essential function of the stock-clerk position. Id. at 361-64. Specifically, the Sixth Circuit noted that the plaintiff-employee fulfilled the duties of his stock-clerk position with his disability and with the help of his co-workers for years before his termination. Id. at 364. Explaining that the ADA does not require blind deference to the employer's stated judgment as to what qualifies as an essential function of a particular position, the Sixth Circuit concluded that the plaintiff had provided sufficient evidence to rebut the employer's contention that lifting thirty-five pounds was an essential function of the stock-clerk job, thereby making summary judgment inappropriate. Id. at 363-64.
Like the employee in Bi-Lo, Plaintiff has provided sufficient evidence to create a genuine issue of material fact as to whether he could perform the essential functions of the press assistant position with or without a reasonable accommodation. Plaintiff performed the duties [*16]  of a press assistant from the time he returned to work in early 2014 until July 2, 2014, when Defendant placed him out of work. Additionally, Plaintiff's shift supervisors testified that, upon returning to work, Plaintiff could do his job and was capable of working around his shoulder issues. (Doc. 38-2, at 14, 16-17; Doc. 42-1, at 7, 16.) This evidence regarding Plaintiff's on-the-job experience is sufficient to rebut Defendant's contention that the recommended restrictions set forth in Plaintiff's FCE report would prevent him from performing the essential functions of press assistant position with or without a reasonable accommodation. Accordingly, because genuine issues of material fact remain as to whether Plaintiff was qualified to perform the essential functions of the press assistant position with or without a reasonable accommodation, the Court will DENY Defendant's motion for summary judgment on Plaintiff's claims for disability discrimination under the ADA and TDA.4
ii. Failure to Accommodate Under the ADA
Impermissible discrimination under the ADA also includes "not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual [*17]  with a disability . . . unless [the employer] can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business."5 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). To establish a claim for failure to accommodate, a plaintiff must show that he was disabled and able to perform the essential functions of his job with or without reasonable accommodations. Bi-Lo, 662 F. App'x at 364. The plaintiff must also prove that the employer was aware of the disability and denied him specific reasonable accommodations. Id. "Once the plaintiff has established the prima facie case, the burden shifts to the defendant to show that accommodating the plaintiff would impose an undue hardship on the operation of its business." Id.
As discussed in connection with Plaintiff's disability discrimination claim, questions of fact remain as to whether the recommended restrictions identified in the FCE report precluded Plaintiff from performing the essential functions of his job. Even assuming the physical requirements identified in the press assistant job description qualify as essential functions, questions of fact remain as to whether Defendant should have granted Plaintiff's requested accommodation of being permitted to [*18]  continue working as press assistant by working around his physical limitations and receiving assistance from his co-workers when necessary. Again, Plaintiff's supervisors testified that Plaintiff could do his job, that he could work around his physical limitations, and that they had not received any complaints from Plaintiff's co-workers regarding his job performance. (Doc. 38-2, at 14, 16-17; Doc. 42-1, at 7, 16.) Additionally, Plaintiff's co-workers testified that it was not uncommon for employees working on Defendant's presses to help each other if they needed assistance. (Doc. 38-2, at 15, 39.) From this evidence, a reasonable jury could find that Plaintiff could perform the essential functions of the press assistant position with a reasonable accommodation.
Further, Defendant has not produced any evidence that accommodating Plaintiff's disability would cause undue hardship to Plaintiff's co-workers or Defendant's business. Thus, even if the physical requirements listed in the press assistant job description were essential functions, Defendant has not met its burden to demonstrate that it could not accommodate Plaintiff without imposing undue hardship on Plaintiff's co-workers or [*19]  Defendant's business. Accordingly, the Court will DENY Defendant's motion for summary judgment on Plaintiff's claims for failure to accommodate under the ADA.
iii. Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process Under the ADA
Under the ADA, to determine whether a reasonable accommodation is available, the employer must initiate an informal, interactive process to "identify the precise limitations resulting from the disability and potential reasonable accommodations that could overcome those limitations." Kleiber v. Honda of Am. Mfg., Inc., 485 F.3d 862, 871 (6th Cir. 2007) (quoting 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3)). "[T]he interactive process requires communication and good-faith exploration of possible accommodations." Id.; Moates v. Hamilton Cty., 976 F. Supp. 2d 984, (E.D. Tenn. 2013) ("Even though Plaintiff may be able to offer assistive input into creating a reasonable accommodation, the ADA is clear that this is not a burden that Plaintiff carries on h[is] own. As Plaintiff's employer, Defendant[ ] had access to knowledge relating to resources and personnel which placed [it] in a superior position to determine what reasonable accommodations could have been made for Plaintiff.").
As explained by the Sixth Circuit in Rorrer v. City of Stow, evidence that an employer predetermined an employee was unfit to perform a job before engaging in the interactive [*20]  process creates a genuine issue of material fact as to whether the employer engaged in the interactive process in good faith. 743 F.3d 1025, 1045 (6th Cir. 2014) In Rorrer, the plaintiff-firefighter lost all vision in his right eye as a result of a bottle-rocket accident, and the municipal defendant eventually terminated his employment after determining that he could not perform the essential functions of his job with or without an accommodation—namely, driving a fire apparatus during an emergency. Id. at 1031. Prior to his termination, the plaintiff-firefighter requested that the municipal defendant accommodate his disability by authorizing him to continue working as a firefighter without having to drive a fire apparatus during an emergency. Id. at 1043. On appeal, the Sixth Circuit noted that fact questions remained as to whether driving a fire apparatus during an emergency was an essential function of the firefighter position and that the municipal defendant failed to inquire as to whether plaintiff could be removed from the driving rotation. Id. at 1044. The Sixth Circuit concluded that the municipal defendant's "immediate conclusion" that the plaintiff was "unfit to serve as a firefighter suggests bad faith and falls short of its obligation under [*21]  the ADA to assist an employee seeking an accommodation," and accordingly, held that the district court improperly granted summary judgment on plaintiff's failure to engage in the interactive process claim. Id. at 1045.
In this case, drawing all reasonable inferences in Plaintiff's favor, the Court finds that genuine issues of material fact remain as to whether Defendant engaged in the interactive process in good faith. As in Rorrer, questions of fact remain as to whether physical requirements listed in the press assistant job description are essential job functions. Additionally, testimony from Human Resources Manager Young suggests that Defendant's management team may have determined that it could not accommodate Plaintiff based primarily on the FCE and the press assistant job description before they met with him on July 18, 2014. (Doc. 38-1, at 38-39.) Young specifically testified that she met with her management team twice to discuss Plaintiff's circumstances. (Id.) She testified that at the first meeting, sometime between June 27, 2014, and July 3, 2014, her management team made the decision to place Plaintiff "out of work." (Id.) Young further testified that the management team determined [*22]  it could not accommodate Plaintiff at a second meeting, but could not recall whether that second meeting occurred before or after she and Eaton met with Plaintiff on July 18, 2014.6 (Id.) At a minimum, Young's testimony is ambiguous as to when Defendant's management team made the decision that it could not accommodate Plaintiff. If this decision occurred before Young and Eaton met with Plaintiff on July 18, 2014, it would constitute evidence that Defendant predetermined it could not accommodate Plaintiff and that it did not engage in the interactive process in good faith. Construing the evidence in the light most favorable to the Plaintiff and drawing all reasonable inferences in his favor, Young's testimony creates an issue of material fact as to whether Defendant engaged in the interactive process in good faith. Accordingly, the Court will DENY Defendant's motion for summary judgment on Plaintiff's claim for failure to engage in the interactive process as required by the ADA.
iv. Retaliation Under the ADA and TDA
The ADA also provides that "[n]o person shall discriminate against any individual because such individual has opposed any act or practice made unlawful by this chapter or because [*23]  such individual made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this chapter." 42 U.S.C. § 12203(a). In the absence of direct evidence, claims for retaliation under the ADA are analyzed using the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework.7 Rorrer, 743 F.3d at 1046. To establish a prima facie case for retaliation under the ADA, Plaintiff must demonstrate that: (1) he engaged in protected activity; (2) Defendant knew he engaged in protected activity; (3) Defendant took an adverse employment action against him; and (4) there was a causal connection between his protected activity and Defendant's adverse employment action. Id.
In this case, Plaintiff has not satisfied his burden of establishing a prima facie case for retaliation under the ADA. First, Plaintiff asserts that he engaged in protected activity "by requesting an accommodation when he submitted multiple notes requesting accommodations for restrictions related to his workplace injury from late 2013 to mid-2014." (Doc. 41, at 24.) In support of this assertion, Plaintiff cites to Defendant's EEOC position statement (Doc. 42-2, at 2-5), and an October 30, 2014 e-mail sent to Young which provided a summary of [*24]  Plaintiff's restrictions, doctor visits, and dates he was unable to work (Doc. 42-1, at 37). Neither of these documents, however, references notes submitted by Plaintiff requesting accommodations. Second, even taking into consideration Plaintiff's request for an accommodation made at his meeting with Young and Eaton on July 18, 2014, there is insufficient evidence in the record to support a finding of a causal connection between that request and Plaintiff's eventual termination. Defendant placed Plaintiff "out of work" almost immediately after receiving the FCE report on or around July 2, 2014, thereby suggesting Defendant did not believe it could accommodate Plaintiff's restrictions before the July 18, 2014 meeting. Further, Defendant did not terminate Plaintiff's employment until November 3, 2014—more than three months after the July 18, 2014 meeting and only after Plaintiff requested a separation notice. The mere fact that Defendant ultimately concluded it could not reasonably accommodate Plaintiff's restrictions, even if it did so incorrectly, by itself, is not sufficient evidence of a causal connection linking Plaintiff's request for an accommodation to his eventual termination. [*25] 8 Barrett v. Lucent Techs., Inc., 36 F. App'x 835, 841 (6th Cir. 2002) ("To show a causal connection, a plaintiff must produce sufficient evidence to infer that an employer would not have taken the adverse employment action had the plaintiff not engaged in a protected activity.") Accordingly, because Plaintiff has failed to satisfy his burden of establishing a prima facie case for retaliation under the ADA, the Court will GRANT Defendant's motion for summary judgment on Plaintiff's ADA retaliation claim.
Additionally, to the extent Plaintiff previously sought to pursue a claim for retaliatory discharge under the TDA, his response brief states that he is voluntarily dismissing that claim. (Doc. 41, at 3.) Accordingly, the Court will GRANT Defendant's motion for summary judgment on Plaintiff's retaliation claim under the TDA.

B. Common Law Retaliatory Discharge
Defendant has also moved for summary judgment on Plaintiff's claim that he was terminated in retaliation for filing a workers' compensation claim, arguing that Plaintiff cannot demonstrate that his workers' compensation claims were a substantial factor in Defendant's motivation to terminate his employment.
The elements of a common law prima facie case for a workers' compensation retaliatory discharge [*26]  claim are: (1) the plaintiff was an employee of the defendant at the time of the injury; (2) the plaintiff made a claim against the defendant for workers' compensation benefits; (3) the defendant terminated the plaintiff's employment; and (4) the claim for workers' compensation benefits was a substantial factor in the employer's motivation to terminate the employee's employment.
Yardley v. Hosp. Housekeeping Sys., LLC, 470 S.W.3d 800, 805 (Tenn. 2015). It is Plaintiff's burden to demonstrate that his claim for workers' compensation was a "substantial factor" in Defendant's decision to terminate him, and he "cannot carry his burden simply by proving that he filed a worker's compensation claim followed by his termination." Morris v. Columbia Const. Co., 109 S.W.3d 314, 317 (Tenn. Ct. App. 2003).
In support of Plaintiff's argument that his workers' compensation claim was a substantial factor in Defendant's decision to terminate him, Plaintiff relies on the declaration of Jimmy Smotherman, plant manager for Defendant from 2012 to 2015. In his declaration, Smotherman avers that, in his experience, "if an employee got injured, [Defendant] would look for a reason to fire the employee," and that, with respect to Plaintiff, he "knew that [Defendant] did not want him to come back and continue to have benefits after his worker's compensation [*27]  injury and surgery."9 (Doc. 42-2, at 72.) Such testimony is sufficient to create a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Plaintiff's workers' compensation claim was a substantial factor in Defendant's motivation to terminate his employment.10 Accordingly, the Court will DENY Defendant's motion for summary judgment on Plaintiff's claim for common law worker's compensation retaliatory discharge.

C. FMLA
Defendant has also moved for summary judgment on Plaintiff's claim for violation of the FMLA. In his response, Plaintiff states that he is "voluntarily dismissing" his FMLA claim. (Doc. 41, at 3.) Accordingly, the Court will GRANT Defendant's motion for summary judgment on Plaintiff's FMLA claim.

IV. CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated herein, Defendant's motion for summary judgment (Doc. 36) is GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART. Plaintiff's claims for retaliation under the ADA and TDA and for violation of the FMLA are hereby DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE. The following claims will proceed to trial: (1) disability discrimination under the ADA and TDA; (2) failure to accommodate under the ADA; (3) failure to engage in the interactive process under the ADA; and (4) common law workers' compensation [*28]  retaliatory discharge.
SO ORDERED.
/s/ Travis R. McDonough
TRAVIS R. MCDONOUGH
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

