Gunter v. Bemis Co.
United States District Court for the Eastern District of Tennessee
August 30, 2017, Filed
Case No. 4:16-cv-37

Reporter
2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 215653 *
TONY A. GUNTER, Plaintiff, v. BEMIS COMPANY, INC., Defendant.
Subsequent History: Affirmed in part and reversed in part by, Remanded by Gunter v. Bemis Co., 906 F.3d 484, 2018 U.S. App. LEXIS 29010, 2018 WL 4997777 (6th Cir. Tenn., Oct. 16, 2018)
Prior History: Gunter v. Bemis Co., 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 231762 (E.D. Tenn., Mar. 15, 2017)
Counsel:  [*1] For Tony A. Gunter, Plaintiff: Anne Hunter, Heather Moore Collins, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Collins & Hunter PLLC, Brentwood, TN.
For Bemis Company Inc, Defendant: Jonathan O Harris, LEAD ATTORNEY, Thomas Wyly Whitworth, Ogletree, Deakins, Nash, Smoak & Stewart, P.C. (Nashville), Nashville, TN.
For Lisa Ramsay Cole, Movant: Jonathan J Cole, LEAD ATTORNEY, Baker, Donelson, Bearman, Caldwell & Berkowitz (Nashville), Nashville, TN.
Judges: TRAVIS R. MCDONOUGH, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE. Magistrate Judge Christopher H. Steger.
Opinion by: TRAVIS R. MCDONOUGH
Opinion



ORDER
Before the Court is Defendant's renewed motion for judgment as a matter of law or, in the alternative, for a new trial. (Doc. 105.) For the reasons stated hereafter, Defendant's motion (Doc. 105) will be GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART.

I. BACKGROUND
Plaintiff Tony Gunter initiated this action on July 2, 2015. (Doc. 1.) In his amended complaint, Plaintiff asserted claims against Defendant Bemis Company, Inc., for: (1) violations of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), as amended by the ADA Amendments Act of 2008 ("ADAAA"); (2) violation of the Tennessee Disability Act ("TDA"), Tenn. Code Ann. § 8-50-103; (3) common law workers' compensation retaliatory discharge; and (4) violation of the  [*2]  Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 ("FMLA"), 29 U.S.C. § 2601, et seq. (Doc. 5.) For a brief summary of the background of the case, see the Court's order on the motion for summary judgment (Doc. 55).
After the Court ruled on Defendant's motion for summary judgment, Plaintiff's only remaining claims were for: (1) disability discrimination under the ADA and TDA; (2) failure to accommodate under the ADA; (3) failure to engage in the interactive process under the ADA; and (4) common law workers' compensation retaliatory discharge. (Doc. 55.) Prior to trial, Plaintiff abandoned his common law retaliatory discharge claim. At the close of Plaintiff's proof during trial, Defendant moved for judgment as a matter of law on all claims, which the Court denied. After all proof closed during trial, Plaintiff abandoned his TDA claim.
After deliberations, the jury returned a verdict finding that Defendant violated the ADA by terminating Plaintiff's employment on the basis of a disability, failing to engage in the interactive process in good faith, and failing to reasonably accommodate Plaintiff's disability. (Doc. 97.) The jury awarded Plaintiff $181,522.61 in back pay, $315,000 in front pay, and $92,000 in compensatory damages. (Id.) The Court [*3]  entered judgment against Defendant in the amount of $588,522.61, pursuant to the jury's verdict, along with any interest as provided by law and any costs and fees allowed by the Court pursuant to Rule 58(e). (Doc. 104.) Defendant has now filed its renewed motion for judgment as a matter of law or, in the alternative, for a new trial pursuant to Rules 50 and 59 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. (Doc. 105.)

II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
Rule 50 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure provides that a court may grant judgment as a matter of law against a party who has been fully heard on an issue during a jury trial if "the court finds that a reasonable jury would not have a legally sufficient evidentiary basis to find for the party on that issue." Fed. R. Civ. P. 50(a)(1). Where jurisdiction is based on a federal statute, "the evidence should be viewed in the light most favorable to the party against whom the motion is made, and that party given the benefit of all reasonable inferences." K & T Enters., Inc. v. Zurich Ins. Co., 97 F.3d 171, 175-76 (6th Cir. 1996); see also Jackson v. FedEx Corp. Servs., Inc., 518 F.3d 388, 392 (6th Cir. 2008). Defendant's motion should be granted "only if reasonable minds could not come to a conclusion other than one favoring the movant." K & T Enters., 97 F.3d at 176 (citing Wehr v. Ryan's Family Steak Houses, Inc., 49 F.3d 1150, 1152 (6th Cir. 1995); Phelps v. Yale Sec., Inc., 986 F.2d 1020, 1023 (6th Cir. 1993)). The Court will not reweigh the evidence, question the credibility of witnesses, or substitute its own judgment for that of the jury. Black v. Zaring Homes, 104 F.3d 822, 825 (6th Cir. 1997).
Rule 59 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure provides that after a jury trial, a court [*4]  may grant a new trial "for any reason for which a new trial has heretofore been granted in an action at law in federal court." The Court may grant a new trial only "when a jury has reached a 'seriously erroneous result' as evidenced by[ ] (1) the verdict being against the weight of evidence; (2) the damages being excessive; or (3) the trial being unfair to the moving party in some fashion." Mike's Train House, Inc. v. Lionel, LLC, 472 F.3d 398, 405 (6th Cir. 2006) (quoting Holmes v. Massilon, 78 F.3d 1041, 1045-46 (6th Cir. 1996)). However, the Court is "not free to reweigh the evidence or set aside the jury verdict merely because the jury could have drawn different inferences or conclusions." Barnes v. Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp., 201 F.3d 815, 821 (6th Cir. 2000). Therefore, a court should not grant a new trial on the basis that the verdict was against the weight of evidence "unless the verdict was unreasonable"; that is, "if a reasonable juror could reach the challenged verdict, a new trial is improper." Id. at 820-21 (quotations omitted).
Although the standards of law for Rules 50 and 59 both discuss "the reasonableness of a jury verdict, the standard for granting a new trial is less stringent than the standard for granting a judgment as a matter of law." Hoback v. City of Chattanooga, No. 1:10-cv-74, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 124794, 2012 WL 3834828, at *3 (E.D. Tenn. Sept. 4, 2012) (citing Denhof v. City of Grand Rapids, 494 F.3d 534, 543 (6th Cir. 2007) ("[G]ranting a judgment as a matter of law is governed by a higher showing [than granting a [*5]  new trial].")). "Judgment as a matter of law requires 'no legally sufficient basis for a reasonable jury to find for that party on that issue,' Fed. R. Civ. P. 50(a), whereas a new trial may be granted where the verdict is 'clearly against the weight of the evidence,' Denhof, 494 F.3d at 543." Id. Therefore, when a court finds the evidence sufficient to withstand a new trial challenge under the lower standard, the evidence must also be sufficient to withstand a motion for judgment as a matter of law. Id. (citing Denhof, 494 F.3d at 543 ("[By] extension, this analysis applies to reverse the judgment as a matter of law as well.")).1

III. ANALYSIS
Defendant argues it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, or a new trial, on the basis that no reasonable jury could have determined that Plaintiff: (1) was a "qualified individual" under the ADA; (2) fulfilled his obligation to mitigate his damages; (3) demonstrated that he was entitled to lost benefits; and (4) proved that reinstatement was not feasible. (Doc. 106, at 3.)

A. "Otherwise Qualified"
The ADA prohibits employers from discriminating against "qualified individual[s] with a disability." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). Furthermore, the ADA requires employers to make "reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations [*6]  of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability." § 12112(b)(5)(A).
A "qualified individual" is someone "with a disability who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position . . . ." § 12111(8); Hedrick v. W. Reserve Care Sys., 355 F.3d 444, 456 (6th Cir. 2004). An individual is "disabled" under the ADA if he has "(A) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities . . . ; (B) a record of such an impairment; or (C) [is] regarded as having such an impairment." § 12102(1). Generally, the "essential functions" of a job are the functions deemed essential by an employer's judgment and the job description prior to litigation. E.E.O.C. v. Ford Motor Co., 782 F.3d 753, 761-62 (6th Cir. 2015). They are the functions of a job that are "fundamental," as opposed to marginal, such that a job would be "fundamentally altered" if one was removed. Id. at 762. However, "written job descriptions are . . . not dispositive." Rorrer v. City of Stow, 743 F.3d 1025, 1040 (6th Cir. 2014). Though consideration is given to an employer's determination of the essential functions of a job, "federal courts are not 'required to give deference to [the employer's] judgment regarding what the essential functions of the position [are]' when the record suggests that there" is evidence to the contrary. Id. at 1042 (quoting Keith v. Cnty. of Oakland, 703 F.3d 918, 925-26 (6th Cir. 2013)).
Defendant argues the evidence [*7]  presented at trial was insufficient for a reasonable jury to find that Plaintiff was qualified "to perform the essential functions of his Press Assistant job with or without reasonable accommodation." (Doc. 106, at 3.) Specifically, Defendant argues that it was entitled to accept the medical opinions in Plaintiff's functional capacity evaluation ("FCE") and from Dr. Garside in determining that Plaintiff could not perform the essential functions of a Press Assistant. (Id. at 3-7.) Therefore, according to Defendant, Plaintiff could not demonstrate that he was a qualified individual under the ADA.
Inherent in Defendant's argument is the idea that the "essential functions" established by the job description accurately represented the work required to perform the position. However, the law does not necessarily grant such deference to a job description, particularly in the face of contrary evidence.2
At trial, the jury was presented with conflicting evidence from which it could have determined that the essential functions of the Press Assistant job differed from those detailed in the job description. For instance, the jury heard Defendant's environmental health and safety coordinator, [*8]  Wayne Eaton, testify that a team of plant engineers, press operators, and press helpers developed the job descriptions for employees working on the presses; Kathryn Young and Rob Pearse testify that the job description was the lens by which Plaintiff's FCE was tested; and Young testify about the process by which Defendant evaluated the FCE results and Dr. Garside's opinions, in light of the job description. However, the jury also heard evidence from which it could have determined that the job description, and the essential functions listed in that job description, did not accurately depict the job requirements. For instance, the jury heard testimony from several employees of Defendant that Plaintiff performed the job of Press Assistant with only minor restrictions, and without issue, up until he was placed on leave. The jury also heard testimony from coworkers that it was customary for people who work for Defendant on the presses to work together as a team to help one another out. See Camp v. BI-LO, LLC, 662 F. App'x 357, 364 (6th Cir. 2016) (finding that substantial evidence that an employee is performing his job under an informal arrangement with his coworkers should be considered in a positive light). Additionally, the jury heard testimony [*9]  from a longtime employee of Defendant, Clarence Jennings, regarding specific discrepancies between the actual requirements of the job and the stated job description. For example, Mr. Jennings testified that, although the job description states that Press Assistants carry things twenty percent of the time and climb on things forty percent of the time, they actually perform those tasks far less often than represented.
Further, the jury heard Kathryn Young testify that decisionmakers involved in placing Plaintiff on leave did not inquire into Plaintiff's actual job performance in making their decision that he could not perform the job, and instead relied only on the job description, the FCE, and Dr. Garside's opinion. Similarly, the jury heard Rob Pearse testify that he relied only on the job description and never observed Plaintiff actually perform the job when he performed the FCE evaluation on Plaintiff. The jury also heard Mr. Pearse testify that he performed the FCE evaluation on Plaintiff after he had already worked an eight-hour shift that day—a condition he admitted at trial could have affected Plaintiff's results.
Defendant argues that it justifiably relied on the FCE and the opinion [*10]  from Dr. Garside in reaching its determination regarding Plaintiff's abilities. (See id.) However, there was evidence presented at trial from which a reasonable jury certainly could have concluded that the job description, and the essential functions reflected in that job description, inaccurately represented the work required in Plaintiff's position. Therefore, a reasonable jury could have weighed the evidence in a manner contrary to Defendant's assertions and concluded that Plaintiff was "otherwise qualified" to perform the Press Assistant job, despite the FCE and Dr. Garside's opinion. Accordingly, the Court will DENY Defendant's motion on this issue.

B. Reasonable Accommodation
Impermissible discrimination under the ADA includes "not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability . . . ." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). To establish a claim for failure to accommodate, a plaintiff must show that "(1) [ ]he is disabled within the meaning of the Act; (2) [ ]he is otherwise qualified for the position; (3) [his] employer knew or had reason to know about [his] disability; (4) [ ]he requested an accommodation; and (5) the employer failed [*11]  to provide the necessary accommodation." Johnson v. Cleveland City Sch. Dist., 443 F. App'x 974, 982-83 (6th Cir. 2011). Ultimately, the employee bears the burden of proposing a reasonable accommodation. Id. (citing Tubbs v. Formica Corp., 107 F. App'x 485, 488-89 (6th Cir. 2004)); see also Rorrer, 743 F.3d at 1041 (noting that a "failure to engage in the interactive process is only an independent violation of the ADA if the plaintiff establishes . . . that he proposed a reasonable accommodation"). The ADA defines "reasonable accommodation" to include "making existing facilities used by employees readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities; and . . . job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, reassignment to a vacant position, acquisition or modification of equipment or devices . . . and other similar accommodations." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(9)(B).
Once an employee has proposed a reasonable accommodation, "the employer has a duty to engage in the 'interactive process' to identify the precise limitations resulting from the disability and potential reasonable accommodations that could overcome those limitations." Melange v. City of Ctr. Line, 482 F. App'x 81, 84 (6th Cir. 2012) (internal citation omitted); see also Kleiber v. Honda of Am. Mfg., Inc., 485 F.3d 862, 871 (6th Cir. 2007). "If a plaintiff's requested accommodation is a transfer to a different position, 'employers have a duty to locate [a] suitable position . . . .'" Rorrer, 743 F.3d at 1040 (citing Kleiber, 485 F.3d at 871)). However, an employer is not required [*12]  to create a new, standalone position. Kleiber, 485 F.3d at 869. Engaging in "the interactive process requires communication and good-faith exploration of possible accommodations." Id. at 871; see also Moates v. Hamilton Cty., 976 F. Supp. 2d 984, 993 (E.D. Tenn. 2013) ("Even though Plaintiff may be able to offer assistive input into creating a reasonable accommodation, the ADA is clear that this is not a burden that Plaintiff carries on h[is] own. As Plaintiff's employer, Defendant[ ] had access to knowledge relating to resources and personnel which placed [it] in a superior position to determine what reasonable accommodations could have been made for Plaintiff.").
Defendant argues it is entitled to a new trial on Plaintiff's claims for failure to accommodate and failure to engage in the interactive process because Plaintiff failed to request a reasonable accommodation. (Doc. 106, at 8.) More specifically, Defendant argues Plaintiff only proposed reassigning him to a tow motor driver position—of which none were available at the time—or a position cutting cores—which was not a standalone job. (Id. at 9.) Further, Defendant argues it provided Plaintiff with a reasonable accommodation in the form of leave after July 18, 2014. (Id. at 10.)
The evidence presented at trial confirmed that, during the interactive [*13]  meeting, Plaintiff asked if Defendant could place him in a position cutting cores or driving a tow motor if he could not return to his job.3 The law does not require Defendant to create a new, standalone position. Because cutting cores was a not standalone position, that request was, therefore, not a request for a reasonable accommodation.
Defendant also contends that Plaintiff's request to drive a tow motor was not a reasonable request. According to Defendant, Plaintiff's request to drive a tow motor failed to satisfy his burden to propose a reasonable accommodation because a tow motor driver position was not available at the time. Defendant cites no law to support this contention. Given the duty placed on employers to locate a suitable position if a plaintiff's requested accommodation is a transfer to a different position, see Kleiber, 485 F.3d at 870, the Court is unconvinced that a plaintiff fails to meet his burden simply because he does not have the knowledge available to him to suggest transfer to an open position at the time of his request. Considering the superior information available to the employer, particularly regarding personnel and resources, as compared to the employee, such a conclusion is [*14]  unreasonable. See Moates, 976 F. Supp. 2d at 993. Given the fact that Defendant had previously placed Plaintiff in a tow motor driver position for three months while he recovered from an earlier surgery, a reasonable jury could conclude that Plaintiff's request to drive a tow motor satisfied his duty to request a reasonable accommodation.4 (See Doc. 38-1, at 12, 14.)
Because a reasonable jury could have considered the evidence presented at trial and concluded that Plaintiff requested a reasonable accommodation when he asked to be placed in a position driving a tow motor, the Court will DENY Defendant's motion on this issue.

C. Mitigation of Damages - Back Pay
"Once a claimant establishes a prima facie case and presents evidence on the issue of damages, the burden of producing sufficient evidence to establish the amount of interim earnings or lack of diligence shifts to the defendant." Rasimas v. Mich. Dept. of Mental Health, 714 F.2d 614, 623-24 (6th Cir. 1983.) In terms of mitigating damages, once the burden shifts, Defendant has the burden to "show that substantially equivalent positions were available and the plaintiff did not use reasonable diligence to seek them out." Hoback, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 124794, 2012 WL 3834828, at *12 (citing Taylor v. Invacare Corp., 64 F. App'x 516, 523 (6th Cir. 2003)). A substantially equivalent position affords a terminated employee "virtually identical promotional [*15]  opportunities, compensation, job responsibilities, working conditions, and status." Rasimas, 714 F.2d at 624. Furthermore, "a claimant is only required to make reasonable efforts to mitigate damages, and is not held to the highest standards of diligence." Id. at 624. "The claimant's burden is not onerous, and does not require him to be successful in mitigation." Id.
Defendant argues it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, or a new trial, on Plaintiff's claim for back-pay damages because Plaintiff failed to mitigate his damages. (Doc. 106, at 11-14.) Specifically, Defendant argues Plaintiff failed to fulfill his duty to seek alternative employment and Plaintiff's depression and his decision to serve as a caretaker over his father in law did not alleviate him of his duty to mitigate his loss of income. (Id. at 11-12.)
Defendant's argument neglects to consider all the evidence the jury heard on this issue. At trial, the jury heard testimony from Plaintiff about how he had spoken with people at several different retail auto parts stores, as well as a garage owned by his county, but was told he could not get any of those jobs due to his lack of education and inability to work a computer. Regardless of whether Plaintiff suffered [*16]  from depression or ultimately elected to take care of his father-in-law, given that a plaintiff is required only to make reasonable efforts to mitigate his damages, a reasonable juror could have concluded that his efforts in seeking out employment at the auto parts stores and county garage satisfied his duty. Moreover, at trial, Defendant presented very little, if any, proof that substantially equivalent positions which would have afforded him similar opportunities to his Press Assistant position were available to Plaintiff, especially considering his location and illiteracy. Given the proof of Plaintiff's attempts to secure other employment and a lack of proof on Defendant's part regarding substantially equivalent positions, a reasonable jury could have concluded that Plaintiff attempted to mitigate his damages. Accordingly, the Court will DENY Defendant's motion on this issue.

D. Lost Benefits
Lost fringe benefits should be awarded based on the actual expenses incurred by a plaintiff in securing substitute insurance or medical care as opposed to the value of the policy. Hance v. Norfolk S. Ry. Co., 571 F.3d 511, 522 (6th Cir. 2009) (adopting the approach that lost benefits should be based on actual expenses as opposed to the value of the policy). [*17]  However, damages "need not be proven with the exactitude of lost profits in a breach of contract case . . . ." Id. at 520. Although an award of damages cannot be "appropriately founded on mere speculation[,] . . . absolute accuracy in the calculation of damages is not necessary either." Id. While "the plaintiff bears the burden of proving damages," he "is entitled to the amount claimed unless the defendant can prove otherwise." Id. at 519.
Defendant argues the jury awarded an improper measure of damages related to lost benefits. (Doc. 106, at 17.) Specifically, Defendant argues Plaintiff's calculation of back-pay damages improperly includes $28,179.86 in lost health benefits and $1,397.93 in lost dental benefits; and his calculation of front-pay damages improperly included $53,240.40 in lost health benefits and $2,239.57 in lost dental benefits. (Id.) Defendant contends that, because Plaintiff's wife testified at trial that she added her husband to her benefits plan at work, the appropriate measure of lost-benefits damages should be the additional cost of adding him to that plan—proof that was not presented at trial. (See Doc. 119, at 3-4.)
Defendant is correct. The Sixth Circuit has unequivocally established [*18]  that the proper measure of damages for lost benefits is based on the actual expenses incurred by plaintiff in securing substitute benefits. See Hance, 571 F.3d at 522. At trial, Plaintiff's spouse testified that, in preparing calculations for front and back pay, she calculated lost benefits and based those numbers on the value of those policies. This testimony is affirmative evidence that front- and back-pay damages attributable to lost benefits were improperly calculated. On the verdict form, the jury awarded the full amount of damages as represented on Plaintiff's proof for front- and back-pay damages. There is no question the jury adopted Plaintiff's improper version of lostbenefits damages.
Plaintiff's wife also testified at trial that, after her husband lost his job, she added him to her insurance benefits through her own job. However, no evidence was offered regarding the additional cost of adding Plaintiff to his wife's benefits plan, which would have been the appropriate measure of lost-benefits damages.
Because the evidence presented at trial established that the lost-benefits calculation was improper, and because Plaintiff failed to offer proof of the appropriate calculation of lost benefits, the [*19]  amount of damages awarded by the jury that is attributable to lost benefits under front- and back-pay damages must be vacated. Accordingly, the Court will GRANT Defendant's motion on this issue and reduce the award of front- and back-pay damages to exclude the amounts awarded in connection with Plaintiff's lost benefits.

E. Front Pay
The Sixth Circuit has established that "reinstatement is the presumptively favored equitable remedy" in employment actions. Roush v. KFC Nat'l Mgmt. Co., 10 F.3d 392, 398 (6th Cir. 1993). However, the Sixth Circuit has "never held that a plaintiff must request reinstatement as a prerequisite to recovering front pay." Id. at 398 n.8. Thus, even though reinstatement should be granted in the ordinary case, "it is an equitable remedy which is not appropriate in every case, such as where the plaintiff has found other work, where reinstatement would require displacement of a non-culpable employee, or where hostility would result." Id. (citing Henry v. Lennox Indus., 768 F.2d 746, 752-53 (6th Cir. 1985)). Even where a plaintiff does not request or seek reinstatement, the fact that a defendant presents no proof suggesting it offered reinstatement or that reinstatement is a viable remedy is instructive. Id.
Defendant argues the Court should set aside the jury's award of front pay because Plaintiff [*20]  failed to present evidence that reinstatement was not feasible. (Doc. 106, at 20.) At trial, Plaintiff repeatedly testified that he had reiterated throughout the process his desire, and preference, to get his job back as opposed to pursuing legal action. Yet, the evidence also established that Defendant's position throughout the case has remained that it could not, and cannot still, accommodate Plaintiff by reinstating him. Accordingly, Defendant's argument that Plaintiff is not entitled to front pay due to a failure to present proof that reinstatement is a viable remedy is baseless. The Court will DENY Defendant's motion on this issue.

IV. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, the Court GRANTS IN PART and DENIES IN PART Defendant's motion for judgment as a matter of law (Doc. 105). The Court WILL REDUCE the amount of back pay damages awarded by the jury by the amount attributable to lost benefits under Plaintiff's damages calculation, $29,577.79. The Court WILL REDUCE the amount of front-pay damages awarded by the jury by the amount attributable to lost benefits, $53,240.40. An appropriate amended judgment will issue with this order.
AN AMENDED JUDGMENT WILL ENTER.
/s/ Travis R. McDonough [*21] 
TRAVIS R. MCDONOUGH
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

