Hansen v. Skywest Airlines
United States District Court for the District of Wyoming
September 28, 2015, Decided; September 28, 2015, Filed
Case No. 13-CV-244-J

Reporter
2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 200185 *
DAVID HANSEN, Plaintiff, vs. SKYWEST AIRLINES, Defendant.
Prior History: Hansen v. Sky West Airlines, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 197420 (D. Wyo., Mar. 31, 2014)
Counsel:  [*1] For David Hansen, Plaintiff: Jeffrey C Gosman, LEAD ATTORNEY, Casper, WY; Richard J Mulligan, LEAD ATTORNEY, Mulligan Law Office, P.C., Jackson, WY.
For Sky West Airlines, Defendant: Chad A Shultz, LEAD ATTORNEY, PRO HAC VICE, GORDON & REES, Atlanta, GA; John Keen, LEAD ATTORNEY, GORDON & REES, Denver, CO; Julia C Glasgow, Leslie K Eason, LEAD ATTORNEYS, PRO HAC VICE, GORDON & REES LLP, Atlanta, GA.
Judges: ALAN B. JOHNSON, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: ALAN B. JOHNSON
Opinion



ORDER GRANTING DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
The motion for summary judgment filed by defendant Sky West Airlines (Doc. 41) and the plaintiff's response in opposition to the motion (Doc. 51) came before the Court for hearing on August 6, 2015. The Court, having reviewed the parties' written submissions and materials offered in support of their respective positions, the arguments of counsel at the hearing, the applicable law, all matters of record, and being fully advised, FINDS and ORDERS as follows.

Standard of Review
Summary judgment is appropriate where the movant has demonstrated that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P., 56(a); Johnson v. Weld County, Colo, 594 F.3d 1202, 1207-1208 (10th Cir. 2010). As a general matter, the summary [*2]  judgment movant has the burden to produce evidence supporting its claims. Kannady v. City of Kiowa, 590 F.3d 1161, 1169 (10th Cir. 2010). If the movant does so, the burden of production shifts to the party opposing summary judgment to demonstrate that a genuine issue of material fact exists. Id. At all times, the Court must view the evidence in the light most favorable to the party opposing summary judgment. Id. at 1168. There is a genuine issue of material fact if a reasonable jury could find in favor of the non-moving party. Id. at 1169. In addition, the Court may only consider evidence that is admissible at trial — inadmissible evidence should be disregarded. Johnson, 594 F.3d at 1209. "It is well settled in this circuit that we can consider only admissible evidence in reviewing an order granting summary judgment." Gross v. Burggraf Const. Co., 52 F.3d 1531, 1541 (10th Cir. 1995) (citations omitted). "Hearsay testimony cannot be considered because [a] third party's description of [a witness's] supposed testimony is not suitable grist for the summary judgment mill." Id. (citation and quotation marks omitted, alterations in original).

Background
This case is brought under Title VII, with the plaintiff David Hansen ("Hansen"), a gay man, asserting claims of sexual harassment, hostile work environment, retaliation, and a state law claim for outrageous conduct. [*3]  He began work as an at will employee with SkyWest in 2003 in Salt Lake City, Utah. He contends that from the beginning of his employment at SkyWest in Utah in 2003, he was subjected to sexual harassment by a gay supervisor and other co-workers. After he began working for SkyWest in Utah, in 2004 he asked his counselor, Scott Peterson, to write a letter to SkyWest's Human Relations Department ("HR") to indicate that he suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder ("PTSD"), aggravated by workplace harassment and unwanted sexual contact and talk. At his request, the counselor, Scott Peterson, LCSW, provided an undated letter to SkyWest's Human Relations Department ("HR"). Doc. 51-1, 148; Doc. 51-2. This letter states:
This letter is in regard to Mr. David Hansen whom I have seen in my practice as a psychotherapist. During the course of our session of February 4, 2004, I asked him to respond to questions (as specified in the Fourth Edition of the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual) associated with Post Traumatic Stress Disorder. Mr. Hansen qualifies for nearly the entire list of symptom[] for a case of PTSD. Among them include, "intense psychological distress [*4]  at exposure to internal or external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event."
His condition could be triggered by employment issues such as discrimination, conflict, and a sense that he is being taken advantage of.
Id. The letter from the therapist does not provide specifics as to what would trigger an episode of PTSD nor is there any indication that discrimination is the only cause.
From the time he began working in the airline industry, specifically with SkyWest, Hansen says he believed people wanted to have sex, and they wanted to have sex with him. He describes the company as one where there was a lot of sexual energy, a sexually charged "culture" where a lot of young people were "peaking with their hormones and a lot of things were said." Doc. 51-1. He has asserted that many employees, male and female, harassed him and sought to be sexually involved with him during his entire tenure with SkyWest. He complains about inappropriate touchings, propositions, remarks and harassment, and other kinds of retaliation by SkyWest employees, including John Robinson, Lynn Katoa, Natalie Tanaka, Bridget Murphy, Tiffany Crabtree, Stacy Reed, Stefanie Eggett, Derek Semple, [*5]  Christine Shreve, Mary Jo Parker, Toni Carver, Danny Luton, and Dave Hynested.1 He claims that, notwithstanding claimed reports about harassment over the years, the company's employees were "papering his file" or setting him up for disciplinary actions, apparently with the hope that he would quit or would be terminated. He characterizes any investigations that were done by the company, through HR or the Employee Assistance Programs ("EAP"), as shams.
He complains about propositions, invitations to have sex, including forced sex and quid pro quo sex which, where if he would perform sexual favors, he would advance within the company. In his deposition, he says he was under the impression that some of these people wanted to rape him, which in his view was forcing their control over him — i.e., control of his job, control of his timesheet and other items. Doc. 51-1, 45. From the time he was hired in 2003 until the time he was terminated in 2011, he claims to have endured endless sexual harassment and retaliation.
Hansen says his PTSD was the result of an incident in the early 2000s that occurred in Los Angeles. He explains that a former business partner broke into his apartment, using a key, [*6]  and jumped into his bed. During that incident Hansen believed he was going to be killed, although there was no weapon involved. Doc. 51-1, 17-24. The same type of event involving the same former business partner had occurred a number of other times, and in those incidents, it is said the business partner had grabbed a knife and jumped into Hansen's bed; as to those incidents, Hansen thought he was just kidding. Id. None of this was ever reported to law enforcement. Hansen says these events are the cause of his PTSD. Throughout the record, Hansen claims that because of this particular predisposition, he perceives events as sexually harassing; he says that such stress causes his unprofessional workplace behavior. PTSD is the condition he identified as the basis for his disability and age discrimination claims he brought in his 2009 Charge of Discrimination.
The Affidavit of Casey Madsen, the Director of Human Resources at SkyWest (Doc. 41-1) indicates that Hansen's technical performance as an agent was generally acceptable when he was not under stress, but he often struggled when he had to deal with co-workers and supervisors. He had a reputation for being hostile, aggressive, combative [*7]  and difficult. While Hansen was in Salt Lake City, SkyWest says it attempted to ensure his success, including accommodation of his PTSD disability. He received a counseling statement2 November 17, 2006, before his requested transfer to Jackson, Wyoming in 2007, which disclosed that there had been several complaints regarding Hansen's actions and about the way he responded and handled situations involving co-workers and supervisors. The co-workers complained they were uncomfortable with the way he responded to situations and were uncomfortable working with him. Doc. 41-1, 23. That particular 2006 Counseling Statement said:
David is an excellent customer service agent and that is where we want Dave to focus his attention. The concerns brought forward from his peers are serious and we have clearly outlined for Dave our expectations. Any concerns or issues he has need to be brought forward in a professional manner, using the chain of command. SkyWest employees are provided a harassment free, productive work environment. Any further incidents or complaints may result in suspension and review of Dave's file.
The Counseling Statement of November 17, 2006 was signed by Nikki Vejnar of SkyWest [*8]  HR.
During his employment at SkyWest, Hansen had received letters of instruction regarding failures to react professionally and failures to calmly seek resolution of problems. His professionalism while speaking with co-workers and supervisors was addressed often. Numerous "records of discussion and action" forms from 2004 onward are included in Exhibits 4 and 5, attached to Doc. 41-1, Madsen's Affidavit, which express concerns about Hansen's responses to co-workers and other employees. Doc. 41-1. In addition to concerns about Hansen's professionalism on the job, these documents also evidence concern by SkyWest about other job performance issues, including merely by way of example, absences, no-shows, and tardies from work, failures to participate in meetings and read memos.
In 2007, Hansen's request to be transferred from Salt Lake City was accommodated by SkyWest when he was transferred to Jackson, Wyoming. Hansen apparently hoped to escape the alleged sexual harassment problems in Salt Lake. Hansen has stated that almost immediately after he transferred to Jackson in 2007, he was approached by John Robinson to join the gay group at SkyWest in Jackson. Hansen says he refused the offer [*9]  and the harassment began anew.
Robinson became Hansen's supervisor in 2007. Robinson was then dating and was partners with Lynn Katoa, another gay man employed at SkyWest in Jackson. Katoa was not Hansen's supervisor at that time. Hansen claims that he was told by Robinson that if he, Hansen, would provide sexual favors to Robinson, as Robinson had done for Katoa, Hansen would be able to be a supervisor too. Doc. 51-2.
In 2008, on a business trip, Hansen was scheduled to share a hotel room with the two men. He told his Station Manager Kelsey Clark about this and that he felt uncomfortable. Clark arranged for him to have his own separate room. After Clark was terminated from the company, Danny Luton (now deceased) became the new Station Manager in the fall of 2008. In 2008, Hansen claims he requested and received an FMLA accommodation which was to be provided by the employer.3 On October 8, 2008, he received a counseling statement from Danny Luton about altercations involving Hansen and a flight attendant and pilots complaining about Hansen's rude and inappropriate behavior. Consequently, Hansen was placed on suspension, referred to EAP and directed to see a counselor for an assessment [*10]  of his ability to work in a high stress fast-paced environment. He would only be allowed to return to work if the counselor and Hansen himself felt he could adequately handle the job without further incidents of unacceptable behavior toward employees and non-revenue passengers. Doc. 41-1, Madsen Affidavit, Ex. 5. He returned to work October 17, 2008.
Hansen has described certain events to demonstrate that he was the subject of sexual harassment. He claims that in January 2009 Katoa and Robinson invited him to join in a naked hot tub soak at the 2008 Christmas party. He declined. In December 2009, at the 2009 Christmas party, Robinson again asked Hansen to join them in the naked hot tub soak; Hansen said no and continued to his car to go home.
Exhibit 5 included with the Madsen Affidavit includes letters of instruction written in 2009 regarding confrontations, aggressive behavior and conflict with other co-workers. One letter of instruction from Danny Luton and Kathy Makasian states "Dave, you must learn to exist in the Jackson station without continuous conflict arising." Doc. 41-1, 36, Madsen Affidavit, Ex. 5.
On April 16, 2009, Hansen says he was directed by Robinson to "hang seats" [*11]  (holding seats for non-revenue passengers) and he refused to do so. On April 16 and 17, 2009, Hansen claims Robinson rubbed him aggressively. Naomi Stockton, a TSA agent who was not employed by SkyWest, and another individual, apparently saw this incident occur. Her deposition, Doc. 51-3, says she and a co-worker were "asked by Dave Hansen if we would be a witness to a hostile situation that was going on and to just oversee so things didn't get out of hand." Doc. 51-3, 22-23. She stated that during the exchange between Robinson and Hansen, "[as] John got louder and was being more forceful he became in contact with his body toward Dave's" and that his "gentiles [sic] were up against David's hips." Id. When the incident occurred, Hansen, Robinson, Stockton and another person were behind the ticket counter all within five feet of each other; no customers were present. She was later called upon to explain to Danny Luton what she had observed. Id. Later during the deposition, she was asked:
Q. Okay. So did you believe that John was trying to have sex with David like within a couple minutes of that event or was this some kind of a pass at hey, maybe later we should have sex or what were you [*12]  thinking?
A. In what I saw I believe that John was basically trying to inform him that he wanted to have sex and that he needed to coincide with the procedures that he wanted him to do.
Q. So you thought that it was somehow like some kind of foreplay as in like I want you to do something illegal and that means I want to have sex with you? I'm trying to get the connection?
***
A. I looked at it as John basically wanted to have sex with David.
Doc. 51-3, 36. Stockton says she was told by Amy Cook,4 to keep her mouth shut about Hansen's situation or she would be fired (although Stockton was a TSA employee and did not work for SkyWest). Id. at 37.
Hansen later, on April 17, 2009, went to Danny Luton make a report about Robinson's hanging seats. He says Luton became hostile and did not want to hear about it and told him his complaint would not ever see the light of day and that he would lose his job. Hansen asserts he reported this to Kathy Makasian, SkyWest's HR contact, in 2009. Hansen says he told her that he had been sexually harassed and badgered by Robinson. Doc. 51-2, 11. About a week later, he met with Luton and David Hyllested to discuss the events. Hansen claims that Luton gave him three [*13]  options "(1) he could fire me on the spot; (2) I could take a year's leave of absence; or (3) I could stay at work and he would paper up my file until he could fire me." Id. Hansen also claims that Luton told him that "he would sue me if I didn't drop the complaint." Doc. 51-2 10-11. Hansen was sent home; he phoned Kathy Makasian and told her he had been sent home. He avers that she said he was supposed to be returned to work. However, he then goes on to say that he was off work for six weeks.
He asserts that in February 2009 he learned he was being investigated for pushing his co-worker Amr Gharib away from Hansen's computer and for John Robinson's claims that Hansen had pushed him. Hansen says Gharib's statements were false and the only time he had touched Robinson was "when I would put my hand out and say I need my personal space." Another incident Hansen cites as supportive of his claims says that in late April 2009, he was stripped of a SkyWest national award. Doc. 51-2, 12.
Hansen says all the claims against him are false. He claims that Makasian did not investigate; it was a witch hunt. However, as a result of Makasian's investigation, Hansen was found to have violated company [*14]  policy for pushing Gharib and Robinson. He was suspended and out of work six weeks. He was allowed to return to work with the requirement that he sign a return to work agreement which he claims prevented him "from reporting any activities such as hanging seats." Hansen states he was placed on strict probation.
The Return to Work Agreement, dated June 18, 2009 and signed by Hansen and Luton is in the record at Doc. 51-3, 95. It actually provides:
I, David Hansen, understand that in order to return to work at SkyWest Airlines, the following requirements and conditions must be met:
Clinical Requirements:
1. I agree to complete all clinical recommendations and treatment plan made by my treatment provider(s). This plan is implemented to support me in my personal recovery as well as with my job performance at SkyWest Airlines.
2. I authorize the EAP counselor(s) to consult with my treatment providers to monitor and support my treatment program.
3. I understand the EAP Counselor(s) will notify my supervisor and/or People Department Consultant if I fail to abide by the requirements.
Requirements:
4. I understand that I must be able to perform the essential functions of my job with or without a reasonable [*15]  accommodation.
5. I understand there are job expectations and performance requirements of SkyWest that need to be addressed before I return to work. These job expectations and performance requirements are:
• You must always treat our passengers, including non revenue passengers and co-workers with dignity and respect. You must never raise your voice, behave aggressively or say inappropriate things.
• If you find yourself getting angry or frustrated you are to immediately call a supervisor or manager to help you. Do not proceed any further until you have received help with the situation. We will evaluate the times you may be removed from stressful situations in order to ensure that the accommodation is reasonable and does not adversely affect the operation. We also ask that you note the date and time of any situation that requires you to be removed from the operation.
• All employees deserve respect of their work space. If you feel an employee has violated your workspace please contact a supervisor immediately. Do not EVER push, nudge, shove or physically touch another employee. Such act may result in immediate termination.
• "You agree step down from the CST position." This will allow you [*16]  to focus solely on your personal performance and not subject you to any unnecessary additional stress of monitoring the performance of other workers while at work.
• Do not monitor or involve yourself in your co-workers['] or supervisors['] work performance; this includes all ticketing and gate functions, ramp, BSO and operations. If you identify a safety or security breach please report it to the supervisor on duty and allow them to handle it.
• You will meet with your station manager on a weekly basis to ensure your transition back to the station is as comfortable as possible. This time will be used to communicate your progress and work on ensuring a productive work environment for all.
I have read and acknowledge the above expectations and requirements. I agree to adhere to these job expectations and performance requirements.
I understand that failure to comply with any of the terms of this Return to Work Agreement will constitute a breach of this contract and I could be subjected to disciplinary action up to and may include termination[.]
This Return to Work Agreement will be monitored closely an[d] evaluated as needed; and will include scheduled monthly and annual evaluations.
We are [*17]  pleased to have you back and want you to be successful in your return to work at SkyWest Airlines. Contact Danny Luton or Kathy Makasian if at any time you feel you need additional support to be successful.
Doc. 51-3, 95.

2009 Charge of Discrimination
Within only one week after the June 19, 2009 Return to Work Agreement was executed and after Hansen's return to work, Hansen says he felt "targeted" and harassed by other co-workers. He then filed a Charge of Discrimination on June 26, 2009, with the Wyoming Fair Employment Program, 32K-2009-00180. The 2009 Charge asserted discrimination based on age, disability, and retaliation, with dates 08-01-2007 through 04-24-2009, and was a continuing action. All specific claims were prior to the Return to Work Agreement. This Charge asserts in part:
4. I was denied a reasonable accommodation where an accommodation would not place an undue burden on my employer.
a. I was initially granted the accommodation to leave work when I felt the symptoms of my disability approaching my employer.
b. On April 16, 2009, I requested to leave work due to my disability, but my supervisor, John Robinson, refused to honor the accommodation I arranged with my employer. [*18] 
c. I was verbally disciplined by the station manager, Danny Luton, for an incident involving a passenger when others were supposed to help me with the situation.
5. I was subject to disability and age harassment.
a. I have been called stupid in front of other employees and customers by a supervisor, Natalie Tananka.
b. John Robinson, supervisor, has called me a liar in front of co-workers and customers.
c. An individual in human resources shared my medical file with other employees.
d. The same individual in human resources continually tells others I am crazy.
6. The harassment complained of affects a term, condition, or privilege of employment and is so pervasive as to alter the working conditions of employment and create an abusive work environment.
7. I was a qualified applicant for a promotion.
a. I was in the process of applying for a supervisor position when I was told by the manager, Danny Luton, to not apply for any position. [This is handwritten and initialed by Hansen, rather than typewritten as is the rest of the information in the Charge.]
8. I was an unsuccessful applicant for an existing vacancy.
a. I was told not to apply for the promotion to begin with.
9. Following my rejection, [*19]  my employer continued to seek applicants or filled the position with an individual outside my protected group.
a. My employer promoted a thirty-two year old, a thirty-five year old and a twenty-seven year old to supervisor positions.
b. I was told by a supervisor, a fifty-eight year old co-worker, who also applied for a supervisor position, did not get the job because she was too old.
10. I engaged in what I believed, in good faith, to be protected activity under the ADA.
a. I requested my employer honor an established accommodation for my disability.
b. I refused to provide medical records to the supervisor, John Robinson, and station manager, Danny Luton, after they demanded I provide them with my medical information.
11. I suffered adverse employment action contemporaneous with or subsequent to my protected activity.
a. After requesting the accommodation the supervisor, John Robinson, and the station manager, Danny Luton, became hostile and physically threatening towards me.
b. I was forced to disclose the cause of my disability.
Doc. 41-6, 1-3. The 2009 Charge was never amended; no supplementation was provided to assert any claim based on sex.
Over two years later, on February 16, 2012, [*20]  Hansen executed a document entitled "Release/Withdrawal Without Benefit" of his claims in 32K-2009-00180. Doc. 41-7, 1. It provides:
I, David Hansen, Complainant in the above referenced charge, RELEASE my charge of unfair and/or discriminatory employment practices for the following reasons:
This charge has been resolved to my satisfaction.
This RELEASE is signed freely and voluntarily by me understanding the consequences of this act. Neither Respondent, co-employees, nor any member of the Wyoming Department of Workforce Services or the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has intimidated or threatened bodily harm or in any way unduly influenced me with loss of job or any other penalty or loss as a result of filing or withdrawing this charge.
By this DOCUMENT, I hereby release Respondent from all liability as well as any civil or administrative claim arising against Respondent by reason of noncompliance with Sections 27-9-105 et seq., Wyoming Fair Employment Practices Act of 1965, as amended, the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended, and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, as amended.
Doc. 41-7, 1. Hansen was represented by counsel, as early as 2008 in an unrelated personal injury matter, and has continued to be represented by the same counsel to date, and including the date the Release was executed and addressed [*21]  to Hansen and his counsel.
In this action, Hansen has claimed that when he sought to bring the 2009 Charge, he was told by a Fair Employment Program employee that he could not file a discrimination charge based on sex because it was a "sexual orientation" claim. The only evidence offered in support of this assertion, other than his own statements, is the Unsworn Declaration of Cherie Doak, Program Manager of the Wyoming Fair Employment Program. The Doak declaration is not admissible evidence; it is hearsay. Cherie Doak did not prepare the EEOC charge and has no personal knowledge that Hansen was so discouraged. There is no authority offered that would suggest this hearsay declaration can give new life to claims arising out of events prior to October 13, 2010 that were never included in the June 2009 EEOC charge. The inadmissible declaration of Cherie Doak will not be considered. And, whether the declaration is admissible or not, because discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity by private employers is not prohibited under either federal or state law, this information is not relevant. The intake questionnaire from 2009 is not in the record before the Court. [*22]  Not only has Hansen clearly and expressly given up any disability or age claims, pursuant to the Release, he has stated and agreed that his concerns had been satisfied. At the time of 2009 Charge, Wyoming law clearly did not, and at present still does not, include sexual orientation or gender identity in any protected class.5

2011 Charge of Discrimination
The defendant persuasively argues that the claims by Hansen arising outside of the 300 day window before his 2011 Charge of Discrimination was filed should be barred. Hansen cites events claimed to support his current claims based on sex, including sexual harassment and hostile workplace environment, and retaliation. Including the events outlined above, he refers to incidents in 2009 involving a requirement that he return cash bag fees collected under his "sine." He reported this, and also reported concerns about threats he says were made in August of 2009 by a co-worker, Joe Larrow, to "kick his ass." Again, in 2009, Luton required him to wear a tie and suit to work when other employees did not have to do so. Doc. 51-2. Hansen received a Letter of Instruction in September 2009, as a result of a heated confrontation between Hansen and [*23]  Larrow about a uniform shirt. Doc. 41-1, 35. Madsen Affidavit Ex. 5. Hansen's Unsworn Declaration asserts that in 2009, a grievance was filed against him and he was investigated for singing "Telephone Man" to Anita Youngkin. He says that in 2009 Natalie Tanaka made comments about him taking a girlfriend dressed as a 747 to a Halloween party and bringing her in for a landing, although he was gay and had no girlfriend. In fact, Hansen did not go to the Halloween party, which was not sponsored by SkyWest. Hansen complained to Youngkin that there had been inappropriate photographs of SkyWest employees taken at the Halloween party which were posted on Facebook and shown in the breakroom. Again, all of this occurred in 2009. Doc. 51-2. Doc. 51-1, 47, Exhibit 6 to the Madsen Affidavit, includes complaints about Hansen, about the Halloween party-girlfriend-747-incident and Telephone Man song incident, and another Report to the Ethics and Compliance Hotline complaining about Hansen's conduct saying "I don't want to work with him." That caller was referred to Youngkin at HR for investigation. A letter from another SkyWest Employee to Nikki Vejnar in Salt Lake City, written in October 2006, complained [*24]  about Hansen's conduct as sexually harassing is included.
John Robinson left the Jackson SkyWest station and transferred to Seattle in October 2009. Doc. 51-3. Robinson states he left Jackson because he and Lynn Katoa were no longer dating and he was still in love with Katoa and wanted to continue dating. Robinson returned to the Jackson station in about June of 2010, but did not return as a supervisor. A few months after he returned to the Jackson station from Seattle, approximately October 2010, Robinson became a supervisor again. Id.
Hansen received a counseling statement from Dan Davis, dated April 14, 2010, again regarding unprofessional interactions with co-workers, failure to accept direction and guidance of his supervisor (Travis Nelson), violation of the company's insubordination policy, and for a heated exchange with an employee working in an administrative capacity which caused her to feel unsafe at work and to request an escort to her vehicle when she left for the day immediately after the exchange with Hansen. The counseling statement notes "[w]hen you were questioned by Dan Davis regarding this incident you explained that heated exchanges are commonplace at JAC. This type [*25]  of behavior is unacceptable by any SkyWest employee and you are encouraged to report your knowledge of this type of behavior to management for immediate handling." He was also advised of zero tolerance policy of workplace violence. "Any additional unprofessional work interactions will result in additional stepped corrective actions and will result in a counseling statement with suspension and an employee review file." Doc. 41-1, 39-41. 5. All of this, Hansen has claimed, was an intentional effort to "paper his file" to his detriment.
Hansen claims the counseling statement regarding the insubordination charge resulting from an interaction with supervisor Travis Nelson is evidence of discriminatory treatment. He further contends the incident involving Mary Jo Parker, the administrative assistant, addressed in that counseling statement was fabricated. He says he was told that his complaints to Youngkin about Robinson had been taken care of because Robinson had left the station and was no longer in Jackson. Doc. 51-2.
Hansen's Unsworn Declaration also offers that Robinson returned to Jackson in mid-2010 and became Hansen's supervisor. Hansen objected to Hyllested, the new station manager, [*26]  about Robinson's return; Hansen's objections were rejected by Hyllested. After that, Hansen himself requested to be transferred to work at the ramp area away from the gate and for part-time employment. At the ramp area, he claims to have been subjected to sexual banter and commentary on a daily basis. He returned to the gate area in December of 2010, and contends that Hyllested minimized his complaints about the ramp area sexual commentary and told him that he needed to get back to work and quit worrying about them. Id.
After Robinson returned to Jackson, Hansen asserts that in October 2010, Robinson rubbed up against him in front of passengers and said he wanted to "come see the bedroom in my new house." Hansen says he reported this to Hyllested and reminded Hyllested that he had a pending harassment grievance against Robinson. Hansen asserts that Hyllested said Hansen made it all up and that he did not want to hear about it. Id.
Hansen says that in December 2010, Katoa approached him at a local gym outside of the workplace, where Hansen was a member, and said that they could sexually harass him at the gym and since they were not at work there was nothing anyone could do about it. Hansen [*27]  only mentions talk at the gym; no touchings occurred. Id. This incident occurred outside the workplace.
Hansen states "[i]n December 2010, I renewed my FMLA accommodation request, specifically stating that my PTSD was triggered by events which were associated with sexual harassment. This request specifically identified that I would be entitled to a time-out and removal from stressful situations. SkyWest accepted this FMLA request in writing on December 30, 2010." Id.
In January 2011 Hansen and Gharib had another dispute, this time involving ticket changes for traveling passengers. Hansen describes the incident by saying that Gharib yelled at him for doing things in the wrong way, that he thought Gharib was going to hit him and that this was stressful to him. He went to his supervisor, Christine Shreve, who directed him to go back to Gharib's location and straighten out the ticket problems. When Gharib showed up back at the ticket counter, Hansen claims Gharib was loud and threatening. Hansen says he requested a time-out from the supervisor but it was denied. Hansen characterizes the accusations about failing to serve the passengers as false and contends his conduct was appropriate.
Following [*28]  this incident, Katoa investigated the dispute between Hansen and Gharib. Hansen says when he came into the office to talk to Katoa and walked by in the doorway, Katoa rubbed his clothed genitals against him and asked if he was afraid he was harassing Hansen. Hansen disputes the events as they were characterized in the investigation by Katoa and denies that the company had any justification for terminating him. Id. His Unswom Declaration continues by saying that during the three years and two months Hansen was in Jackson, he suffered emotional distress that "I felt was severe, and that management used the knowledge they had of my medical condition against me." Id. "During periods that I experience harassment at work, I would have flashbacks of the events that occurred with Elliot Krystal, my business partner that caused my PTSD, and other intrusive memories that would make me physically sick." Id.
After Hansen's termination, Casey Madsen oversaw the investigation of the January 22, 2011 clash with Amr Gharib over the ticketing issue. Madsen was at that time the SkyWest Director of Employee Relations and People Resources. That investigation took place after Hansen's termination and after [*29]  Amr Gharib and Rose Salient had accused Hansen of service failures and unprofessional conduct. Approximately nine individuals were interviewed during the investigation. Interviews and statements were obtained from Bridget Murphy (supervisor on duty), Lynn Katoa (supervisor, assisted with investigation), Christine Shreve (supervisor, witness), Dave Hansen, Amr Gharib, Justin Carr (supervisor, witness), Shane Henderson (CS trainer), Carol Moss, and Lynn Wells (training supervisor). He also reviewed Hansen's statements with the station manager, Dave Hyllested, reviewed Hansen's file, and "reached consensus with station manager, ER, legal, and Regional Director," met with Hansen to discuss the findings of the investigation and proceeded with termination. Hansen wrote a letter about the January 22, 2011 confrontation with Amr Gharib and also wrote a rebuttal letter which he sent February 3, 2011. The investigation report, with statements and Hansen's responsive letters, is found at Exhibit 7 attached to the Madsen Affidavit. Doc. 41-1, 53-74.
Madsen's Affidavit reveals sexual harassment complaints were filed against Hansen for singing the Telephone Man song and making a sexually inappropriate [*30]  comment in 2009. Hansen himself made two reports of sexual harassment to the company in 2009. Doc. 41-1, 47-52. Hansen reported John Robinson, his gay male supervisor, rubbed up against him and he reported that pictures posted on Facebook from a Halloween party hosted by the City of Jackson were displayed in the breakroom. SkyWest says these reports were investigated and resolved in accordance with the company's procedures. There were no other reports of sexual harassment from Hansen until after his termination in January 2011, in his August 2011 Charge of Discrimination. Doc. 41-1, 1-5.
After he was terminated, Hansen had several opportunities to make a claim of sexual harassment: (1) during internal company proceedings when Hansen challenged his termination; (2) as part of a grievance he filed in response to his termination; and (3) as part of his claim for unemployment. Post-termination documents, including the Ethics Hotline complaint and request for review, are at Doc. 41-9, 1-17.
In the Ethics Hotline complaint made by Hansen on February 11, 2011, after his termination, he said that "retaliation" had been ongoing since 2009. Id., 2. He said he had filed a grievance against Robinson [*31]  and Katoa for "ADA rights and discrimination." During the EEOC investigation of the 2009 claim, the EEOC requested that the company not to retaliate against Hansen. Hansen said he was "scolded" by Amr Gharib on January 22, 2011 in public; he had asked to have the discussion in private; that request was denied. Hansen called SkyWest's Global Assistance asking for videos and phone records. After that, Katoa told him he was sorry but the videos and phone records had been destroyed. As a result of the investigation led by Casey Madsen, SkyWest's HR Director, regarding the incident with Gharib, Hansen was terminated for unprofessional behavior. Id.
The brief incident description in his Ethics Hotline complaint shows that Hansen felt he had been retaliated against because of the EEOC claims he had filed. (At this time, the only EEOC Charge claim Hansen had ever filed was that filed in 2009.) His report to the Ethics Hotline does not mention sexual discrimination. Hansen asked for a formal review and appeal of his termination. The 2011 Ethics Hotline complaint reflects that Richard Mulligan was Hansen's attorney. By separate letter dated March 14, 2011, Hansen said his attorney would be happy [*32]  to answer any questions and provided Mulligan's phone number. Hansen's review board request was denied on March 16, 2011. Doc. 41-9, 6.
The statement given when Hansen sought unemployment benefits stated that he had been discharged for violation of company rule or policy, specifically: "I had requested Under ADA Law, wich [sic] I was given consideration, reasonable accommodation as required and the company failed to comply." He stated the reason he was given for his discharge was "failure to serve passenger." He indicated he had received a warning from manager David Hyllested on April 2010 regarding the request for accommodation. He also says "the manager destroyed evidence that would have proven me guiltless." This document is dated and signed by Hansen on February 24, 2011. Doc. 41-9, 10-12.
On March 14, 2011, Hansen wrote a "to whom it may concern letter" saying he had been improperly dismissed from employment at SkyWest. "The dismissal was in retaliation for a filing I have in place with the EEOC." (The only EEOC filing at that time was the 2009 Charge of Discrimination which was released in February 2012.) A copy of his Request for Review is included in the record and outlines the [*33]  claimed failures regarding his FMLA reasonable accommodation requests. Doc. 41-9, 13-17. He asserts that the confrontation with Amr Gharib caused him to need an accommodation, which was denied by his supervisor, Christine Shreve. He admitted that his behavior "may not have been extremely professional. However, I feel that after having made three requests for an accommodation and having it refused all three times, I did everything in my power to avoid the incident as it developed. I received no support from my co-workers or supervisor in trying to avoid what happened. All of the events that followed could have and would have been avoided if the accommodation that I requested multiple times had been granted, as is required by the ADA, and also required as the company has granted the accommodation in writing." He discloses that a grievance had been filed against him regarding the incident, but says he had not received any information regarding what the actual charges in the grievance were Doc. 41-9, 14-17.
After he was terminated in February of 2011, on August 8, 2011 Hansen filed another Charge of Discrimination on the basis of sex and retaliation, 32K-2011-00129, marked received by the [*34]  agency on August 11, 2011. Doc. 60-2. He alleges the dates that discrimination took place occurred between 05/01/2008 and 02/11/2011, which includes dates covered by his Release Agreement. In the 2011 Charge he states he was subjected to unwelcome sexual harassment. His discrimination statement in the Charge provides:
I believe I have been discriminated against on the basis of my sex and I was retaliated against in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, and the Wyoming Fair Employment Practices Act of 1965, as amended. Specifically:
1. I am a member of a protected group (male);
2. I was subjected to unwelcome sexual harassment;6
a. My supervisor, John Robinson made sexual advances towards me;
b. Lewd pictures of a sexual nature were posted within the workplace;
c. I was sent emails of a sexual nature;
3. The harassment complained of was based on sex;
4. The acceptance or rejection of the harassment by me was an expressed or implied condition to the receipt of a job benefit or cause a tangible job detriment;
a. My supervisor, John Robinson, told me that "I need to go along with his requests in order to advance with the company."
5. The sexual harassment complained of affects a term, condition, or privilege of employment and is so pervasive at [sic] [*35]  to alter the working conditions of employment and create and [sic] abusive working environment;
6. I engaged in protected opposition to Title VII prohibited discrimination when I complained about what I, in good faith, believed to be unlawful employment practices;
a. I complained continuously about the sexual harassment;
7. Subsequent to my complaint, I was discharged on February 11, 2011;
8. There exists a causal connection between my complaint and my discharge.
Doc. 60-2, EEOC 32K-2011-00129, marked received August 11, 2011. At the time Hansen filed the 2011 Charge he was, and still is, represented by the same counsel who had been representing him in matters concerning his earlier EEOC charge, the instant matter, and other matters since at least 2008. Doc. 41-4.

Discussion
As discussed below, the vast majority of Hansen's repetitive and voluminous complaints arise out of the company's alleged failures to provide him the FMLA accommodation to which he claims entitlement, as evidenced in his complaints to the company, as evidenced in his Ethics Hotline complaint of February 2011, as evidenced in his discharge statement to the Wyoming Department of Employment, Unemployment Insurance Division [*36]  (Doc. 41-9, 10-12), as evidenced in his March 14, 2011 post-termination letter and request for review (Doc. 41-9, 14-17), as evidenced in his 2011 EEOC Charge (Doc. 60-2). His complaints were centered around the company's failures to provide the ADA accommodation when he requested one.
The Court agrees with SkyWest that Hansen's claims of discrimination on the basis of sexual harassment and hostile work environment will be limited to those that occurred on or after October 13, 2010, 300 days before he filed his 2011 Charge of Discrimination. The claims plaintiff alleges in this case and that he asserted in his 2011 Charge of Discrimination are not claims of discrimination based on disability or age. Those claims have been released and will not be revived here in the guise of a sexual discrimination claim. Hansen's claims that the denial of his requests for the FMLA accommodation were denied do not support a cognizable claim of sex based discrimination. Whether Hansen has PTSD and whether the company failed to make a reasonable accommodation with respect to his PTSD are pertinent to a disability claim, not a sexual discrimination claim — matters not pursued in his new, separate August [*37]  2011 Charge of Discrimination, which asserts discrimination on the basis of sex and retaliation.

Hansen's Title VII Claims for Hostile Work Environment and Retaliation
Hansen's Title VII claims for hostile work environment and retaliation claims must be examined. Hansen's claim is that he was sexually harassed by numerous co-workers and supervisors, male and female, creating a hostile work environment. SkyWest asserts that his claims are time barred, and that if the claims are not time barred, Hansen has failed to establish the incidents were severe and pervasive.

Are the claims time barred?
The first issue is whether Hansen's claims of sexual harassment are time barred. The Wyoming Fair Employment Practices Act requires workers to file a charge of discrimination within "six (6) months of the alleged violation. . . ." Alternatively, Title VII requires a charge to be filed with the EEOC or local agency within 300 days of the alleged act of discrimination. 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-5(e)(1). Hansen recognizes the time frames outlined here, but contends that the acts charged in the 2011 Charge of Discrimination are not time barred because he is asserting a hostile work environment claim and some of the charged acts occurred [*38]  within the required 300 day time frame.
If acts only within that 300 day period can be considered, incidents occurring before October 13, 2010 would be excluded, as his 2011 Charge of Discrimination is dated August 8, 2011. As the Supreme Court has explained:
A hostile work environment claim is composed of a series of separate acts that collectively constitute one "unlawful employment practice." 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-5(e)(1). The timely filing provision only requires that a Title VII plaintiff file a charge within a certain number of days after the unlawful practice happened. It does not matter, for purposes of the statute, that some of the component acts of the hostile work environment fall outside the statutory time period. Provided that an act contributing to the claim occurs within the filing period, the entire time period of the hostile environment may be considered by a court for the purposes of determining liability.
Nat'l R.R. Passenger Corp. v. Morgan, 536 U.S. 101, 115 (2002). To determine whether all of the acts alleged by Hansen are all part of the same hostile work environment, the Court looks to the type of acts, the frequency of the acts, and the perpetrator of the acts. Id. at 120.
The Tenth Circuit has also considered the time limitations of Title VII. In Duncan v. Manager, Department of Safety, City and County of Denver, 2005 U.S. App. LEXIS 2535, 397 F.3d 1300, 1308 (10th Cir. 2005), the appellate [*39]  court stated:
Title VII requires a litigant to file a claim within 300 days of the alleged discriminatory conduct. 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-5(e)(1). The very precision of this requirement—not a year, not six months, not the state law statute of limitations for comparable causes of action—bespeaks Congress's concern. Title VII is not intended to allow employees to dredge up old grievances; they must promptly report and take action on discriminatory acts when they occur. Unlitigated bygones are bygones.
As applied to hostile environment claims, however, this requirement has proven problematic. Such claims do not consist primarily of discrete acts, but often involve a series of incidents that span a period longer than 300 days. The Supreme Court addressed this problem in National Railroad Passenger Corp. v. Morgan, 536 U.S. 101, 117,122 S.Ct. 2061, 153 L.Ed.2d 106 (2002), holding that as long as "an act" contributing to a hostile work environment took place no more than 300 days before the plaintiff filed an EEOC charge, a court may consider the complete history of acts comprising that hostile work environment. The Court justified this holding, in part, on the repeated nature of the conduct, which occurs "over a series of days or perhaps years." Id. at 115, 122 S.Ct. 2061. Even so, however, an employee may not unreasonably delay the filing of [*40]  a hostile work environment claim. Morgan explains that when analyzing a hostile work environment claim spanning longer than 300 days "[a] court's task is to determine whether the acts about which an employee complains are part of the same actionable hostile work environment practice, and if so, whether any act falls within the statutory time period." Id. at 120, 122 S.Ct. 2061. Morgan emphasizes that there must be a relationship between acts alleged after the beginning of the filing period and the acts alleged before the filing period: "if an act on day 401 had no relation to the acts between days 1-100, or for some other reason, such as certain intervening action by the employer, was no longer part of the same hostile environment claim, then the employee cannot recover for the previous acts, at least not by reference to the day 401 act." Id. at 118, 122 S.Ct. 2061. Morgan holds that a series of alleged events comprises the same hostile environment where "the pre- and post-limitations period incidents involve[d] the same type of employment actions, occurred relatively frequently, and were perpetrated by the same managers." Id. at 120, 122 S.Ct. 2061 (citation to court below omitted).
Duncan, 397 F.3d at 1308-1309. Having released all of the claims asserted in the 2009 Charge, any claims related [*41]  to his ADA and ADEA discrimination claims are barred. The 2009 claim was never amended or supplemented to assert any discrimination claim based on sex.
In his 2011 Charge, Hansen claims Robinson made sexual advances toward him. It is problematic because, having transferred to Seattle, Robinson was not even present in the Jackson SkyWest station from approximately December 2009 to June or July 2010. He did not become a supervisor until approximately October 2010, several months after he had returned from Seattle to Jackson. Hansen complains of the hip-bumping incident at the ticket counter in October 2010, and stated that no one else touched him in an inappropriate manner in October of 2010. Doc. 41-4, 15.
He says that during October 2010, John Robinson, Lynn Katoa and Dan Davis spoke to him in a sexually offensive manner.
Q. ... What specifically do you recall being said by Lynn Katoa that you considered to be sexually offensive in October of 2010.
A. He says, "We've invited to — you to our parties before, and why can't you just conform with us?"
Q. Anything else?
A. At this time, that's all I can remember.
Q. Okay. How about John?
A. John Robinson, when he rubbed up against me, said, "I heard [*42]  you bought a new home here. I would really like to come over and see your bedroom."
Q. Anything else?
A. Not that I can remember.
Q. Dan Davis.
A. Dan Davis just asked me why I simply couldn't conform so I could stay full-time. To their advances.
Q. Dan was a co-worker?
A. Dan was a supervisor.
Q. He was your supervisor?
A. He was one of my direct supervisors, correct.
Q. Anything else said by Dan Davis?
A. Can you clarify, please?
Q. During October of 2010 that you considered to be sexually inappropriate. Or even sexually based, whether you thought it was inappropriate or not.
A. Oh. Not that I can remember.
Q. Okay. November of 2010, can you tell me if there was ever a time when any employee associated with SkyWest touched you in what you considered to be an inappropriate manner?
A. I can't remember right now.
Q. As you sit here today, you cannot recall any events of inappropriate touch in November of 2010; is that accurate?
A. Yeah, not at this time.
Q. Okay. What about inappropriate speech?
A. Yes.
Q. Okay. And who?
A. I remember that -- I don't know if it was November or December.
Q. I'll combine the two.
A. Combine the two?
Q. Yes.
A. Okay. Thank you. Because I was going to say there was a larger period [*43]  of time.
There was a gym membership that was negotiated, where I was already a membership -- or I had a membership, and a comment was made to me by Lynn Katoa and a couple other associates there saying, "Well, we can sex you - we can sexually be aggressive with you or sexually harass you at the gym and you can't do anything about that."
Q. Any other inappropriate speech in November of December of 2010?
A. Yeah, actually, one that I thought was inappropriate.
Q. Okay. What is it?
A. Christine Shreve.
Q. Christine who?
A. Shreve.
Q. Female?
A. Female.
Q. What'd she say?
A. She was a supervisor. She says, "Either you pick up my supervisory shift or I'll make sure that I add to your sexual harassment problems."
Q. She say anything else?
A. No, other than she sat down and cried because I wouldn't pick up her -- her supervisory shift, and I couldn't.
Q. And you think that's humorous. Was something else said that made that funny?
A. I -- she, before - the reason I thought it was humorous was because she sank to the floor, and I simply tried to identify, saying, "I would love to pick up your shift. I've been trying for a long time, but you guys have been papering my file so that I'm not able to be promoted [*44]  and pick up your shift. You put me" —
I mean, I was not in a winning situation. I couldn't win either way.
Q. So this young lady, Christine Shreve, you said went to the floor, began crying about not being able to get someone to cover her shift, and then I think you were saying how that was humorous.
A. Oh, I didn't say it was humorous.
Q. You were laughing about it though.
(Objection.)
Q. The video will show you were laughing when you first explained it to me. I'm trying to think what you thought was funny about that. I just missed that part of it.
A. I'm sorry. I didn't think it was funny, and unfortunately sometimes I have some nervous gestures.
Q. So the laughing during that was just a nervous gesture?
A. The laughing during that was just a nervous gesture.
Q. Okay. Did she say anything else to you that you thought was inappropriate?
A. No. I just -- I -- I -- I saw things -- no.
Q. And since I broadened the scope of my questions for inappropriate speech --
A. Um-hum.
Q. -- to include December, let me also broaden it to include inappropriate touch.
Was there any inappropriate touch by anyone associated with SkyWest towards you in November or December of 2010?
A. You know, it happened frequently [*45]  enough that -- that, unfortunately, it was such a long period of time I have a hard time recalling.
Q. As you sit here today, you're not familiar with any inappropriate touch that occurred in October -- I'm mean — sorry, November or December of 2010?
A. Not at this time.
Q. When did you purchase your home?
A. It was, I believe, May of 2010.
Q. And you specifically recall that the comment made by Lynn about wanting to come and see -- I'm sorry, by --
A. John.
Q. I'm sorry. -- by John coming to see your new home you specifically remember that was made in October of 2010?
A. I remembered it was made around that time. He was returned to the station, and he wanted to see the home.
Q. All right. Have you told me all -- about all the inappropriate speech in November or December of 2010?
A. As as far as I can remember at this time.
Q. All right. And let's go to January of 2011. Inappropriate touch.
A. What -- what is the question? Sorry. Do I --
Q. Was there anyone associated [sic] SkyWest that touched you in what you considered to be an inappropriate manner in January of 2011?
A. I can't remember if it was January or the first part of February, but I do remember Lynn Katoas [sic] with a inappropriate behavior. [*46] 
Q. I'm fine with combining January and February. Does that help you?
A. Yeah. Thank you.
Q. Okay. And that's Lynn?
A. Lynn Katoa, yeah.
Q. Anyone else?
A. Not that I can remember.
Q. Tell me what you recall about Lynn touching you in what you considered to be an inappropriate manner in January or February of 2011.
A. He was in the middle of conducting -- not in the middle. He was at the end of conducting an interview. When the witness had left the room, as I went to go out the door, he made the same action John did, that I described, and said, "What? Are you afraid I'm gonna sexually harass you? Do you consider this sexual harassment?"
Q. Do you remember anything else?
A. Just that it was frightening, because I was trying to leave the office, and I couldn't leave the office without going by.
Q. Okay. So do you remember any other inappropriate touch in January or February of 2011 by anyone associated with SkyWest?
A. I -- I remember being -- several times -- when you say "touch," I also considered when I got cornered in an office, or cornered at all, and they started coming in what they call the Hula-Hoop area; that's how they referred to as to personal space --
Q. Okay.
A. - When SkyWest put it. [*47]  I remember Amaro [sic], during that event, he came into my space and cornered me during a period of our altercation.
Q. But - the one that led to your termination?
A. Correct.
Q. Okay. Anyone else? You say he didn't touch you, but he got into your personal space?
A. He was inches away.
Q. Okay.
A. Yeah, it was - it was -
Q. And that laugh that you just gave there, is that a nervous laugh -
A. Very nervous. 'Cause it -
Q. - or is something funny about it?
A. No, it's not funny. Unfortunately, I have flashbacks, and my nervousness —
Q. The flashback caused you to laugh?
A. The flashback -
(Objection.)
Q. Was it the flashback that caused you to laugh?
A. Because it hurts, and if I don't laugh, I'll cry.
Q. Okay. Anybody else who ever touched you inappropriately in January or February of 2011.
A. Not that I can recall at this time.
Q. How about inappropriate speech; that is, speech -- words that you found to be sexually offensive that were said to you, around you, about you, that you heard with your own ears in January or February of 2011?
A. Yes.
Q. Who said it?
A. Well, I mentioned the incident with Lynn Katoa.
A. Yes, you did. Anything else?
A. Something that I did find offensive, it may not be directly correlated [*48]  to anyone else sexually, but unfortunately when I had addressed the issue with my supervisor David Hillstead [sic] regarding what John was doing and my concern about him being placed over me as a supervisor, and I said, "I filed a grievance that is unresolved. I've got some issues pending."
He says, "You're fabricating that. You're just making it up. It's all in your head. I talked to corporate. They have no records."
Q. Okay. So this is January and February of 2011, and the question was if you're aware of any speech that you found to be sexually inappropriate. Have you told me about everything?
A. Unfortunately, I can't remember, at this time, all of the specifics. I just remember that I felt a sexual charge in the air.
Q. You have told me about everything that you recall?
A. That I recall at this time, correct.
Q. And then your employment was terminated at the end of January or the early part of February --
A. Correct -
Q. -- correct?
A. -- the early part of February, actually. A weekend.
Doc. 41-4, 16-18.
Hansen's assertion in this litigation that he was told by an employee of Wyoming Workforce Services that he could not pursue a discrimination claim on the basis of "sexual orientation" is [*49]  not helpful to his cause. Wyoming does not have any law that includes sexual orientation as a protected class. If indeed that was the claim he wanted to file, but did not assert in his 2009 EEOC Charge of Discrimination, it would not have assisted him in obtaining the relief requested in that 2009 Charge of Discrimination. The Cherie Doak Affidavit, an offer of inadmissible evidence, has no relevance when it merely indicates that Hansen was "discouraged" from bringing a sexual orientation claim. Further, to the extent that his 2011 Charge asserts discrimination arising out of the failure to provide his FMLA accommodation, his claims fail.
A recent Tenth Circuit opinion, Arabalo v. City of Denver, Text at 625 Fed. Appx. 851, 2015 WL 52325740 (September 9, 2015) provides helpful instruction when considering timeliness of Title VII hostile work environment claims. Arabalo sued Denver and co-workers, alleging among other things, Title VII hostile work environment and Title VII retaliation. Her Title VII claim went to trial; the jury's verdict returned in favor of Denver. Arabalo appealed. Of interest to the discussion here is the Tenth Circuit's consideration of the district court's order concluding Arabalo [*50]  had failed to exhaust her administrative remedies for one of the three bases asserted for her hostile work environment, the alleged rape at her home. The district court had eliminated the alleged rape because she had never advised the CCRD or EEOC of it and had failed to exhaust her administrative remedies in supporting that basis. The appellate court's discussion follows here:
Because Arabalo's failure kept the agencies from considering the effect, if any, of the alleged rape, the district court concluded that she had not exhausted her administrative remedies. It then took a further step and concluded that, under Jones v. Runyon, 91 F.3d 1398 (10th Cir. 1996), it lacked subject-matter jurisdiction to allow the jury to consider the alleged rape in deciding the hostile-work-environment claim. In short, the district court denied Denver's Rule 50 motion seeking to defeat the entire hostile-work-environment claim, but limited Arabalo to the bases she had provided to the CCRD and EEOC, for instance, sexual harassment by Gutierrez and by the jail's inmates.
Recognizing the effect of the district court's reliance on Jones, Arabalo asks that we overrule it. As a panel, we have no authority to do so because "[w]e are bound by the precedent of prior [*51]  panels absent en banc reconsideration or a superseding contrary decision by the Supreme Court." In re Smith, 10 F.3d 723, 724 (10th Cir. 1993). But that does not end our analysis. We still need to address a recent case neither party has raised by a Rule 28(j) letter (the method for notifying the court of changes in the law): Gad v. Kan. State Univ., 787 F.3d 1032 (10th Cir. 2015).
In Gad, we concluded that a party's failure to verify submissions to the EEOC did not defeat the court's subject-matter jurisdiction. Id. at 1035-36. Beyond that, we called into question some of our circuit's earlier decisions concluding we lacked subject-matter jurisdiction for other failures to meet Title VIPs requirements. Id. at 1039-40. We suggested that recent Supreme Court cases may have limited jurisdictional requirements to those set forth in 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-5(f)(3), the subsection vesting jurisdiction of Title VII actions in the federal courts. Id. at 1038. Even if Gad renders the district court's reliance on Jones erroneous—which we do not decide today—we still would affirm the district court's excluding evidence of the alleged rape to support the hostile-work-environment claim. As a condition precedent to suit, even if not a jurisdictional prerequisite, Arabalo was required to notify the CCRD and the EEOC of the alleged rape before she could later rely on it in support of her [*52]  hostile-work-environment claim. See 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-5(b).
For instance, in Shelton v. Boeing Co., 399 F.3d 909, 912 (8th Cir. 2005), the Eighth Circuit noted that "[e]xhaustion of administrative remedies is a condition precedent to the filing of an action ... in federal court." It ultimately held that because the EEOC could not extend the scope of investigation outside the time period of discriminatory acts the plaintiff identified in his charge of discrimination. It concluded that for any alleged discriminatory acts outside this period plaintiff had failed to exhaust his administrative remedies. Id.; cf. Teal v. Potter, 559 F.3d 687, 691-93 (7th Cir. 2009) ("The scope of the EEOC's investigation was defined by Teal in her complaint; it would be unreasonable to conclude that the agency would have discovered the July 2003 discharge based on this single, vague and unsupported sentence."); Pacheco v. Mineta, 448 F.3d 783, 789 (5th Cir. 2006) (citing Fine v. GAF Chemical Corp., 995 F.2d 576, 577-78 (5th Cir. 1993)) (holding that the facts the plaintiff included in his EEOC charge would not cause the EEOC to investigate a disparate-impact claim). In our view, these cases are consistent with our own precedent. For example, we have said that "[a] plaintiff's claim in federal court is generally limited by the scope of the administrative investigation that can reasonably be expected to follow the charge of discrimination submitted [*53]  to the EEOC." Jones v. U.P.S., Inc., 502 F.3d 1176, 1186 (10th Cir. 2007) (alterations omitted) (quoting MacKenzie v. City & Cty. of Denver, 414 F.3d 1266, 1274 (10th Cir. 2005)).
Because she deprived both agencies of the ability to consider the alleged-rape evidence, Arabalo failed to exhaust her administrative remedies for it. In Gad, we concluded that "the verification requirement is a condition precedent" to suit, 787 F.3d at 1042, and we conclude it is a condition precedent here, too, for exhausting remedies by notifying the investigating agencies of the grounds supporting the claim. See, e.g., Shelton, 399 F.3d at 912 (holding that the failure to include relevant facts in the EEOC charge was a failure to satisfy the condition precedent). Arabalo's need to disclose her bases supporting her alleged claim is a condition precedent to her suit, not a mere affirmative defense for which the defendant must bear the burden. See Gad, 787 F.3d at 1042.6 We see no dispute that Arabalo failed to meet the condition precedent necessary to rely on the alleged rape to support her claim—advising the CCRD and EEOC of this support for her claim and thus exhausting her administrative remedies.
As a way of excusing her failure to tell the CCRD or the EEOC of the alleged rape, Arabalo contends that her "hostile work environment claim was holistic and consisted of one single claim." Appellant's [*54]  Br. at 38. In response, we fail to see how an administrative agency investigating Arabalo's hostile-work-environment claim would naturally stumble upon the unstated alleged rape at her home.
Arabalo v. City of Denver, 625 Fed. Appx. 851, 2015 WL 5235740, *6-*8.
The instant case is not unlike Powell v. Express Credit Auto, Inc., 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 47851, 2015 WL 1642137 (W.D. Okla. April 13, 2015). In that case, the plaintiff had made an EEOC charge, marking the box for discrimination based on sex, not race. Her narrative indicated that the basis of her charge was gender-sexual harassment and retaliation. Her summary of claims, at the top of the narrative stated, "[t]he Complainant was subject to sexual harassment and an ongoing hostile work environment when, but not limited to: Over a period of years, she was subjected to frequent unwanted sexual advances, touching, innuendos, and comments about her breasts." Her narrative mentioned nowhere that she was being terminated because she was in a relationship with an African American man; she never mentioned discrimination based on race. 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 47851 2015 WL 1622137, *1. The court considered whether the Title VII had exhausted her administrative remedies prior to filing suit.7 The plaintiff in Powell said that she had discussed the race discrimination claim with the EEOC investigator, and "assumed it would be dealt with at some point in the process." [*55]  The district court stated:
Because she has asked the EEOC to reopen her claim so that she may amend her charge to add details about race discrimination, she asks the Court to stay its ruling on Defendants' motion until the EEOC decides whether to permit amendment. Id.
Plaintiff's request is in direct conflict with the requirement that she exhaust her administrative remedies prior to pursuing a Title VII claim in federal court. Plaintiff had the option of amending her charge to add a race discrimination claim or filing a new charge raising such a claim prior to bringing suit in this Court, see Eke v. CaridianBCT, Inc., 490 F. App'x 156, 160 (10th Cir. 2012) (unpublished), but chose to do neither. Because the EEOC could not reasonably be expected to investigate a claim of race discrimination based on Plaintiffs charge, she has failed to exhaust her administrative remedies for this claim. Plaintiffs claim of race discrimination is thus dismissed, due to a lack of subject matter jurisdiction.
Id., *2.
The approach in the Powell case is appropriate here. Hansen did not plead in his 2009 Charge discrimination on the basis of sex. As in Powell, he apparently assumed that somehow, at some time his claims about sexual discrimination would come out in the wash. He did not [*56]  amend his 2009 Charge to add a claim of sex discrimination and apparently chose not to pursue it further, instead electing to rely on his claims of discrimination on the basis of disability and age. The scope of the agency's investigation is defined by his charge of discrimination. Having made the deliberate decision not to amend or supplement his 2009 Charge to assert claims of discrimination on the basis of sex, there is no reason to assume that an investigation of such claims would be expected to follow that 2009 Charge of Discrimination alleging only disability and age discrimination.
Not until August 2011 did Hansen deliberately elect to bring a Charge of Discrimination on the basis of sex. Having waited so long, the Court agrees with the Duncan court that Title VII is not intended to allow employees to dredge up old grievances; they must promptly report and take action on discriminatory acts when they occur. Hansen did not do so. Unlitigated bygones are bygones. The Court finds that his claims of sexual harassment, hostile work environment, and retaliation are limited to those events that occurred after October 13, 2010, the 300 day period prior to filing his August 8, 2011 Charge of [*57]  Discrimination.

Hostile Work Environment Claim
Under Title VII, it is an unlawful employment practice for an employer to discriminate against any individual with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, because of that individual's sex. 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(a)(1)). A sex discrimination claim may be based on a hostile work environment when the plaintiff can show (1) he was discriminated against because of his sex; and (2) that the discrimination was sufficiently severe or pervasive such that it altered the terms and conditions of his employment and created an abusive working environment. Morris v. City of Colorado Springs, 666 F.3d 654, 663 (10th Cir. 2012).
Title VII does not establish "a general civility code," Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Servs., Inc., 523 U.S. 75, 81, 118 S.Ct. 998, 140 L.Ed.2d 201 (1998), for the workplace, accord Dick v. Phone Directories Co., 397 F.3d 1256, 1263 (10th Cir. 2005); Petrosino v. Bell Atl., 385 F.3d 210, 223 (2d Cir. 2004). Accordingly, the run-of-the-mill boorish, juvenile, or annoying behavior that is not uncommon in American workplaces is not the stuff of a Title VII hostile work environment claim. See, e.g., Faragher v. City of Boca Raton, 524 U.S. 775, 788, 118 S.Ct. 2275, 141 L.Ed.2d 662 (1998) (discussing the Supreme Court's hostile work environment decisions, and stating that "[a] recurring point in these opinions is that simple teasing, offhand comments, and isolated incidents (unless extremely serious) will not amount to discriminatory changes in the terms and conditions of employment" (citation omitted) [*58]  (quoting Oncale, 523 U.S. at 82, 118 S.Ct. 998) (internal quotation marks omitted)); EEOC v. Sunbelt Rentals, Inc., 521 F.3d 306, 315 (4th Cir. 2008) ("Workplaces are not always harmonious locales, and even incidents that would objectively give rise to bruised or wounded feelings will not on that account satisfy the severe or pervasive standard. Some rolling with the punches is a fact of workplace life."); DeNovellis v. Shalala, 124 F.3d 298, 310 (1st Cir. 1997) ("Not all offensive conduct is actionable as harassment; trivial offenses do not suffice."). "An employer creates a hostile work environment when 'the workplace is permeated with discriminatory intimidation, ridicule, and insult, that is sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of the victim's employment and create an abusive working environment.'"Hall v. U.S. Dep't of Labor, 476 F.3d 847, 851 (10th Cir. 2007) (quoting Davis v. U.S. Postal Serv., 142 F.3d 1334, 1341 (10th Cir.1998)) (internal quotation marks omitted).
"[A] plaintiff must show that the environment was both objectively and subjectively hostile or abusive." Davis, 142 F.3d at 1341; accord Russell v. Univ. of Toledo, 537 F.3d 596, 608 (6th Cir. 2008) ("The applicable 'test for a hostile work environment has both objective and subjective components" (quoting Williams v. Gen. Motors Corp., 187 F.3d 553, 566 (6th Cir.1999))); see also 3 Lex K. Larson, Employment Discrimination § 46.05[3][e], at 46-93 (2d ed. 2011) (noting that "a dual standard ... asks both whether the plaintiff was offended by the work environment and whether a reasonable person would likewise be offended" [*59]  and opining that "[a] failure to prove either aspect is fatal to the Title VII claim"). Thus, we must assess "the objective severity of the harassment from the perspective of a reasonable person in the plaintiff's position, considering all the circumstances." Harsco Corp. v. Renner, 475 F.3d 1179, 1187 (10th Cir. 2007) (emphasis added). In other words, we must look to a "totality of the circumstances," and "consider[ ] such factors as 'the frequency of the discriminatory conduct; its severity; whether it is physically threatening or humiliating, or a mere offensive utterance; and whether it unreasonably interferes with an employee's work performance.'" Chavez v. New Mexico, 397 F.3d 826, 832-33 (10th Cir. 2005) (quoting O'Shea v. Yellow Tech. Servs., Inc., 185 F.3d 1093, 1098 (10th Cir. 1999)); accord Billings v. Town of Grafton, 515 F.3d 39, 48 (1st Cir. 2008). "[T]hat [objective] inquiry requires careful consideration of the social context in which particular behavior occurs and is experienced by its target." Oncale, 523 U.S. at 81, 118 S.Ct. 998. "Conduct which is considered normal and appropriate in one setting may be deemed abusive or hostile in another." EEOC v. Fairbrook Med. Clinic, PA, 609 F.3d 320, 328 (4th Cir. 2010).
Furthermore, "if the victim does not subjectively perceive the environment to be abusive, the conduct has not actually altered the conditions of the victim's employment, and there is no Title VII violation." Harris v. Forklift Sys., Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21-22, 114 S.Ct. 367, 126 L.Ed.2d 295 (1993). However, "[i]n order to prevail on the subjective component of this test, the law does not require [*60]  a plaintiff to show that the discriminatorily abusive work environment seriously affected her psychological well-being or that it tangibly impaired her work performance." Davis, 142 F.3d at 1341 (citation omitted).
Ms. Morris identifies various incidents that she submits altered the status of her working environment. "[T]he Supreme Court has repeatedly said, using the disjunctive 'or,' that a claim of discrimination based on the infliction of a hostile working environment exists if the conduct is 'severe or pervasive.'" Smith v. Sheahan, 189 F.3d 529, 533 (7th Cir. 1999); see 3 Larson, supra, § 46.05[3][b], at 46-82 ("Abusive conduct that is either severe or pervasive is actionable; it does not have to be both."). Addressing each allegation and considering them under a totality of the circumstances, first, we determine that the alleged incidents of harassment were not sufficiently "pervasive" to establish liability under Title VII. "[W]hether the complained of conduct is sufficiently pervasive as to create a hostile work environment must be determined from the totality of the circumstances since no single factor is required." Sprague v. Thorn Americas, Inc., 129 F.3d 1355, 1365 (10th Cir.1997).
Morris v. City of Colorado Springs, 666 F.3d at 663-665; see also Communications Graphics, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 116871, 2015 WL 5156888 (D. N.D. Okla. 2015) (the same; ADA hostile work environment claim analyzed utilizing the same framework).
Further, the Morris court also noted that:
A plaintiff [*61]  does not make a sufficient showing of a pervasively hostile work environment "by demonstrating a few isolated incidents of ... sporadic ... slurs.... Instead, there must be a steady barrage of opprobrious ... comments." Chavez, 397 F.3d at 832 (quoting Bolden v. PRC, Inc., 43 F.3d 545, 551 (10th Cir. 1994)) (internal quotation marks omitted) (discussing a hostile work environment claim based on racial discrimination).
Our case law stands in support of this conclusion. See Sprague, 129 F.3d at 1365-66 (concluding that "five separate incidents of allegedly sexually-oriented, offensive comments either directed to [the plaintiff] or made in her presence in a sixteen month period" were not sufficiently pervasive to support a hostile work environment claim); cf. Chavez, 397 F.3d at 833-36 (finding sufficient evidence of a hostile work environment based upon sexual discrimination where there was evidence that the plaintiffs had been subjected both to a "number of gender-based incidents" occurring over a long period of time, including sexual propositions, and "multiple incidents of hostile and physically threatening conduct"); Harsco Corp., 475 F.3d at 1184-85, 1188 (affirming district court's denial of the defendant's motion for judgment as a matter of law on a hostile work environment claim where the plaintiff presented substantial evidence of "an environment [*62]  polluted with gender-specific comments and behavior that exceeded the mere flirtatiousness or baseness that has been found not to support a Title VII claim" (emphasis added)).
Alternatively, Ms. Morris argues that the harassment in her case was severe. She implies that even if there is insufficient evidence of pervasiveness, a claim may stand if the evidence shows that a few isolated incidents are in themselves "severe." In this respect, she emphasizes the pericardium and "hitting" incidents, and argues that, viewed in the context of her employment, they were sufficient to create a hostile and abusive working environment. In support, she cites two cases: Turnbull v. Topeka State Hospital, 255 F.3d 1238 (10th Cir. 2001), and Lockard v. Pizza Hut, Inc., 162 F.3d 1062 (10th Cir. 1998). We disagree that the isolated incidents in this case, viewed objectively, could be deemed "severe."
More specifically, we conclude that Turnbull and Lockard are inapposite. In Tumbull, we considered reasonable a jury finding that a hostile work environment had been created where a female psychologist was sexually assaulted by a male patient. 255 F.3d at 1242, 1244-45. The patient attacked her by knocking her to the ground, "undress[ing] her and digitally penetrating] her." Id. at 1242. He also "bit and choked her, and repeatedly threatened to kill her." Id. at 1242-43. As a result, she suffered [*63]  post-traumatic stress disorder. See id. at 1243. In addressing the sufficiency of the evidence as to the issue of severity in the work environment, we first noted that, while "an isolated incident may suffice if the conduct is severe and threatening," frequency is "one factor in the analysis." Id. Nonetheless, we found the relevant conduct in that case sufficiently "severe and threatening" due to its "objectively abusive [and] dangerous" nature. Id. at 1243-44.
Similarly, the plaintiff in Lockard was subjected to demonstrably severe and inappropriate conduct. See 162 F.3d at 1072. Specifically, she was a waitress who had to experience "'filthy' comments ... such as 'I would like to get into your pants'" made by two customers. Id. One customer also "pulled her hair," and "grabbed her breast and placed his mouth on it." Id. As a result of the incident, she "testified that ... her emotional condition deteriorated to the point that she feared going out in public." Id. We found "the harassing conduct by the two male customers ... sufficiently severe to create an abusive environment." Id.
The incidents in Lockard and Turnbull are quite plainly distinguishable from the isolated incidents in this case. They both involved instances of sexual [*64]  assault—conduct that clearly could be objectively viewed as threatening and severe. See Little v. Windermere Relocation, Inc., 301 F.3d 958, 967 (9th Cir. 2002) ("Rape is unquestionably among the most severe forms of sexual harassment. Being raped by a business associate, while on the job, irrevocably alters the conditions of the victim's work environment."); 3 Larson, supra, § 46.05[3][b], at 46-82 (noting that "a single incident of physical assault against a co-worker that is motivated by anti-female animus can qualify as severe enough to constitute an alteration of the co-worker's conditions of employment"). Consistent with our conclusions in Lockard and Turnbull, other courts have required the conduct to be especially egregious or extreme where only isolated incidents are alleged. See, e.g., Smith, 189 F.3d at 534 (noting that, "[a]lthough less severe acts of harassment must be frequent or part of a pervasive pattern of objectionable behavior in order to rise to an actionable level, 'extremely serious' acts of harassment do not," and finding that "[b]reaking the arm of a fellow employee because she is a woman, or, as here, damaging her wrist to the point that surgery was required, because she was a woman, easily qualifies as a severe enough isolated occurrence to alter the conditions of her employment"); [*65]  Ellison v. Brady, 924 F.2d 872, 878 (9th Cir. 1991) (noting that "the required showing of severity or seriousness of the harassing conduct varies inversely with the pervasiveness or frequency of the conduct"); see also Jacob v. ES—O—EN Corp., No. 2:06-CV-740 TC, 2008 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 12742, at *8, 2008 WL 474120, at *3 (D.Utah Feb. 19, 2008) ("[Plaintiff's] allegations of rape and assault by [an employee] amount to [a] hostile work environment, because these actions could be severe enough to alter [her] conditions of employment and create an abusive work environment."); Grozdanich v. Leisure Hills Health Ctr., Inc., 25 F.Supp.2d 953, 970 (D.Minn. 1998) ("A single sexual assault has a far greater potential to adversely alter the work environment, and with greater permanence, than would an offensive verbal remark, or a series of such remarks."); cf. Patterson v. Cnty. of Oneida, 375 F.3d 206, 230 (2d Cir. 2004) (holding in a 42 U.S.C. §§ 1981 and 1983 context that, "[a]lthough a single incident ordinarily will not give rise to a cognizable claim for hostile work environment, ... [where the plaintiff was subjected to] a physical assault in which [he] was punched in the ribs and ... temporarily blinded by having mace sprayed in his eyes[,] [w]e cannot say that, as a matter of law, such an incident is not sufficiently severe, in all the circumstances, to create a hostile work environment"). The facts presented in this case do not rise to the extreme level of conduct described in the foregoing cases.
Morris v. City of Colorado Springs, 666 F.3d at 665-668 (physician in operating [*66]  room threw pericardium tissue at plaintiff and joked about the incident; yelled at her and demeaned her work; made comments such as "get your ass in gear" or "get someone in here who knows what they are doing," hit or flicked her on the head twice within a two week period but not on a regular basis and not complained about for almost a year).
In this case, the incidents occurring after October 13, 2010 are few. Robinson was not in the Jackson station from December 2009 and did not return from Seattle until June or July of 2010. In October of 2010, Hansen says Robinson bumped him against the side of his buttocks, pushing him, while they were behind the ticket counter and while customers were present; Hansen simply moved away. Doc. 41-4, 15. Hansen recalled Robinson was the only employee at SkyWest who touched him inappropriately in October 2010. Id. In October 2010, Hansen says offensive remarks were made by John Robinson, Lynn Katoa and Dan Davis. He considered it sexually offensive when Katoa said "[w]e've invited to -- you to our parties before, and why can't you just conform with us?" Doc. 41-4, 16. Robinson said, when Hansen claims he rubbed up against him, "I heard you bought a [*67]  new home here. I would really like to come over and see your bedroom." Id. Dan Davis, one of Hansen's direct supervisors, "just asked me why I simply couldn't conform so I could stay full-time. To their advances." Id. In November and December of 2010, Hansen says the incident where Katoa and a couple others approached him at the gym saying "[w]ell, we can sex you — we can sexually be aggressive with you or sexually harass you at the gym and you can't do anything about that." Id. He asserts that Christine Shreve, a supervisor, said "Either you pick up my supervisory shift or I'll make sure that I add to your sexual harassment problems." He says she sat down and cried when he wouldn't pick up her shift. Doc. 41-4, 16-17. Hansen recalled no other incidents of touching or inappropriate speech during November or December 2010. Id. He was asked about inappropriate speech or touchings in January or February and cited one incident where he says Katoa made "the same action John did" and said "What? Are you afraid I'm gonna sexually harass you? Do you consider this sexual harassment?" Doc. 41-4, 17-18. He contends that when he and Amr Gharib had their altercation in January of 2011, Amr got [*68]  into his personal space, or the "Hula-Hoop" area, inches away, but did not touch him. Id. He also said, although it "may not be directly correlated to anyone else sexually," he felt David Hyllested, his supervisor, responded inappropriate to a statement Hansen made to him, "unfortunately when I had addressed the issue [regarding Lynn Katoa's behavior after conducting an interview in the office in January of 2011] about what "John was doing and my concern about him being place over me as a supervisor, and I said, 'I filed a grievance that is unresolved. I've got some issues pending.' He says Hyllested responded by saying "[y]ou're just fabricating that. You're just making it up. It's all in your head. I talked to corporate. They have no records." Id. Hansen just remembers he "felt a sexual charge in the air." Id.
Hansen has not provided sufficient evidence for a jury to find the alleged harassment was pervasive. These appear to be isolated comments; he cites only one inappropriate touching. The incident with Amr Gharib cannot reasonably be considered harassment that is sexually based; they were arguing about the appropriate customer service and Hansen's complaint was about Gharib's intrusion [*69]  into his personal space or the "Hula-Hoop" area. This complaint is more akin to the disability claim of discrimination he pursued with his 2009 Charge of Discrimination; but, no discrimination on the basis of disability has been asserted in the 2011 Charge of Discrimination. There is little that would lead a reasonable person to conclude the statements by Hyllested were sexual in nature. These are isolated incidents and not a steady barrage of incidents of sexually oriented, offensive comments or touchings directed toward Hansen.
None of the incidents or comments he cites could be considered severe or especially egregious. His complaints pale in comparison to the complaints of the plaintiffs in Morris, Lockard or Turnbull, cited in the authorities referenced above, where plaintiffs were raped, sexually assaulted, or physically injured. In evaluating Hansen's claims, the Court considers the totality of the circumstances, including the frequency of the claimed discriminatory conduct, its severity, whether it is physically threatening or humiliating or a mere offensive utterance, and whether it unreasonably interferes with the employee's work performance. Harris v. Forklift Sys., Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 23, 114 S. Ct. 367, 126 L. Ed. 2d 295 (1993); Morris v. City of Colorado Springs, 666 F.3d at 664; Chavez v. New Mexico, 937 F.3d 826, 832-33 (10th Cir. 2005); Harsco Corp. v. Renner, 475 F.3d 1179, 1187 (10th Cir. 2007). Having considered these factors, [*70]  and having carefully reviewed the parties' submissions, the Court finds that the incidents and comments Hansen cites are not sufficiently pervasive or severe to support his hostile working environment claim on the basis of sex.

Retaliation in Violation of Title VII
Title VII protects employees and former employees who attempt to exercise their rights guaranteed under the Act prohibiting retaliation by employers. 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-3(a). This section provides:
(a) Discrimination for making charges, testifying, assisting, or participating in enforcement proceedings
It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employer to discriminate against any of his employees or applicants for employment, for an employment agency, or joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining, including on-the-job training programs, to discriminate against any individual, or for a labor organization to discriminate against any member thereof or applicant for membership, because he has opposed any practice made an unlawful employment practice by this subchapter, or because he has made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing [*71]  under this subchapter.
"To establish a prima facie case of retaliation, a plaintiff must demonstrate (1) that he engaged in protected opposition to discrimination, (2) that a reasonable employee would have found the challenged action materially adverse, and (3) that a causal connection existed between the protected activity and the materially adverse action. Burlington N. & Santa Fe Ry. Co. v. White, 548 U.S. 53, 126 S.Ct. 2405, 2414-15, 165 L.Ed.2d 345 (2006); Miller v. Auto. Club of N.M., Inc., 420 F.3d 1098, 1119 (10th Cir.2005)." Argo v. Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Kansas, Inc., 452 F.3d 1193, 1202 (10th Cir. 2006).
Hansen's August 2011 charge asserts he engaged in protected opposition to Title VII discrimination when he complained about unlawful employment practices, "I complained continuously about the sexual harassment." He alleges that his discharge from employment occurred after his continuous complaints about sexual harassment.
First of all, the record does not bear out his claims of continuous complaints of sexual harassment. In 2006, while stationed in Salt Lake City, a co-worker complained about Hansen's conduct as sexually harassing. He complained to Kelsey Clark in 2008 about having to share a room with other male co-workers; Clark arranged for him to have a separate room. He says he was investigated in 2009 when a grievance was filed against him for singing "Telephone Man" to Anita Youngkin; he complained to Youngkin in 2009 [*72]  about inappropriate photographs from the Halloween party he did not attend; he reported conduct in April of 2009 to Kathy Makasian, at the same time he was complaining about Robinson "hanging seats," and says he told her he had also been sexually harassed and badgered by Robinson. At that same time, in 2009, he was also being investigated for another physical altercation with Amr Gharib, resulting in his suspension and referral to EAP. He complained frequently to the company about the failure to receive FMLA accommodations; none of those complaints were about sexual harassment. In June 2009, he filed his 2009 Charge of Discrimination alleging discrimination on the basis of age and disability. No mention of sexual harassment or hostile work environment was included in that 2009 Charge.
After he was discharged at the end of January 2011, Hansen requested board review, which was denied. His March 14, 2011 letter alleges he was improperly dismissed in retaliation for a filing he had in place with the EEOC at that time. That would have been the June 2009 Charge of Discrimination, as his 2011 Charge of Discrimination was not filed until August of 2011. Assuming solely for purposes of argument, [*73]  however, that any of Hansen's asserted complaints made prior to October 13, 2010 could be offered to support a viable retaliation claim, the Court finds that they are too remote in time. Thus, the Court finds there are insufficient facts alleged to support the third element of the prima facie case, a causal connection between the protected action and the adverse acts.
In Meiners v. University of Kansas, 359 F.3d 1222, 1231 (10th Cir. 2004), the court stated:
We have held that "unless the [adverse action] is very closely connected in time to the protected activity, the plaintiff must rely on additional evidence beyond mere temporal proximity to establish causation." Anderson v. Coors Brewing Co., 181 F.3d 1171, 1179 (10th Cir. 1999) (emphasis in original). A six-week period between protected activity and adverse action may be sufficient, standing alone, to show causation, but a three-month period, standing alone, is insufficient. Id.
This continues to be the guiding principle when considering the temporal proximity of a protected activity relied upon to establish causation:
The Tenth Circuit has held that "unless the [adverse action] is very closely connected in time to the protected activity, the plaintiff must rely on additional evidence beyond mere temporal proximity to establish causation." Meiners v. Univ. of Kansas, 359 F.3d 1222, 1231 (10th Cir. 2004) (internal quotation marks [*74]  and citation omitted). "A six-week period between protected activity and adverse action may be sufficient, standing alone, to show causation, but a three-month period, standing alone, is insufficient." Id. (finding protected conduct and an adverse action separated by two months and one week were "probably too far apart" to satisfy the causation element). Ms. El Helbawy does not allege other facts to suggest that her termination was a result of her protected conduct. Her allegation that Defendant failed to follow its own procedures and policies does not state a claim. See E.E.O.C. v. C.R. England, Inc., 644 F.3d 1028, 1052 (10th Cir. 2011) (finding that evidence that company failed to abide by a contractual provision did not establish a causal connection). In the public record are also the adjudications of the ALJ and the MSPB that Ms. El Helbawy did not provide adequate medical documentation to justify her absences from work and that the agency appropriately denied her full-time telework request. See El Helbawy, 2014 MSPB LEXIS 3990, 2014 WL 2853621 (Exhibit 4 (Doc. # 19-4) at 9-10 of 73); El Helbawy, 112 M.S.P.R. 518, 2015 WL 3750738, at ¶¶ 3-6. Claim Three is properly dismissed for failure to state a claim for retaliation under Title VII.
El Helbawy v. Pritzker, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 125903, 2015 WL 5535246, *9 (D. Colo. September 21, 2015).
In the instant case, there are insufficient facts alleged to support the third element of the prima facie case, [*75]  a causal connection between the protected action and the adverse acts. The events he relies upon, and in particular his 2009 Charge of Discrimination, lack temporal proximity necessary to support his retaliation claim for engaging in protected anti-discrimination activity claimed to result in his termination from SkyWest in 2011. Hansen's retaliation claim fails.

Disparate Treatment
To state a claim for disparate treatment on the basis of a protected characteristic under Title VII, a plaintiff must allege (1) he belongs to a protected class; (2) he suffered an adverse employment action; and (3) disparate treatment among similarly situated employees. Carney v. City & County of Denver, 534 F.3d 1269, 1273 (10th Cir. 2008). To support a claim of disparate treatment, a plaintiff must allege and prove he was similarly situated to other employees "in all relevant respects." McGowan v. City of Eufala, 472 F.3d 736, 745 (10th Cir. 2006). "Similarly situated employees are those who deal with the same supervisor and are subject to the same standards governing performance evaluation and discipline." Aramburu v. Boeing Co., 112 F.3d 1398, 1404 (10th Cir.1997). See also El Helbawy v. Pritzker, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 125903, 2015 WL 5535246, *9 (D. Colo. September 21, 2015).
Here, Hansen's allegations are conclusory and devoid of facts supporting the elements of his Title VII disparate treatment claim. His amended complaint includes allegations that his claims of sexual discrimination and [*76]  hostile work environment were dismissed as were his claims of lewd behavior while the claims of similarly situated coworkers against him were treated with heightened severity. He argues that disparate treatment was the result of his refusal to accept and acquiesce in the hostile work environment and his refusal to engage in quid pro quo sex. He alleges disparate treatment was directed against him by his supervisor and others in the supervisory chain who all intentionally discriminated against him. He relies upon the same facts identified above in this Order which will not be reiterated here. The Court finds that Hansen has not presented anything other than conclusory allegations and vague unsupported assertions to support a cognizable disparate treatment claim. Summary judgment will be granted in favor of defendant on this claim.

Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress (Outrageous Conduct)
To recover for intentional infliction of emotional distress under Wyoming law the plaintiff must prove that the defendant acted in an extreme and outrageous manner and that the defendant intentionally or recklessly caused the plaintiff severe emotional harm. E.g., Cook v. Shoshone First Bank, 2006 WY 13, 2006 WY 13, 126 P.3d 886 (Wyo. 2006); Hoflund v. Airport Golf Club, 2005 WY 17, 2005 WY 17, 105 P.3d 1079 (Wyo. 2005). The conduct must be "so outrageous [*77]  in character, and so extreme in degree, as to go beyond all possible bounds of decency, and to be regarded as atrocious, and utterly intolerable in a civilized community." Hoflund, 105 P.3d at 1089 (quoting Restatement (Second) of Torts § 46 cmt. d (1965)). As the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals explained, "a claim for the intentional infliction of emotional distress makes actionable only the most egregious conduct." Herrera v. Lufkin Industries, Inc., 474 F.3d 675, 688 (10th Cir. 2007).
In Worley v. Wyoming Bottling Co., the Wyoming Supreme Court explained, "[i]t is for the court to determine, in the first instance, whether the defendant's conduct may reasonably be regarded as so extreme and outrageous as to permit recovery, or whether it is necessarily so." 1 P.3d 615, 628 (Wyo. 2000) (quoting Kanzler v. Renner, 937 P.2d 1337, 1341 (Wyo. 1997)). When considering a motion for summary judgment,
"the court, as a matter of law, makes preliminary determinations regarding the outrageousness of the conduct and the severity of the emotional distress." Kanzler, 937 P.2d at 1341. Therefore, the Court must act as the gatekeeper for determining whether the conduct is extreme and outrageous. Herrera, 474 F.3d at 688 (citing Leithead v. American Colloid Co., 721 P.2d 1059, 1066 (Wyo. 1986)).
The pertinent facts are included in this Order. Hansen's claims rely on the same facts as set forth in the preceding portions of this order. Acting as the gatekeeper, as Wyoming law permits, the Court finds that the defendant's conduct [*78]  cannot be regarded as so extreme in degree, as to go beyond all possible bounds of decency, and to be regarded as atrocious, and utterly intolerable in a civilized community. The defendant is entitled to summary judgment on this claim.

Conclusion
The Court has determined that the defendant is entitled to summary judgment in its favor on all claims asserted by plaintiff against defendant, including Title VII claims for discrimination on the basis of sex and hostile work environment, retaliation, disparate treatment, and outrageous conduct. It is therefore
ORDERED that the Motion for Summary Judgment filed by Defendant SkyWest Airlines (Doc. 41) shall be, and is, GRANTED.
Judgment shall be entered accordingly.
Dated this 28th day of September 2015.
/s/ Alan B. Johnson
ALAN B. JOHNSON
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

JUDGMENT
The Court has entered its Order Granting Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment, finding that the defendant is entitled to judgment in its favor as a matter of law. It is therefore
ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED that plaintiff David Hansen recover nothing of defendant Sky West Airlines, and that defendant shall recover of plaintiff its costs of action, pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 54, with all parties [*79]  to bear their own attorneys' fees.
Dated this 28th day of September 2015.
/s/ Alan B. Johnson
ALAN B. JOHNSON
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

