Harper v. Capital One
United States District Court for the Northern District of Texas, Dallas Division
February 14, 2013, Decided; February 14, 2013, Filed
No. 3-11-cv-03007-F

Reporter
2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 206098 *
DAVETTA HARPER, Plaintiff, v. CAPITAL ONE, N.A., Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Davetta Harper, Plaintiff: David Bell, LEAD ATTORNEY, Law Offices of David Bell, Dallas, TX.
For Capital One Financial Corporation doing business as Capital One doing business as Capital One Bank doing business as Capital One NA, Defendant: Victor N Corpuz, LEAD ATTORNEY, Jackson Lewis PC, Dallas, TX; Taylor Eric White, Foley Gardere, Dallas, TX.
Judges: Royal Furgeson, Senior United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Royal Furgeson
Opinion



ORDER GRANTING DEFENDANT'S MOTION TO STRIKE EXPERT TESTIMONY AND MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT ON ALL CLAIMS

I. STATEMENT OF NATURE AND STAGE OF PROCEEDINGS
BEFORE THE COURT is a Motion for Summary Judgment on All Claims (Dkt. No. 29) and Motion to Strike the Expert Report and Testimony of Barbara O'Neal (Dkt. No. 28). Plaintiff DaVetta Harper ("Harper") filed this employment discrimination lawsuit against Capital One, N.A. ("Defendant") alleging claims of discrimination and retaliation solely under the FMLA. Harper has filed no claims for disability discrimination or failure to accommodate under the Americans with Disabilities Act. Defendant timely responded, the parties engaged in discovery, and the discovery deadline has passed. Defendant now brings this Motion for Summary Judgment [*2]  on All Claims, seeking dismissal of this action. Additionally, Defendant has filed a renewed Motion to Strike the Expert Report and Testimony of Barbara O'Neal. On January 24, 2013 The Court has been aided by the good briefing and presentations of counsel for both parties. Having extensively reviewed the evidentiary record and applicable law, Defendant's Motion to Strike is GRANTED and Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment on All Claims is GRANTED without prejudice. The case is dismissed in its entirety.1
 

II. BACKGROUND
Harper worked for Capital One from 2008 to April 2010 for the North Plano branch.2 In 2009, she was promoted to branch manager, and her duties included managing a team of tellers and sales personnel.3 Harper's daily responsibilities included greeting customers in the lobby, assisting customers in transactions sales, and handling escalated problems, among other duties.4 As branch manager, Harper was charged with creating the official schedules for her branch5, and under Capital One's e-Time policy, Harper was responsible for approving her employees' timecards on a weekly basis.6
In February 2010, Harper verbally informed her District Manager Matthew Woody that her doctor [*3]  told her to go on light duty due to her pregnancy.7 Harper neither discussed any strategy for managing the bank during her pregnancy nor requested any sort of accommodation from Woody at that time.8 Instead, Harper merely informed Woody of her alleged complications without specifics, what her doctor was "monitoring," and the general "expectations" of her light duty.9 She further did not formally request time off directly from Woody at that time.10
Following her conversation with Woody, Harper contacted a representative of Aetna, which administered Capital One's short-term disability and health insurance plans and FMLA leave process.11 Harper's anticipated leave was three months—part of which would be paid under company policy and another part of which would be unpaid under the FMLA.12 At no point prior to her termination from Capital One did Harper request FMLA, short-term disability, or any other type of leave.13
Harper's assistant branch manager was Nicole Metcalf, and she acted as branch manager when Harper was away from the branch and could handle various duties for which Harper was otherwise responsible.14 In February 2010, Harper hired Laci Lowry, who was a part-time teller in Harper's [*4]  branch at that time, to paint a mural in Harper's home.15 Harper agreed to pay Lowry a total of one hundred and fifty dollars for the project.16
On March 3, 2010, an anonymous caller placed a tip on Capital One's Ethics Hotline that in February 2010 Harper hired Lowry to paint a mural in a room at Harper's home and that Lowry completed the work during her regularly scheduled hours and received Capital One pay for those hours.17 The Ethics Hotline is an external mechanism by which Capital One employees could report suspicious activity.18 The case was referred to investigator Mona Trent.19 Trent was part of Capital One's Corporate Security department, which does not influence or make decisions regarding certain human resources issues, such as employee leave requests or requests for accommodations, or business issues, such as budgeting and staffing decisions.20
Capital One's code of conduct and ethics prohibits self-dealing and falsification of company records and makes such activities immediately terminable offenses.21 Because the anonymous tip on March 3, 2010 suggested there was a violation of Capital One's code of conduct and ethics, Trent started an investigation.22 The investigation was intended [*5]  to be highly confidential due to concerns for employee reputations and to preserve the integrity of the investigation, among other things.23
During her investigation, Trent pulled Lowry's eTime records and the branch schedule for February 2010.24 She believed that Lowry was paid for two days on which she was scheduled for "community service" on the official branch schedule.25 While Capital One employees can be paid for doing community service, if approved, the substance of the anonymous tip led Trent to continue her investigation further.26 Trent then interviewed both Lowry and Harper at length, as well at Nicole Metcalf and Mathew Woody informally.
Based on her interviews and the various documents she reviewed or received during her investigation, Trent concluded that Lowry acted at Harper's instruction, and that Harper allowed Lowry to put time down on her timecard for the time she was away from the branch painting the mura1.27 Trent concluded that Harper had engaged in unethical conduct, which included self-dealing and falsification of company records.28 Capital One terminated Harper on April 7, 2010, citing the investigation as the basis for the move. If Harper had taken FMLA leave when her [*6]  baby was born, it would have occurred in July, 2010, more than three months later.
Harper contends that the investigation conducted by Defendant was fatally flawed, so much so in fact, that it was not merely botched, but a sham investigation that never sought to get the facts straight. There are two dates in question in which Lowry painted the mural at Harper's house: February 16 and 24. Harper argues that on February 16, Lowry was already scheduled for "CS" (community service) at the Dallas SPCA and did not work at Harper's house that day from 10:00 to 3:00 P.M. (Pl.'s App. at 20, Harper Dep. 130:1-15.) Harper states that only after Lowry completed her work at the SPCA did she go to Harper's home to paint the mural. (Pl.'s Resp. ¶ 47.) Furthermore, Harper argues that the arrangement to schedule Lowry for community service had already been made before any plan to paint the mural at Harper's home that day. Harper then contends that the only other time Lowry came to Harper's home to paint was on a day Ms. Lowry was not scheduled to work at the bank at all, February 23—not February 24. (Pl.'s App. at 20, Harper Dep. 129:23-25.) However, in that same deposition, Harper does admit that Lowry's [*7]  schedule on the February 24 does indicate she was scheduled for community service again at the SCPA, and that on February 23, which Harper indicated may have been the actual date of the mural painting, Lowry was scheduled for work. (Pl.'s App. at 20, Harper Dep. 133:3 20.) These discrepancies in Harper's deposition are further augmented by Harper's previous written statement that, "On (2) occasions, I allowed Laci to leave the branch early 2-3 hrs to work on painting. I coded time on schedule as CS-community service, to allow team to know she would be out of the office during that time." (Def.'s App. at 158, Harper Statement.) However, Harper contends that Trent forced her to write those statements "word for word" under threat of "voluntary termination." (Pl.'s App. at 23, Harper Dep. 144:23-25, 145:1-9.)
Harper sued, and is seeking actual damages of at least $200,000; attorney's fees as the Court deems equitable; back pay and interest on the back pay as the Court deems equitable; all reasonable and necessary costs incurred in this suit; expect fees as the Court deems appropriate; front pay in the amount the Court deems equitable to make Plaintiff whole; Pre and Post judgment interest; [*8]  and Loss of Benefits. (Pl.'s First Amended Comp. at 5).

III. SUMMARY JUDGMENT STANDARD
A party is entitled to summary judgment on all or any part of a claim as to which there is no genuine issue of material fact and as to which the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c); Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 247 (1986). The moving party has the initial burden of showing that there is no genuine issue of material fact. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 256. The movant may discharge this burden by pointing out the absence of evidence to support one or more essential elements of the non-moving party's claim "since a complete failure of proof concerning an essential element of the nonmoving party's case necessarily renders all other facts immaterial." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323-25 (1986); see also Baton Rouge Oil & Chem. Workers Un. v. ExxonMobil Corp., 289 F.3d 373, 375 (5th Cir. 2002). In considering a motion for summary judgment, "the court must draw all reasonable inferences in favor of the nonmoving party, and it may not make credibility determinations or weigh the evidence." Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 150, 120 S.Ct. 2097, 147 L.Ed.2d 105 (2000) (in context of judgment as a matter of law, which "mirrors" summary judgment and involves the same inquiry).
Once the moving party has carried its burden under Rule 56(c), the non-moving party must do more than merely show that there is some doubt as to the material facts. Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co., Ltd. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586 (1986). The party opposing the motion may [*9]  not rest on mere allegations or denials of pleading, but must set forth specific facts showing a genuine issue for trial. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248, 256. An issue is material only if its resolution could affect the outcome of the action. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248. Unsupported allegations that are conclusory in nature are insufficient to defeat a proper motion for summary judgment. Simmons v. Lyons, 746 F.2d 265, 269 (5th Cir. 1984); see also Jenkins v. NTE Aviation Ltd., 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 14597, *4-6 (N.D. Tex. Feb. 19, 2010).

IV. ANALYSIS
Harper filed this action asserting FMLA discrimination and retaliation against Capital One, her former employer. The Court holds that Capital One is entitled to summary judgment on Harper's claims because (1) Harper cannot meet her initial burden of establishing a prima facie case; (2) even if Harper could meet the initial burden, Capital One had a non-discriminatory reason for her termination, and (3) Harper cannot show a discriminatory pretext for her termination.
In sum, Harper argues that Capital One was so determined to fire her due to her maternity leave that it deliberately organized a flawed investigation run by Trent that unfairly entrapped Harper into making self-incriminating admissions about her participation in the scheme; and then terminated her based on that intentionally-designed "sham" investigation. That version of the [*10]  events appears to be inconsistent with the record before the Court, found in both the depositions and Ms. Harper's written admissions of her involvement during the investigation. Yet regardless, the Court believes the minute, "he said, she said" details of the investigation are less important than the lack of a causal link to any discriminatory intent. Indeed, "[t]he question is not whether an employer made an erroneous decision; it is whether the decision was made with discriminatory motive." Mayberry v. Vought Aircraft Co., 55 F.3d 1086, 1091 (5th Cir. 1995). In this case, Harper has failed to convincingly show a discriminatory pretext for her termination.

1. Harper cannot establish a prima facie case under the FMLA
After examining the totality of the evidence, the Court finds that Harper's claims do not establish a prima facie case under the FMLA. To make a prima facie showing of FMLA, Harper must show that: (1) she was protected under the FMLA; (2) she suffered an adverse employment decision; and either (3a) that she was treated less favorably than an employee who had not requested leave under the FMLA; or (3b) the adverse decision was made because she took FMLA leave. Hunt v. Rapides Healthcare Sys., LLC, 277 F.3d 757, 768 (5th Cir. 2001) (citing Chaffin v. John H Carter Co., Inc., 179 F.3d 316, 319 (5th Cir.1999)). If Harper succeeds in making a prima facie case, the burden shifts [*11]  to Defendant to articulate a legitimate nondiscriminatory or nonretaliatory reason for the employment action. Once Defendant has done so, Harper must show by a preponderance of the evidence that the Medical Center's reason is a pretext for retaliation. Id.
Where a defendant has moved for summary judgment on an employment discrimination claim based on circumstantial evidence, as in this case, we apply the burden-shifting framework established in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S.Ct. 1817, 36 L.Ed.2d 668 (1973). See Russell v. McKinney Hosp. Venture, 235 F.3d 219, 222 (5th Cir.2000). The first step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis requires "[t]he plaintiff [to] establish a prima facie case that the defendant made an employment decision that was motivated by a protected factor." Mayberry v. Vought Aircraft Co., 55 F.3d 1086, 1089 (5th Cir.1995). If the plaintiff establishes a prima facie case, we proceed to the next stage of the analysis, where "the defendant bears the burden of producing evidence that its employment decision was based on a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason." Id. If the defendant carries its burden, the analysis moves to the third McDonnell Douglas step, where "[t]he burden ... shifts back to the plaintiff to prove that the defendant's proffered reasons were a pretext for discrimination." Id.

A. Capital One's Alleged Failure to Accommodate Harper Does Not Establish [*12]  Any Actionable Claims under the FMLA
Harper fails to prove the first prong of the prima facie case: being denied her rightful protections under the FMLA. Defendant contends that Harper never formally filed FMLA papers, but the Court believes that such details are largely irrelevant. Harper testified that she had officially notified Defendant's insurance carrier, Aetna, that she was pregnant and anticipating maternity leave, in addition to notifying Matthew Woody, her supervisor. (See Pl.'s App. P. 10, Harper Depo. 70.) In the view of the Court, such actions were sufficient to trigger FMLA rights. The far more important question is the scope of those rights, and whether the alleged "failure to accommodate" triggers any actionable claims under the FMLA. The Court holds that it does not.
Harper alleges that Capital One violated the FMLA by "denying her legal right to an accommodation (light duty) during her pregnancy." (Def.'s App. At 174, ECF No. 10, Pl.'s First Am. Compl. ¶ 14.) Harper testified extensively during her deposition that Capital One failed "to provide appropriate accommodations"—in particular, for additional staff at her branch. See, e.g., Def.'s App. at 11-13, 19, 27-28, [*13]  30, 42, 49-51, 53, Harper Dep. 29:25, 30:1-2, 31:9-13, 40:18-23, 51:17-25, 52:1-2, 59:17-19, 80:1-5, 88:16-22, 89:21-25, 90:1-3, 92:12-15.
But these alleged failures to accommodate, even if true, are not actionable under the FMLA. Indeed, the FMLA regulations state, "the leave provisions of the [FMLA] are wholly distinct from the reasonable accommodation obligations of employers covered under the [ADA]." 29 C.F.R. § 825.702(a). The regulations further note that "accommodations" are part of the ADA, not FMLA:
ADA's "disability" and FMLA's "serious health condition" are different concepts, and must be analyzed separately. FMLA entitles eligible employees to 12 weeks of leave in any 12-month period due to their own serious health condition, whereas the ADA allows an indeterminate amount of leave, barring undue hardship, as a reasonable accommodation.
29 C.F.R. § 825.702(b) (emphasis added). Harper's claims fall only under the purview of the FMLA—not the ADA—which specifically provides job protected leave, not accommodation, under certain circumstances. 29 U.S.C. § 2612(a)(1)(D) ("Because of a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform the functions of the position of such employee."). Additionally, if an employee cannot perform the [*14]  duties of her job, the FMLA does not require the employer to provide a job that the employee can perform. See 29 C.F.R. § 825.216(c) ("If the employee is unable to perform an essential function of the position . . . the employee has no right to restoration to another position under the FMLA."). While that provision also notes that "[t]he employer's obligations may, however, be governed by the Americans with Disabilities Act," Harper is not suing under the ADA.
Furthermore, the leading cases in Texas confirm that employers are not required to provide accommodations under the FMLA. As the Fifth Circuit has clearly stated: "Under the FMLA, however, there is no right to reinstatement with 'reasonable accommodations.'" Oatman v. Fuji Photo Film USA, Inc., 54 F. App'x 413, *2 (5th Cir. 2002) (unpublished); cent. denied, 538 U.S. 978, 123 S.Ct. 1788, 155 L.Ed.2d 667 (2003). See also Johnson v. Houston's Restaurants, Inc., No. H-03-4566, 2005 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 47758, at *1142 n.1 (S.D. Tex. Feb. 17, 2005) ("Where an employee is not able to perform the essential functions of his position, the FMLA does not require the employer to provide a different position in order to accommodate an employee's health condition or disability.") In fact, even under the ADA, the Fifth Circuit has held that employers are "not required to create light duty jobs to accommodate disabled employees." Turco v. Hoechst Celanese Corp., 101 F.3d 1090, 1094 (5th Cir. 1996)
Additionally, as Defendant notes, Harper's [*15]  allegations are contradictory. In fact, she concedes that Capital One did not hire additional staff as a result of budgetary constraints—an explicit admission that the decision not to hire additional workers for her branch was unrelated to her pregnancy leave—a leave that was not even anticipated to begin until many months later. (See Def.'s App. at 40, 44-45, Harper Dep. 77:17-21, 82:5-25, 83:1-15.)
Had Harper pursued a claim under the ADA, her demands for "reasonable accommodation" may have been more salient. However she did not bring such a claim and therefore the issue is not relevant to the resolution of this FMLA case. As such, Capital One's alleged "failure to accommodate" is not legally actionable.

B. Harper Had No Pregnancy Complications
Harper's baby was due and was ultimately born in July 2010.29 During her pregnancy, Harper claims her doctor placed her on light duty in February 2010.30 This included being "cautious of what [she] lifted and how long [she] stood."31 However as Defendant points out, Harper's doctor merely instructed generally to limit the time she spent on her feet without a specific time restriction, to refrain from lifting "heavy" objects without a specific weight [*16]  restriction, to get "adequate" rest, exercise, and fluids, and to "reduce" her stress levels.32 At no time during her employment did Harper provide any medical records or doctors' notes to Defendant regarding her alleged generalized restrictions, yet the company accommodated her anyway.33
First, Harper requested and was allowed to have a chair placed at her branch's greeter station to allow her to spend less time on her feet.34 In addition, Harper was not required to participate in what are known as "Calling Day" efforts, which typically require bankers, such as Harper, to go out into the community to have meetings with potential Capital One customers.35 In both situations, Woody, as her direct supervisor at Capital One, expressed no dissatisfaction with the requests and allowed her to do what she needed to do, including going on doctor's appointments despite staffing concerns-facts which Harper admits.36
In fact, during their February 2010 conversation, Woody told Harper that she could come to him if she needed anything-something that Harper again readily admits in her deposition.37 As a result of these precautions, Harper never went on bed rest and suffered no pregnancy complications [*17]  whatsoever during the entirety of her pregnancy.38
The only thing Harper requested and was not granted was additional staffing.39 According to Harper, she lost three tellers between February and April 2010, and that the loss of these tellers allegedly left her branch short-staffed.40 Despite that allegation, Harper's branch was not short-staffed.41 Based upon the number of teller transactions at that time, Capital One determined that additional teller staffing was not warranted at Harper's branch in the spring of 2010 because the remaining tellers were not busy enough to justify further hires.42 Harper herself even believes that Capital One's refusal of her additional staff was due to budgetary constraints.43 As Harper said, "there was a freeze or something of that nature on hiring any new associates and some other things."44 Clearly, the factual record shows that Defendant's staffing was related to budget and branch needs and totally unrelated to Harper; in other words, non discriminatory and legitimate.
 

C. Capital One had a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for terminating Harper's employment
Courts grant summary judgment on FMLA claims where the employer articulates a legitimate, non-discriminatory [*18]  reason for its employment actions. Here, the Court finds that Defendant has easily crossed that threshold by virtue of the alleged self-dealing scheme involving Harper. Harper alleges that her requests for pregnancy-leave motivated Defendant to fire her. However, such a claim is speculative at best and unsupported by the factual record. Indeed, even if the Capitol One investigation reached an incorrect result, there is no persuasive link to any motive related to Harper's pregnancy.
If there is no causal link between the challenged employment action and her protected activity, summary judgment is appropriate. Chaffin v. John H Carter Co., 179 F.3d 316, 319 (5th Cir.1999); See also Grubb v. Sw. Airlines, 296 Fed. Appx. 383, 390 (5th Cir. 2008) (stating that "speculation from the timing of [the plaintiff s] FMLA application and his firing is also not enough" to overcome the employer's articulated legitimate reason for his termination); "[T]iming alone is not enough to support retaliation when evidence shows that the employer's actions were justified. An anti-discrimination or retaliation statute does not exempt an employee from violations of company work rules or job requirements." Jarjoura v. Ericsson, Inc., 266 F.Supp.2d 519, 531 (S.D.Tex.2003), affd, 82 Fed.Appx. 998 (5th Cir.2003) (unpublished) (("[T]iming alone is not enough to support retaliation ...."); Price v. Marathon Cheese Corp., 119 F.3d 330, 337 (5th Cir.1997) ("[One] cannot merely rely on his subjective [*19]  belief that discrimination occurred...."); In short, even if Harper could show that her efforts to seek FMLA leave are protected, she lacks evidence to prove that such efforts led to her dismissal.
For example, Harper claims that "Matthew Woody admitted the schedule is not evidence of falsification." Pl.'s Resp. at 13 at ¶ 44. Yet such a view is a misinterpretation of the deposition. Woody stated that "the piece of paper itself is not" evidence of falsification, which makes perfect sense. Indeed, without any other information, it would be assumed that Lowry was engaged in "community service" as the time card said. The fact that it is not facially indicative of fraud is irrelevant. Furthermore, when Woody was asked by Harper's attorney if he thought Harper "intended to do something dishonest with this mural painting incident," he replied, "I think based on the investigation done, the notes that I saw and the conclusion, then, yes, I do." (Pl.'s App. at 31, Woody Dep. 11:3-11).Thus, the notion that Woody's deposition somehow aided Harper's is a strained interpretation.
Harper's additional points also fall short. She claims "Defendant has been unable to establish that a document, let alone [*20]  documents, was falsified by Ms. Harper" and that "Matthew Woody admitted that the falsification of the time card was made by Ms. Lowry." Pl.'s Resp. at 13 at ¶ 45. Again, this is a remarkably superficial view of the investigation, or fraud generally. If a manager encourages a subordinate to falsify records, the fact that the manager did not physically alter the records herself is immaterial. The act of sanctioning and participating in the scheme is falsification, regardless of who files the actual time card. Similarly inapplicable is Harper's contention that "Ms. Lowry reports her own time and Ms. Harper cannot go in a change the time card." Id. If the scheme to falsify records was developed before the time card was filed, it would not matter if the supervisor were able to edit it afterward. In fact, Lowry wrote in her statement that "Ms. Harper also specifically told me that I should put the time down on my timecard." (Def.'s App. at 165, Lowry Decl. at ¶ 11.)
Most importantly, Harper never successfully links the supposed "discriminatory intent" of Defendant with the actual course of the investigation. Harper contends that "the only evidence Defendant offers . . . is the word of Ms. [*21]  Lowry, an employee who had been disciplined numerous times." Id at ¶ 51. Such a statement is belied by Harper's own written admissions during the investigation. Harper prepared a handwritten, signed statement admitting that "on (2) occasions," she "allowed Laci to leave branch early 2-3 hrs to work on painting" and that she "coded time on schedule as CS — community service to allow team to know she would be out of office during that time." (Def.'s App. at 150, 158-59, Trent Decl. ¶ 26, Ex. C-4.). Thus, Trent later wrote in her investigation log that "Harper gave a written statement in which she admitted that she altered the schedule to reflect that Lowry was performing Community Service when Lowry was in fact working in her home." (Def.'s App. at 161, Capital One Investigation Log.) Now, having implicated herself during the investigation, Harper attempts to wipe the record clean, blaming Trent's investigative techniques—even implying her own admissions were made forcibly under threat of termination. Harper claims that "Ms. Trent forced Ms. Harper to write a statement 'word for word' how Ms. Trent wanted it written or Mrs. Trent told Ms. Harper is would be grounds for termination. It [*22]  did not matter to Defendant if the facts were wrong." (Pl.'s Resp. at ¶ 49) (emphasis added.) Essentially, Harper asks the Court to believe that she had no idea about the allegations, but then quickly admitted to knowing about that very scheme (about which she had no idea) under duress, and this was entirely the result of the coercion by Trent. That version of the events, when combined with the evidence from other employees, is simply not persuasive.
Yet the Court is not attempting to conclude whether or not Defendant's investigation was correct, but rather, if it was reasonable. Given the facts on the record, Trent's conclusions are not unreasonable, nor has Defendant shown any persuasive evidence linking the investigation to a hidden FMLA pretext. Furthermore, Harper's attorney alleged in Court that the investigation was so incorrect that it was facial evidence of intent to remove her for ulterior reasons, specifically Defendant's desire to remove Harper due to her FMLA needs. Again, such speculation cannot past the barrier of summary judgment, given the evidence before the Court. In fact, the only evidence to which Harper points to draw a connection between her alleged need for FMLA [*23]  leave and her termination was one alleged stray comment—based on double hearsay. She claims Defendant's Regional Director Patrick Allen asked his assistant why Harper needed three months off to have her child. (Def.'s App. at 41-42, Harper Dep. 79:7-8, 80:19-25.) Harper admits that this happened at least a month before her termination, but was not even sure when it occurred exactly. (See Def.'s App. at 43, Harper Dep. 81:14-21.) Despite the unsubstantiated allegation, Harper concedes that she never once spoke to Allen directly and never personally heard him say anything about her pregnancy at all. (See Def.'s App. at 45-46, Harper 83:16-18, 84:1-3.) In the opinion of the Court, Allen's comments are inadmissible as hearsay, but even if they were not, they do not indicate any discriminatory intent. Simply put, more is needed.
Indeed, the record indicates the events unfolded organically. First, the anonymous tip placed to Capital One's Ethics Hotline suggests that at least one other employee believed he or she had knowledge of Harper's alleged involvement in the self-dealing. (Def.'s App. at 147, Trent Decl. ¶ 3.) It begs the question as to why an employee would call the hotline and implicate [*24]  Harper, unless he or she were part of what Harper alleges was a plan to entrap and terminate her due to her requests for light duty or family leave.
Second, Trent has stated in her deposition she did not instruct Harper on what to put in her statement, besides indicating what topics needed to be covered. (Def.'s App. at 150, Trent Decl. ¶ 27.) Additionally, Trent also spoke with Woody during her investigation, who stated that he did not tell Harper or Lowry that Lowry would be paid by Capital One for the time she spent at Harper's home painting the mural. (Def.'s App. at 150, Trent Decl. ¶ 28); (App. at 83, Woody Decl. ¶ 32.) Rather, he only told Harper that he did not think the mere act of painting a mural for Harper was a conflict of interest. (Def.'s App. at 150, Trent Decl. ¶ 29); (see Def.'s App. at 83, Woody Decl. ¶ 32.)
After assembling the interviews and documents, Trent has stated that she concluded that Lowry acted at Harper's instruction, and that Harper allowed Lowry to put time down on her timecard for the time she was away from the branch painting the mural. (Def.'s App. at 150, Trent Decl. ¶ 31.) Given the available information, Trent concluded that Harper broken company policy [*25]  by engaging in self-dealing and falsification of company records. (Def.'s App. at 151, Trent Decl. ¶ 32.) After making her conclusions, Trent prepared a report detailing the results of her investigation. (Def.'s App. at 151, 163, Trent Decl. ¶ 33, Ex. C-6.) As the Court has noted, Trent's conclusions are not, as Harper alleges, so facially absurd as to indicate any FMLA pretext behind the termination.
Again, Trent relied not only on her interview with Lowry and Lowry's handwritten statement, but also Harper's own handwritten statement, in which Harper specifically admitted to allowing Lowry to leave the branch early to paint the mural. (See Def.'s App. at 150, Trent Decl. ¶ 31.) The Court finds that Trent's reliance on these interviews and statements was in good faith and non-discriminatory, especially because Trent, in her capacity as an investigator, had nothing to do with any decision regarding whether or when Harper could go on leave for her child. (Def.'s App. at 148, Trent Decl. ¶ 6.) As such, Harper's allegations regarding the company's investigation are sheer speculation and cannot overwhelm Defendant's non-discriminatory reason for terminating her employment.
Having analyzed [*26]  the evidentiary record, be it depositions, written statements, or the briefing, the Court believes there is no material factual dispute on this matter. Indeed in any investigation, witnesses routinely contradict one another; but when the only person espousing an alternate view is the accused, and that individual has also previously admitted involvement in the actions, and other evidentiary materials suggest some degree of involvement by the accused, the Court is obliged to weigh such evidence accordingly. Yet most importantly, even assuming arguendo that Harper's criticism of the investigation is entirely valid, she has failed to sufficiently link it to any discriminatory intent. If Harper's version of the events is accurate, it means that Defendant's actions were, at most, a botched investigation. The muddled insinuations about an elaborate plot to terminate her because of her pregnancy leave fail due to the lack of evidence. In the opinion of the Court, the anonymous phone call to the Capital One tip line, statements from Laci Lowry and Matthew Woody, and the detailed nature of Trent's investigation log and report in no way suggest a conspiracy to terminate Harper.

D. Harper has failed [*27]  to prove that she was treated less favorably than a similarly-situated employee who had not requested leave.
To buttress of her claims, Harper cites only Laci Lowry as an example of another employee who was treated more favorably after engaging in similar misconduct. The Court agrees with Defendant's summation: "Even assuming arguendo that Lowry was similarly-situated to Harper, any treatment of Lowry does not support Harper's claims because Lowry was a member of the same protected class." Def.'s Mot. at 19. Lowry was likewise pregnant in April 2010 and later took three months of leave due to her pregnancy without any complaints whatsoever. (Def.'s App. at 166, Lowry Decl. ¶¶ 21, 22, 23.) Importantly, this occurred around the same period as Harper's termination. Therefore, it is contradictory to claim that Lowry, who was in a similarly-situated "protected class" under the FMLA, is evidence of disparate treatment. Most importantly, Harper has not offered any other comparators who were treated more favorably, and has thus failed to satisfy that element of a prima facie case.
Harper also alleges that "[t]he record is also clear that Ms. Lowry had a history of work-related violations while [*28]  Ms. Harper has been an exemplary employee." (Pl.'s First Am. Compl. ¶ 13.) Clearly, Harper believes she was an otherwise good performer and that the defendant's conclusion to the contrary was incorrect, however such subjective beliefs do not establish discrimination or retaliation. See Mayberry, 55 F.3d at 1091 (finding that a "dispute in the evidence concerning . . . job performance does not provide a sufficient basis for a reasonable factfinder to infer that [a] proffered justification is unworthy of credence"); see also Sandstad v. CB Richard Ellis, Inc., 309 F.3d 893, 899 (5th Cir. 2002) (stating that "merely disputing [the employer's] assessment of [the employee's] performance will not create an issue of fact"). Thus, Harper's allegation that she was a better performer than Lowry also does not establish that Capital One's legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons for Harper's termination was a pretext for discrimination or retaliation under the FMLA, and thus Harper's claims should be dismissed.

E. Harper has not established that she was terminated due to an anticipated taking FMLA leave.
The FMLA statute itself does not define "interference," but the regulations state that interference is shown either through a refusal to authorize FMLA leave or discouragement from taking [*29]  the leave:
'Interfering with' the exercise of an employee's rights would include, for example, not only refusing to authorize FMLA leave, but discouraging an employee from using such leave. It would also include manipulation by a covered employer to avoid responsibilities under FMLA, for example:
(1) Transferring employees from one worksite to another for the purpose of reducing worksites, or to keep worksites, below the 50-employee threshold for employee eligibility under the Act;
(2) Changing the essential functions of the job in order to preclude the taking of leave;
(3) Reducing hours available to work in order to avoid employee eligibility.
29 C.F.R. § 825.220(b). Generally, proof of injury stemming from interference with the FMLA "requires evidence that the plaintiff was denied FMLA leave improperly." See Arizmendez v. Univ. of Tex. at El Paso, 536 F. Supp. 2d 710, 715 (W.D. Tex. 2008); see also De La Garza-Crooks v. AT&T, 252 F.3d 436, 2001 WL 361099, *1 (5th Cir.2001) (unpublished) (citing Graham v. State Farm Mut. Ins. Co., 193 F.3d 1274, 1274 (11th Cir.1999) ("[A] plaintiff suffers no FMLA injury when she receives all the leave she requests....")). Here, even assuming Harper was entitled to FMLA protection based on her inadequate allegations, she cannot show that Defendant discouraged her from taking or otherwise denied her FMLA leave.
Judge Cummings in addressed a similar allegation in Moran v. Wal-Mart Corp. No. 5:02-CV-096, [*30]  2003 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 5099, at *13 (N.D. Tex. April 1, 2003).There, the plaintiff claimed her direct supervisor told her that since she had become pregnant, she became less dependable, and she argued that this was evidence of the defendant's discriminatory intent to terminate her in violation of the FMLA. Id. at *3, *13. Judge Cummings held that the comment was too remote in time to her termination and had nothing to do with the adverse employment action or ultimate employment decision. See Id. At *13-14 ("[The] alleged remark about Plaintiffs dependability was made approximately three months prior to Plaintiffs termination and, thus, was remote in time vis-a-vis Plaintiffs termination for theft.")
Similarly here, even assuming Harper's allegation regarding Allen is true and this Court were to find that it is admissible, it does not, as a matter of law, show that Defendant discouraged or denied Harper her FMLA leave; nor does it establish a causal connection between her anticipated leave and the decision to terminate her. Specifically, Harper testified that she believed Woody, her direct supervisor, was "on her side." (Def.'s App. at 46, Harper Dep. 84:23-24.) And Harper did not even report Allen's comment to Defendant's human resources department or otherwise [*31]  complain about it until this suit. (Def.'s App. at 48, Harper Dep. 86:21-25.) Harper even concedes that her direct supervisor, Matthew Woody, did not question her when she claims she informed him that she would need to take maternity leave when she had her child. (Def.'s App. at 38-39, Harper Dep. 73:17-25, 74:1-4.)
In fact, Harper admits that it is just her "assumption" that Capital One did not want to pay her short-term disability leave—an explicit admission of her subjective speculation. (Def. 's App. at 54, Harper Dep. 98:15-21.) Accordingly, Harper has failed to establish a prima facie case because she does not have sufficient evidence as a matter of law to establish that Defendant discouraged her from taking FMLA leave, denied her FMLA leave, or terminated her employment because of any anticipated FMLA leave. As a result, her claims fail.

VI. HARPER'S PROPOSED EXPERT
In addition to Defendant's motion for Summary Judgment on All Claims, Defendant has also filed a renewed Motion to Strike Expert Report and Testimony and Exclude Barbara O'Neal ("O'Neal") as an Expert (Dkt. No. 28). This motion follows the Court's hearing on October 16, 2012, in which the Court heard arguments from both parties on the [*32]  original Motion to Strike (Dkt. No. 17) and granted the motion (Dkt. No. 25), finding the report contained no admissible opinions, while granting Harper leave to re-file and cure the defects of the proposed testimony.
Harper originally designated O'Neal as an "expert to testify regarding the improper, inappropriate and/or unlawful manner in which Plaintiff's employment and termination were handled." (See Dkt. No. 17, Def.'s Mot. to Exclude at Ex. A.) At the October 16 hearing, the Court indicated that the new expert report (1) should not include any opinion whatsoever; (2) should not opine on whether the defendant's methodology was flawed; (3) should not include anything about what the defendant did, did not do, or should have done in this case; and (4) should not include anything about the facts of this case at all.
Although Harper has adjusted the proposed testimony, The Court finds that O'Neal's amended expert report is simply a series of conclusory statements unsupported by sources, and furthermore does not address the administration of employee leave practices, which is the key issue in this case. Having examined the merits of Harper's new proposed expert testimony from Ms. O'Neal [*33]  and the relevant standards from the Fifth Circuit, the Court finds the testimony remains inadmissible, and therefore Defendant's Motion to Exclude is GRANTED.

A. Standard for Admissibility.
Under Rule 702, expert testimony is admissible, if it is (1) based upon sufficient facts or data, (2) produced by reliable principles and methods, and (3) supported by a reliable application of the principles and methods to the facts of the case. Fed. R. Evid. 702. District courts act as "gatekeepers" to ensure that the expert testifies "to (1) scientific knowledge that (2) will assist the trier of fact to understand or determine a fact in issue." Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharm., Inc., 509 U.S. 579, 592-93 (1993). "Under Daubert and Fed. R. Evid. 702, a district court has broad discretion to determine whether a body of evidence relied upon by an expert is sufficient to support that expert's opinion." Knight v. Kirby Inland Marine Inc., 482 F.3d 347, 354 (5th Cir. 2007)

B. Analysis
To be clear: in the opinion of the Court whether the investigation followed "best practices" does not matter either way with regard to Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment. If O'Neal's report were admitted, the value of her testimony would not affect this Court's judgment because the key issue is not whether Defendant followed the industry standard for "best practices" with employee investigations, [*34]  but rather if there was any nexus between Harper's termination and any pretext to remove her because of her FLMA needs. And the Court has found no evidence of that. Thus, the decision on this motion does not affect the Court's ruling on Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment, because it O'Neal's proposed report and testimony do not address the key issues that the Court deems most relevant to the case.
Nevertheless, on its own merits, O'Neal's amended report does not pass the standards of Rule 702. Her report, a series of nineteen numbered paragraphs, is composed entirely of subjective opinions regarding what should be done during a workplace investigation or how to conduct employee disciplinary actions. O'Neal does not explain how she reaches such subjective conclusions, nor does she specify any articles, studies, reports, or other data on which she relied in forming those opinions. Not even a single "best practices" standard from a similarly-situated corporation is included, which could at least allow the Court to better ascertain whether O'Neal's statements are indeed the industry norm. Instead, the Court is instructed to take her at her word, because she worked in the human resources field. [*35]  The lack of a single citation is glaring.
The Fifth Circuit standards state that any step an expert takes in formulating her opinion "that renders the analysis unreliable . . . renders the expert's testimony inadmissible." Curtis v. M&S Petroleum, Inc., 174 F.3d 661, 670 (5th Cir. 1999) (emphasis in original). Furthermore, "the expert's testimony must be reliable at each and every step or else it is inadmissible." Knight., 482 F.3d 347, 354 (5th Cir. 2007)). Therefore, if an expert does not specifically elucidate the methodology and basis she used in formulating her opinions, her opinions are unreliable and inadmissible. "The reliability analysis applies to all aspects of an expert's testimony: the methodology, the facts underlying the expert's opinion, the link between the facts and the conclusion, et alia." Knight, 482 F.3d 347, 355 (quoting Heller v. Shaw Indus., Inc., 167 F.3d 146, 155 (3d Cir. 1999))
Importantly, The Fifth Circuit has consistently held that a plaintiff in an employment discrimination case cannot establish discrimination, retaliation, or pretext merely by questioning the employer's investigation or ultimate business decision to terminate. LeMaire v. State of Louisiana, 480 F.3d 383, 391 (5th Cir. 2007) ("Our job as a reviewing court conducting a pretext analysis is not to engage in second-guessing of an employer's business decisions. . . Our anti-discrimination laws do not require an employer to make proper decisions, [*36]  only non-retaliatory ones.") (citation omitted).
This concept was addressed by Judge DiClerico in the District of New Hampshire in Cook v. CTC Comms. Corp., No. 06-cv-58, 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 80849, at *6-7 (D.N.H. Oct. 15, 2007). There, a proposed human resources expert sought to testify that an employer should follow certain steps in "an appropriate workplace investigation." Id. at *5. But the expert failed to "identify the source of her" proposed investigation steps, referring only generally to "sources." Id. at *6. Judge DiClerico ultimately found that the expert's "opinions on what would constitute an appropriate investigation are not sufficiently supported by relevant data and appropriate methodology to satisfy Rule 702." Id. at *7. Here, the Court finds a similarly lacking report. During the hearing, Harper's attorney suggested providing such methodology would be impossible. However, there's no indication that O'Neal even attempted to find out the "best practices" of other large corporations before reaching her conclusions, and the Court questions the likelihood that no literature on the topic exists.
Finally, Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 26(a)(2)(B) specifies what must be contained in an expert's report. Specifically, an expert must provide, among other things, "the facts or data considered by the witness [*37]  in forming [all opinions]," a "list of all publications authorized in the previous 10 years," a "list of all other cases in which, during the previous 4 years, the witness testified as an expert at trial or by deposition," and a "statement of the compensation to be paid for the study and testimony in the case." Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(a)(2)(B). O'Neal's amended report and short resume contain none of this information, and Defendant contends that her website and LinkedIn profile do not appear to contain it either—a claim uncontested by Harper. As a result of this lack of information, Defendant and this Court are unable to assess O'Neal's qualifications and the reliability of her opinions.
In short, O'Neal's proposed testimony is unsubstantiated opinion and nothing more, and would not aid the Court in understanding the contours of the case. Beyond her own experience in human resources, she does not explain how or why she reaches her "best practices," nor their basis or methodology. The Court is unwilling to admit such conclusions, especially when the proposed expert's report is missing key elements as required by Federal Rule 26(a)(2)(B). Accordingly, the proffered testimony and amended report are inadmissible and Defendant's Motion [*38]  to Strike is GRANTED.

VII. CONCLUSION
Having extensively reviewed the evidentiary record and applicable law, the Court holds that Defendant's Motion to Strike is GRANTED and Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment on All Claims is GRANTED. It is ORDERED that all of Plaintiff DaVetta Harper's claims are dismissed with prejudice. The case is dismissed in its entirety.
IT IS SO ORDERED
Signed this 14 day of February, 2013.
/s/ Royal Furgeson
Royal Furgeson
Senior United States District Judge


End of Document

