Hergenrader v. McCarthy
United States District Court for the Central District of Illinois, Rock Island Division
November 5, 2019, Decided; November 5, 2019, Filed
Case No. 4:19-cv-04008-SLD-JEH

Reporter
2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 250413 *; 2019 WL 13292837
KENNETH HERGENRADER, Plaintiff, v. RYAN MCCARTHY,1 Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Kenneth Hergenrader, Plaintiff: Stephen T Fieweger, STEPHEN T FIEWEGER P.C., Davenport, IA.
For Ryan McCarthy, Secretary of Department of Army, Defendant: Kimberly A Klein, LEAD ATTORNEY, US ATTORNEY, Peoria, IL.
Judges: SARA DARROW, CHIEF UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: SARA DARROW
Opinion



ORDER
Before the Court is Defendant Ryan McCarthy, Secretary of the Department of the Army's ("the Army"), Motion for Summary Judgment, ECF No. 7. For the reasons that follow, the motion is GRANTED.

BACKGROUND2
Plaintiff Kenneth Hergenrader worked for the Army as an industrial hygienist at the Rock Island Arsenal ("the Arsenal"). His position was at the eleventh paygrade of the General Schedule pay scale ("GS-11") and his first level supervisor was Tony Abbott. While employed by the Army, Hergenrader had numerous health issues. First, he was diagnosed with congestive health failure in August 2015 and was hospitalized for eight days. Second, in late December 2016, he tore his rotator cuff. He had surgery to repair the tear in May 2017 and then underwent a twelve-week rehabilitation program. Lastly, in February 2017, he had a massive gastrointestinal bleed and was hospitalized for ten days.
In 2015, Abbott noticed that [*2]  Hergenrader was having trouble walking without stopping to catch his breath. He considered requiring Hergenrader to undergo a fitness for duty examination at that time, but then Hergenrader was hospitalized and the examination was put on hold. Hergenrader was returned to work with no restriction by his cardiologist in July 2016. But Abbott was still "concerned from a safety standpoint of whether or not [Hergenrader] could do the work that [was] in his [position description]" so Hergenrader was asked to do a fitness for duty examination in October 2016. Hr'g Tr. 148:20-22, ECF No. 8-1 at 237.
According to the position description, major duties for the industrial hygienist position include planning and conducting evaluations of work environments, investigating occupational health problems, and evaluating existing ventilation systems. Position Description 2-3, ECF No. 8-1 at 49-50. The majority of evaluation work the industrial hygiene office does is for the Joint Manufacturing and Technology Center ("JMTC") on the Arsenal, which has 3.2 million square feet of industrial manufacturing space. Conducting investigations "involve[s] moderate physical exertion, including carrying equipment, [*3]  climbing, standing, walking, and bending." Id. at 5, ECF No. 8-1 at 52.
The position description does not accurately describe the position as Hergenrader performed it, however. Hergenrader described his job as "[a]t least 90 to 95% . . . mental." Hr'g Tr. 11:15, ECF No. 8-1 at 100. He explained that "[p]hysical aspects of the job would basically entail walking through work areas with a clipboard, a checklist, and basically taking notes as to what day-to-day operations entail. Physical activity, essentially, is a minimal amount of walking." Id. 11:24-12:3, ECF No. 8-1 at 100-01. He never had to climb a ladder in the course of his duties. But Hergenrader was on light duty after his hospitalizations. And before Hergenrader's health issues first surfaced, industrial hygiene technicians performed the tasks, like collecting samples, that required climbing ladders. The industrial hygiene technician position was phased out between 2014 and 2016, so the industrial hygienists had to start performing those tasks. After Hergenrader came back from light duty, though, Abbott did not ask him to climb ladders out of concern for his safety. Abbott—and contractors when Abbott got behind—performed the [*4]  functions Hergenrader was not asked to perform.
Dr. Aaron Jacob, Medical Director of the Arsenal's Health Center, conducted the October 2016 fitness for duty examination. Hergenrader told Dr. Jacob that his work was mostly "computer and mental work." Hr'g Tr. 37:21, ECF No. 8-1 at 126. Based on this information, Dr. Jacob told Hergenrader that he thought Hergenrader could do the job. After receiving the industrial hygienist position description, however, Dr. Jacob found that Hergenrader was unable to perform multiple aspects of the position, including: 1) walking for three hours of an eight-hour day; 2) repeated bending for two hours of an eight-hour day; and 3) climbing with the legs only for two hours of an eight-hour day.
Hergenrader requested accommodations for the first time on April 3, 2017. He requested three accommodations: use of a lift system to replace use of ladders; availability of a motorized transportation vehicle; and availability of a handicapped parking space next to his assigned work area. The request for handicapped parking was approved later that month. The other two requests were not addressed immediately because Hergenrader had not submitted medical documentation [*5]  to support them.
Hergenrader underwent a second fitness for duty examination on April 25, 2017. The examination was conducted by Dr. James Stephens, a physician from Fort Knox. A second examination was ordered because of the conflicting opinions from Hergenrader's personal cardiologist—who released him to work with no restrictions in July 2016—and Dr. Jacob. See Hr'g Tr. 149:15-23, ECF No. 8-1 at 238. Dr. Stephens documented seven medical issues: right shoulder pain, congestive heart failure, asthma, gastrointestinal bleed, left knee pain, obstructive sleep apnea, and diabetes that was not well controlled. Dr. Stephens noted that Hergenrader "was unable to walk more than approximately 100 feet or so without having to stop to rest for as long as 5 minutes, many times only making it approximately 50 feet or so before having to stop and rest." Stephens Evaluation 4, ECF No. 8-1 at 63. He also noted that Hergenrader stated that he could not climb a ladder. Id. He concluded that Hergenrader was unable to perform many of the essential functions of the industrial hygienist position, including walking, repeated bending, and climbing. Id. at 5-6, ECF No. 8-1 at 64-65.
On June 15, 2017, Abbott [*6]  issued a memorandum denying Hergenrader's remaining two accommodation requests—for a motorized vehicle and a lifting device—because he still had not provided "medical documentation from [his] primary physician to substantiate and support Dr. Stephens'[s] conclusions." See June 15, 2017 Mem., ECF No. 8-1 at 84. Sometime later, Hergenrader submitted a letter from his primary physician, Dr. John Dannenfeldt. Dr. Dannenfeldt recommended that, due to Hergenrader's congestive heart failure and recovery from his gastrointestinal bleed, he "not walk further than 50 yards without motorized assistance." Dr. Dannenfeldt Letter 2, ECF No. 8-1 at 83. Dr. Dannenfelt also noted that "[a] mechanical lifting device for accessing elevated work areas [wa]s essential" because "[a]ny individual that has a compromised circulatory condition should not use a ladder." Id.
Hergenrader resubmitted his remaining accommodation requests on July 10, 2017, noting that he had provided Dr. Dannenfeldt's documentation. Abbott contacted the JMTC safety office to survey the feasibility of Hergenrader's requested accommodations. Travis Brokaw, Safety and Occupational Health Specialist for the JMTC, recorded his findings [*7]  in a memorandum for the record. He concluded that using "an aerial work platform to access [dust collector or other ventilation] systems would not be feasible in most cases" because those systems are "only accessible by ladder" and they "are not designed to enable an employee to safely access them from an aerial work platform." Brokaw Mem. ¶ 3, ECF No. 8-1 at 88. He also concluded that "an electric cart will not always get an employee within 50-yards of the area they would need to perform work." Id. ¶ 4.
Dr. Jacob denied the accommodation requests by memorandum on August 8, 2017, because use of a motorized vehicle and lifting system would "not guarantee access to all areas of JMTC." Aug. 8, 2017 Mem. ¶ 2(a), ECF No. 8-1 at 86. Specifically, he noted that "[e]levated areas, such as baghouses and mezzanine levels, equipped with enclosed caged ladders are meant to be accessed using those ladders due to safety railings restricting access to aerial equipment." Id. ¶ 2(b). He also noted that "[e]ven with a motorized vehicle[,] walking more than 50 yards w[ould] be required when conducting industrial hygiene surveys." Id. ¶ 2(c), ECF No. 8-1 at 87.
Dr. Jacob also issued Hergenrader a medical [*8]  restrictions memorandum, indicating that the Army would search for a position to which he could be reassigned. Dr. Jacob requested that Hergenrader submit a resume and provide preferences regarding the scope of the reassignment search. Hergenrader indicated that he was willing to take a reassignment within commuting distance from the Arsenal, but was unwilling to take a position at a lower grade. He was also unwilling to relocate unless the Army paid his expenses and the position was a promotion. Kenneth Elshoff, a human resources specialist, conducted twelve searches over the course of four months and determined that there were no jobs available within the commuting area of the Arsenal at the GS-11 level.3 Dr. Jacob identified a GS-12 Safety and Occupational Health Specialist position available with the Army Sustainment Command and encouraged Hergenrader to apply. Hergenrader applied, but although he was well-qualified for the position, he did not receive an interview.
Abbott proposed removing Hergenrader from federal service on September 18, 2017, "due to [his] medical inability to perform the duties of [his] position." Not. Proposed Removal ¶ 1, ECF No. 8-1 at 14. Lieutenant Colonel [*9]  Sandra Rolph, Chief of the Department of Primary Care, officially removed Hergenrader from his position on November 9, 2017. Hergenrader filed a complaint of discrimination with the Army's equal employment opportunity office and received a final decision on December 13, 2018. He filed suit in this Court on January 14, 2019, alleging that he was subjected to disability discrimination in violation of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. § 794(a). Compl., ECF No. 1. The Army moves for summary judgment.

DISCUSSION

I. Legal Standard
Summary judgment is appropriate "if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). Summary judgment is also appropriate if the party opposing summary judgment fails to establish a genuine issue of fact on an element essential to its case and on which that party bears the burden of proof at trial. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986). At the summary judgment stage, the court's function is not "to weigh the evidence and determine the truth of the matter[,] but to determine whether there is a genuine issue for trial"—that is, whether "there is sufficient evidence favoring the non[-]moving party for a jury to return a verdict" in his favor. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 249 (1986); Patel v. Allstate Ins. Co., 105 F.3d 365, 370 (7th Cir. 1997). The court [*10]  must view the evidence "in the light most favorable to the non-moving party[] and draw[] all reasonable inferences in that party's favor." McCann v. Iroquois Mem'l Hosp., 622 F.3d 745, 752 (7th Cir. 2010) (citing Anderson, 477 U.S. at 255). "A genuine issue for trial exists only when a reasonable jury could find for the party opposing the motion based on the record as a whole." Pipitone v. United States, 180 F.3d 859, 861 (7th Cir. 1999) (quoting Roger v. Yellow Freight Sys., Inc., 21 F.3d 146, 149 (7th Cir. 1994)).

II. Analysis

a. Discovery
Under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56(d), "[i]f a nonmovant shows by affidavit or declaration that, for specified reasons, it cannot present facts essential to justify its opposition, the court may" deny the motion for summary judgment, defer ruling on it, or allow the nonmovant additional time to conduct discovery. Here, Hergenrader briefly complains that he has not had the opportunity to conduct discovery. See Resp. Mot. Summ. J. 1, ECF No. 10-1. But he does not ask the Court to take any specific action based on the lack of discovery. Instead, he argues that he can demonstrate material issues of fact even without discovery. Id. And he certainly has not submitted an affidavit or declaration as required by the rule. In the absence of a clear request for relief and compliance with Rule 56(d), the Court will proceed in ruling on the summary judgment motion.

b. Merits
Hergenrader claims that he was discriminated [*11]  against on the basis of disability when he was denied reasonable accommodations. The Rehabilitation Act provides that no "qualified individual with a disability . . . shall, solely by reason of her or his disability, . . . be subjected to discrimination . . . under any program or activity conducted by any Executive agency." 29 U.S.C. § 794(a); Garg v. Potter, 521 F.3d 731, 736 (7th Cir. 2008) ("[The] Rehabilitation Act prohibit[s] an employer from discriminating against a qualified individual with a disability because of the disability." (quotation marks omitted)). "In the employment context, the Rehabilitation Act requires that courts use the standards and provisions relating to employment of the Americans with Disabilities Act[, ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101-12213] . . . ." Novak v. Principi, 442 F. Supp. 2d 560, 565 (N.D. Ill. 2006) (citing 29 U.S.C. § 794(d)); Garg, 521 F.3d at 736 (applying the ADA's definition of disability to a Rehabilitation Act claim).
The ADA defines "discrimination" to include "not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who is an applicant or employee." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). To establish a failure to accommodate claim, the plaintiff must show that: "1) he was disabled; 2) his employer was aware of his disability; and 3) he was a qualified individual who, with or without reasonable accommodation, could perform the essential functions of the employment position." Basith v. Cook County, 241 F.3d 919, 927 (7th Cir. 2001). The Army's arguments [*12]  focus on the last prong of the claim; it does not appear to dispute, for purposes of this motion, that he was disabled and that it knew of his disability. See Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J. 18, ECF No. 8 ("For purposes of the motion for summary judgment, Defendant does not dispute that Plaintiff had several medical conditions that limited his physical capacity.").
The Army argues that climbing ladders and walking more than fifty yards are essential functions of the industrial hygienist position, id. at 17-20, 22-24, and that Hergenrader's requested accommodations of a lifting device and a motorized vehicle would not have allowed him to perform those essential functions, id. at 20-22. Hergenrader counters that climbing and walking long distances are not essential functions of the position, Resp. Mot. Summ. J. 13-14, 15-16, and that, even if they were, he could have performed the essential functions of the position with his requested accommodations, id. at 14-15. Hergenrader also argues that he could have been accommodated through reassignment to the Safety and Occupational Health Specialist position. Id. at 16.

i. Essential Functions
The first task for the Court is to identify the essential [*13]  functions of the industrial hygienist position. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC") regulations define essential functions as "the fundamental job duties of the employment position the individual with a disability holds or desires." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(1). "The term 'essential functions' does not include the marginal functions of the position." Id. "The essential-function inquiry is a factual question, not a question of law." Brown v. Smith, 827 F.3d 609, 613 (7th Cir. 2016) (emphasis omitted). EEOC regulations identify various factors that are relevant to determining the essential functions of a position:
(i) The employer's judgment as to which functions are essential; (ii) Written job descriptions prepared before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job; (iii) The amount of time spent on the job performing the function; (iv) The consequences of not requiring the incumbent to perform the function; (v) The terms of a collective bargaining agreement; (vi) The work experience of past incumbents in the job; and/or (vii) The current work experience of incumbents in similar jobs.
29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(3).
To identify the essential functions of the industrial hygienist position, the Army points the Court to the position description, which states that the major [*14]  duties of the position include conducting inspections of work environments and investigating occupational health problems and that it "involve[s] moderate physical exertion, including carrying equipment, climbing, standing, walking, and bending." Position Description 5, ECF No. 8-1 at 52. Hergenrader does not dispute that he was restricted to walking less than fifty yards and could not use a ladder. Instead, he argues that walking more than fifty yards to do inspections and climbing ladders are not essential functions of the position. Resp. Mot. Summ. J. 13-14.
The court "presume[s] that an employer's understanding of the essential functions of the job is correct, unless the plaintiff offers sufficient evidence to the contrary." Gratzl v. Office of Chief Judges of 12th, 18th, 19th, & 22nd Judicial Circuits, 601 F.3d 674, 679 (7th Cir. 2010). One type of evidence could be that the employer does not "actually require[] all employees in a particular position to perform the allegedly essential functions." DePaoli v. Abbott Labs., 140 F.3d 668, 674 (7th Cir. 1998). Hergenrader argues that although climbing is in the position description, he was never tasked with climbing during his employment, and therefore it is not an essential function. Resp. Mot. Summ. J. 13. As to walking, he argues that his job only involved minimal walking and that sampling the air [*15]  and water in locations throughout the Arsenal only constituted two percent of his duties. See Hergenrader Aff. ¶ 5, Resp. Mot. Summ. J. Ex. A, ECF No. 10-1 at 18-21.4 The Army does not dispute that Hergenrader never climbed ladders. See Reply 4, ECF No. 11. And it concedes that Hergenrader's description may accurately describe the position as he performed it when he was on light duty. Id. at 5.
But it provides a two-fold argument for why climbing and walking long distances should be considered essential functions even though Hergenrader may not have performed those functions. First, it suggests that the job duties of the position changed over time. See Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J. 23. It explains that the industrial hygienist position description always included climbing and walking, but that when Hergenrader was hired, industrial hygiene technicians performed the sampling and climbing functions. The industrial hygienists, like Abbott, had to absorb those duties when the technicians were phased out. Second, the Army argues that Hergenrader was not asked to perform all of the functions of the position out of concern for his safety, but that this was not sustainable. Id. at 23-24. The industrial [*16]  hygiene department got behind on inspections and they had to hire contractors to help Abbott catch up on missed work. See Hr'g Tr. 166:23-24, ECF No. 8-1 at 255 ("[T]hey came in to help me get caught up."). Army officials testified at the fact-finding hearing that they needed industrial hygienists who could perform the full slate of duties for the department to function well. See, e.g., id. at 123:12-15, ECF No. 8-1 at 212 (Rolph testifying that when deciding whether to terminate Hergenrader, she "found that we really need employees who are able to safely go within the factory environment and do industrial hygiene quality control checks"); id. at 286:8-9, ECF No. 8-1 at 375 (Hergenrader's second-level supervisor testifying that "the industrial hygiene mission started suffering greatly" because Hergenrader was not able to perform all of the functions of the job).
This case implicates two related principles. First, the fact that an employer accommodated an employee previously by reassigning many functions of a job does not demonstrate that the reassigned functions were not essential. See Winfrey v. City of Chicago, 259 F.3d 610, 616 (7th Cir. 2001) ("[T]he fact that the City was willing to work with Winfrey will not count as evidence that the position [*17]  it created is in fact the full ward clerk position."); Basith, 241 F.3d at 930 ("[T]he fact that restructuring is feasible, in itself, is not persuasive evidence one way or the other that a function is essential to a job."). Here, Abbott essentially created a modified light duty position for Hergenrader and others did the work Hergenrader could not. This was not required by the ADA, see Gratzl, 601 F.3d at 680 ("An employer need not create a new job or strip a current job of its principal duties to accommodate a disabled employee. Nor is there any duty to reassign an employee to a permanent light duty position." (citation omitted)), and it does not demonstrate that climbing ladders and walking to conduct inspections are not essential functions of the position.
Second, "[j]ust as an employer is not required to create a new position or strip a current job of its essential functions, an employer is not required to maintain an existing position or structure that, for legitimate reasons, it no longer believes is appropriate." Id. Gratzl is instructive. In that case, the plaintiff's employer (a court) decided—without knowledge of the plaintiff court reporter's urinary incontinence—to require all court reporters to rotate through courtrooms. [*18]  Id. The plaintiff had previously served in a specialist position which did not require live court reporting, so she was able to use the restroom whenever she needed. Id. at 676. The Seventh Circuit held that the court was not required to allow the plaintiff to remain in her specialist position to accommodate her incontinence. Id. at 680-81. This case presents slightly different facts, but the same principle applies. Here, industrial hygiene technicians performed the more physically demanding aspects of the work, including climbing, but they were phased out. So though industrial hygienists may not have been required to climb ladders in the past, circumstances changed and they had to take on more responsibilities. See Bilinsky v. Am. Airlines, Inc., 928 F.3d 565, 572 (7th Cir. 2019) (holding that the essential functions of the plaintiff's job changed after her employer merged with another airline and her department's responsibilities changed even though they changed "slowly rather than all at once"). Hergenrader has not provided any evidence to dispute these changed circumstances.
Hergenrader also argues that another industrial hygienist, Erica Wray, only worked in the laboratory and therefore did not have to walk long distances or climb ladders, which, he argues, demonstrates [*19]  that those are not essential functions of the job. See Resp. Mot. Summ. J. 13, 15-16. As evidence for this, he points to his own affidavit which states: "[T]here was another industrial hygienist Ms. Erica Wray who spent all of her work time in the laboratory and was not required to go do inspections on the interior and exterior buildings at the Rock Island Arsenal." Hergenrader Aff. ¶ 6. The Army admits that Wray, for a time, worked only in the laboratory. See Reply 7. But it explains that she was hired in December 2016 from a medical laboratory technician position and there was no one hired to replace her, so she had to continue her laboratory technician duties temporarily. See Abbott Supplemental Decl. ¶ 5, ECF No. 12-1. By August 2017, she was fully performing the duties of an industrial hygienist, including conducting inspections and climbing ladders. Id. ¶ 6. Hergenrader's personal observation of Wray's activities before he was terminated does not establish that she was not required to climb ladders or walk long distances to conduct inspections.
Hergenrader also makes an inapt analogy to Miller v. Illinois Department of Transportation, 643 F.3d 190, 198 (7th Cir. 2011). In Miller, the plaintiff worked on a highway bridge crew. Id. at 192. Several years into the job, the plaintiff [*20]  was diagnosed with acrophobia, or fear of heights, after he had a panic attack when changing lightbulbs on a bridge. Id. at 193. He requested an accommodation of "not be[ing] required to work on bridge beams and other extreme places." Id. at 194 (quotation marks omitted). This request was denied and he was later discharged. Id. The Department of Transportation argued that "working above 25 feet in an extreme or exposed position [wa]s an essential function of members of the bridge crew." Id. at 197. The Seventh Circuit found that, although "high work in exposed or extreme positions [wa]s an essential function of the bridge crew as a whole," it did not necessarily follow, on the facts of that case, that each member of the crew was required to do every task required of the crew as a whole. Id. at 198. The evidence showed that "[t]he bridge crew worked as a team" and that "[n]o one person was assigned permanently to any one task." Id. Moreover, the plaintiff had provided evidence that the crew previously "accommodated the various skills, abilities, and limitations of the individual team members by organizing itself according to those skills, abilities, and limitations." Id. For instance, one team member could not weld, so other [*21]  team members welded when it was required.
Hergenrader states that, like the bridge crew in Miller, "the industrial [h]ygienists at the Arsenal performed duties as a team and some team members were not required to do sample testing and ladder climbing." Resp. Mot. Summ. J. 15. But there is no evidence that the industrial hygienists worked as a team. There is no evidence that duties were split—i.e., that one person walked around to collect samples, one person tested the samples, one person did low inspections, one person did high inspections, etc. Rather, it appears that the industrial hygienists were supposed to operate independently to conduct evaluations, but due to external circumstances (Wray's transitioning duties and Hergenrader's health), Wray and Hergenrader were not tasked with the full industrial hygienist duties, including climbing ladders to collect samples. Abbott had to take on that extra work and eventually had to hire contractors to help him catch up.
Hergenrader has not provided sufficient evidence for the Court to second guess the Army's understanding of the essential functions of the industrial hygienist position, so the Court presumes that the essential functions include [*22]  climbing ladders and walking more than fifty yards to conduct inspections.

ii. Reasonable Accommodations
Hergenrader makes no argument that he could perform those essential functions without accommodation, so the Court next considers whether there were reasonable accommodations that would enable Hergenrader to perform them.

1. Lift and Personal Transportation Device
Hergenrader requested the use of a mechanical lifting device to avoid the need to climb ladders. The Army denied this accommodation in part because it would not enable Hergenrader to access all elevated areas. The Army based its denial of the accommodation on information received from the JMTC safety office. See Aug. 8, 2017 Mem. ¶ 2(a), ECF No. 8-1 at 86; Abbott Decl. ¶ 5, Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J. Attach. 2, ECF No. 8-2.
To dispute this, Hergenrader merely cites his own affidavit, in which he states that "caged ladders would not have prevented [him] from accessing [dust collectors, ventilations systems, and air exchanges] through the use of a lift devise [sic]." Hergenrader Aff. ¶ 7. This is not sufficient to create a genuine issue of fact. "While it is true that a nonmoving party's own affidavit or deposition can constitute [*23]  affirmative evidence to defeat a summary judgment motion, conclusory statements in the plaintiff's affidavit or deposition do not create an issue of fact." Mills v. First Fed. Sav. & Loan Ass'n of Belvidere, 83 F.3d 833, 843 (7th Cir. 1996) (quotation marks and brackets omitted). Hergenrader's affidavit does not cite to specific facts to support his conclusion that he could have accessed necessary areas with a lifting device despite the presence of caged ladders. Moreover, it does not explain how he is competent to testify about the feasibility and safety of using a lifting device in JMTC facilities. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(4) ("An affidavit or declaration used to support or oppose a motion must be made on personal knowledge, set out facts that would be admissible in evidence, and show that the affiant or declarant is competent to testify on the matters stated."). In the absence of a genuine dispute as to the feasibility of using a lifting device, the Court concludes that this accommodation would not have enabled Hergenrader to perform the essential function of climbing to gain access to areas for inspection and sampling. Because he could not perform at least one of the essential functions of the job, even with his suggested accommodation, he cannot establish a failure-to-accommodate claim. [*24] 
In light of this conclusion, the Court need not address use of a motorized vehicle in detail. The Court notes, however, that a similar analysis applies. The Army denied Hergenrader the use of a motorized vehicle because using a motorized vehicle would not always get him within fifty yards of where he needed to conduct an inspection. And, again, it based this denial on information received from the JMTC safety office. Hergenrader's only evidence is his own affidavit, in which he states that "[t]here was no location within any building in which [he] would have to walk more than 50 feet if [he] were allowed access to the building and the use of a golf cart or gator." Hergenrader Aff. ¶ 4. Again, this is conclusory and the affidavit does not demonstrate how Hergenrader is competent to make this conclusion, so it cannot serve to create a genuine issue of fact.

2. Reassignment
"The ADA may require an employer to reassign a disabled employee to a different position as reasonable accommodation where the employee can no longer perform the essential functions of their current position." Gile v. United Airlines, Inc., 95 F.3d 492, 498 (7th Cir. 1996); see 42 U.S.C. § 12111(9)(B). After determining that Hergenrader could not perform the essential functions of the industrial hygienist [*25]  position, the Army looked for a vacant position it could reassign Hergenrader to, but was unable to find one for which Hergenrader was qualified. Hergenrader complains that he was not considered for the Safety and Occupational Health Specialist position Dr. Jacob identified. Resp. Mot. Summ. J. 16.5 The Army argues that this position would have been a promotion and therefore it need not have reassigned Hergenrader to it as a reasonable accommodation. See Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J. 25 (citing Malabarba v. Chi. Tribune Co., 149 F.3d 690 (7th Cir. 1998)).
Indeed, "an employer does not have to accommodate a disabled employee by promoting him or her to a higher level position." Malabarba, 149 F.3d at 699. The Army implies that the position was a promotion because it was a GS-12 position,6 whereas Hergenrader's industrial hygienist position was a GS-11 position. See Notification of Personnel Action, ECF No. 8-1 at 7. Hergenrader does not address the Army's contention that reassignment to the Safety and Occupational Health Specialist position would be a promotion and thus provides no reason for the Court to find that it would not be. Because the position was a promotion, the Army need not have reassigned Hergenrader to the position as a reasonable accommodation.  [*26] Cf. 29 C.F.R. app. pt. 1630 ("Employers should reassign the individual to an equivalent position, in terms of pay, status, etc., if the individual is qualified, and if the position is vacant within a reasonable amount of time.").

CONCLUSION
Accordingly, the Motion for Summary Judgment, ECF No. 7, is GRANTED. The Clerk is directed to enter judgment and close the case.
Entered this 5th day of November, 2019.
/s/ Sara Darrow
SARA DARROW
CHIEF UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

