Hill v. Clayton Cnty. Sch. Dist.
United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division
September 17, 2013, Decided; September 17, 2013, Filed
CIVIL ACTION No. 1:11-cv-02937-SCJ

Reporter
2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 190142 *
EDITH JEANETTE HILL, Plaintiff, v. CLAYTON COUNTY SCHOOL DISTRICT, Defendant.
Subsequent History: Affirmed in part and reversed in part by Hill v. Clayton Cnty. Sch. Dist., 619 Fed. Appx. 916, 2015 U.S. App. LEXIS 13793 (11th Cir. Ga., 2015)
Prior History: Hill v. Clayton Cnty. Sch. Dist., 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 190140 (N.D. Ga., June 5, 2013)
Counsel:  [*1] For Edith Jeanette Hill, Plaintiff: Edward D. Buckley, LEAD ATTORNEY, Rachel Berlin, Buckley Beal, LLP, Atlanta, GA; Amanda A. Farahany, Benjamin F. Barrett, Jr., Barrett & Farahany, LLP, Atlanta, GA; Tremain Courtney Mattress, Molden Law Firm, LLC, Atlanta, GA.
For Clayton County School District, Defendant: Patrick H. Ouzts, Randall C. Farmer, Gregory, Doyle, Calhoun & Rogers, LLC, Marietta, GA; William P. Miles, Jr., Gregory, Doyle, Calhoun & Rogers, LLC -Atl, Marietta, GA.
Judges: HONORABLE STEVE C. JONES, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: STEVE C. JONES
Opinion



ORDER
This matter is before the Court for consideration of Magistrate Judge J. Clay Fuller's Non-Final Report and Recommendation (the "R&R") [Doc. No. 61]. In the R&R, Magistrate Judge Fuller recommends that Defendant Clayton County School District's ("Defendant") Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. No. 47] be denied in part and granted in part. Specifically, Magistrate Judge Fuller recommends that Defendant's motion be denied in regard to Plaintiff Edith Jeanette Hill's ("Plaintiff") claim for denial of reasonable accommodation under the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq. and granted in regard to Plaintiff's discrimination and retaliation claims [*2]  under the ADA and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 ("Title VII"), 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. Pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(C), Defendant [Doc. No. 64] and Plaintiff [Doc. No. 63] filed timely objections to the R&R. Therefore, the Court now considers the R&R and the objections thereto.

I. ANALYSIS

A. Legal Standard
When proper objections to a Magistrate Judge's report and recommendation are filed, the Court must "make a de novo determination of those portions of the report or specified proposed findings or recommendations to which objection is made." 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(C); see also Macort v. Prem, Inc., 208 F. App'x 781, 784 (11th Cir. 2006) ("Where a proper, specific objection to the magistrate judge's report is made, it is clear that the district court must conduct a de novo review of that issue."). "De novo review implies that 'the district court's consideration of the factual issue . . . be independent and based upon the record before the court.'" Macort, 208 F. App'x at 784 (quoting LoConte v. Dugger, 847 F.2d 745, 750 (11th Cir. 1988)).
The facts and procedural history of this case are set forth in the R&R and are fully incorporated herein. The Court proceeds accordingly in reviewing the objections to the R&R submitted by the Defendant and the Plaintiff.

B. Discussion

1. Defendant's Objections to the R&R
To establish a claim under the ADA for failure to reasonably accommodate a [*3]  disability, a plaintiff must prove the following elements: 1. that he has as a disability; 2. the defendant had notice of his disability; 3. with a reasonable accommodation, he could perform the essential functions of his job; and 4. the defendant refused to make such an accommodation. Richardson v. Honda Mfg. of Ala., LLC, 635 F. Supp. 2d 1261, 1279 (N.D. Ala. 2009). In its objections to the R&R, the Defendant argues, inter alia, that Plaintiff has failed to satisfy the third and fourth elements articulated in Richardson. Specifically, Defendant argues that Plaintiff fails to establish that access to an air-conditioned bus would have enabled her to perform the essential functions of a special needs school bus driver. Defendant also argues, assuming arguendo that an air-conditioned bus would have been a reasonable accommodation, that it made a reasonable accommodation by placing Plaintiff on unpaid leave and securing an air-conditioned bus for Plaintiff two months after her request. Below, the undersigned addresses both of these arguments in turn.

a. Plaintiff fails to establish she could have performed the essential functions of a special needs school bus driver with an air-conditioned bus
To satisfy the third element for a claim under the ADA for failure to reasonably [*4]  accommodate, a plaintiff must "show that he can perform the essential functions of his job with a reasonable accommodation." Davis v. Fla. Power & Light Co., 205 F.3d 1301, 1305 (11th Cir. 2000). The "essential functions" of an employment position "are the fundamental job duties of a position that an individual with a disability is actually required to perform." Earl v. Mervyns, Inc., 207 F.3d 1361, 1365 (11th Cir. 2000). Whether a specific task constitutes a fundamental aspect of an employment position "is evaluated on a case-by-case basis." Davis, 205 F.3d at 1305. The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (the "EEOC"), through regulations issued to assist in the interpretation of the ADA, have articulated the following nonexclusive factors for determining if a specific task is an essential function of a particular employment position:
(i) The employer's judgment as to which functions are essential; (ii) Written job descriptions prepared before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job; (iii) The amount of time spent on the job performing the function; (iv) The consequences of not requiring the incumbent to perform the function; (v) The terms of a collective bargaining agreement; (vi) The work experience of past incumbents in the job; and/or (vii) The current work experience of incumbents in similar jobs.
29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(3) (2012).
Here, [*5]  Plaintiff concedes that, in order to fulfill her employment duties as a special needs school bus driver, she was required to be outdoors [Doc. No. 47-4, 4-6]. More specifically, Plaintiff concedes that her employment duties required her to open doors at any railroad tracks, help load and unload students, and help evacuate students off her bus in the event of an emergency [id. at 6-8]. All of these functions are necessary to maintain the safe operation of the Defendant's school bus and protect the students onboard. Therefore, as ensuring the safe transportation of students is obviously an essential function of a special needs school bus driver's employment duties, this Court concludes that Plaintiff's job duties required her to be exposed to outdoor heat.
As she concedes that some of her essential job functions required her to be outside, including evacuating students in the event of an emergency, Plaintiff must establish that a reasonable accommodation to her breathing problems due to heat exposure existed for her employment duties that were performed outdoors. Ivey v. First Quality Retail Serv., 490 F. App'x 281, 286 (11th Cir. 2012). However, Plaintiff fails to articulate how an air-conditioned bus would have allowed her to perform the job duties that required her [*6]  to be exposed to outdoor heat. In her response to Defendant's motion for summary judgment, Plaintiff appears to only address the issue of outdoor heat exposure by stating "[w]hen I am outdoor[s] inspecting my bus it is only five minutes; at 5:30 am until 5:35am . . . I also perform the same inspection when I return in the morning and the afternoon" [Doc. No. 50, 21]. However, Plaintiff fails to articulate what temperature level, or the length of exposure to a specific temperature level, triggers her breathing difficulties. In fact, Plaintiff asserts that her breathing difficulties are "sporadic" and that she doesn't "know when it will trigger[]" [id. at 30]. Therefore, by Plaintiff's own admission, Plaintiff's breathing problems are not exclusive to her presence on a school bus and potentially can be triggered by any exposure to heat.
More importantly, Plaintiff's argument does not address the issue of exposure to outdoor heat in the event of an emergency that would require evacuation. In the event of such an emergency, Plaintiff was required to exit the bus and exert physical energy to help evacuate students regardless of the temperature outside. Without an accommodation that ensures Plaintiff could have performed [*7]  this activity without suffering severe breathing issues, Plaintiff is not qualified to perform an essential function of a special needs school bus driver. As Plaintiff does not present an argument on this point, the Court fails to see how an air-conditioned bus ensured Plaintiff would not have suffered debilitating breathing problems when exposed to outdoor heat, particularly under a scenario that would have required significant physical exertion. As Plaintiff's requested accommodation would not have assisted her ability to withstand outdoor heat, Plaintiff was not qualified for the position of a special needs school bus driver. Thus, Plaintiff has failed to show that an air-conditioned bus is a reasonable accommodation to her alleged disability.

b. Assuming arguendo that Plaintiff could have performed the essential functions of a special needs school bus driver with an air-conditioned bus, Defendant provided Plaintiff with a reasonable accommodation
To properly accommodate an employee's disability under the ADA, an employer is only required to provide a "reasonable" accommodation. Lucas v. W.W. Grainger, Inc., 257 F.3d 1249, 1255 (11th Cir. 2001). Therefore, "an employer is not required to accommodate an employee in any manner in which that employee [*8]  desires." Stewart v. Happy Herman's Cheshire Bridge, Inc., 117 F.3d 1278, 1285 (11th Cir. 1997) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Further, an employer is not obligated "to provide employees the maximum accommodation or every conceivable accommodation possible." Id. (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). An accommodation is considered reasonable if it modifies or adjusts the work environment in a manner that will "enable an individual with a disability who is qualified to perform the essential functions of [his] position." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(ii) (2012).
In its objections to the R&R, Defendant argues, assuming arguendo that Plaintiff could have performed the position at issue with an air-conditioned bus, that placing Plaintiff on unpaid leave "enabled [Defendant] time to acquire an air-conditioned bus (which it did) or allow the weather to cool so that Plaintiff could work without an air-conditioned bus" [Doc. No. 64, 14]. The Defendant further notes in its objections that it acquired an air-conditioned bus for Plaintiff two months after her initial accommodation request. The record reflects that Defendant did not have an air-conditioned bus available for Plaintiff in August 2009, and that Plaintiff was offered an air-conditioned bus and told to return to work in [*9]  October 2009 [Doc. No. 47-3, 2-3; Doc. No. 47-5, 2; Doc. No. 47-8, 2]. The only possible "evidence" in the record to dispute either of these issues is Plaintiff's own deposition testimony, where she appears to indirectly challenge the issue that she was offered to return to work in October 2009.1 To the extent Plaintiff challenges that she was offered to return to work in October 2009 through her deposition, such "evidence" is insufficient to survive a motion for summary judgment as "uncorroborated allegations by a plaintiff in an affidavit or deposition will not create an issue of fact for trial sufficient to defeat a well-supported motion for summary judgment." Dent v. Giaimo, 606 F. Supp. 2d 1357, 1359 (S.D. Fla. 2009).
As a proper accommodation, Plaintiff was placed on unpaid leave after claiming [*10]  she was unable to perform her job duties without an air-conditioned bus. See Hartsfield v. Miami-Dade Cnty., 90 F. Supp. 2d 1363, 1372 (S.D. Fla. 2000) (stating "the [d]efendant accommodated the [p]laintiff Hartsfield by allowing her to take breaks and leaves of absence as needed."). After two months, Plaintiff was allowed to return to work once Defendant secured her requested accommodation. A mere two month delay in securing an air-conditioned bus for Plaintiff does not, standing alone, establish an unreasonable delay in providing the requested accommodation. See id. at 1373 ("Where an accommodation is delayed [by several months] an employer does not violate the ADA, as long as the employee receives some other accommodation or at least does not suffer adverse employment action."); Terrell v. USAir, 132 F.3d 621, 628 (11th Cir. 1998) (stating a three month delay in procuring the plaintiff's requested accommodation was not unreasonable). In short, Defendant made available to Plaintiff the accommodation she requested. Plaintiff does not present evidence that Defendant could have provided her with an air-conditioned bus before October 2009, or that this two month delay was unreasonable or intentional. In essence, Plaintiff only argues that Defendant failed to accommodate her alleged disability because she did not receive an air-conditioned [*11]  bus as quickly as she would have liked. Obviously, such an argument does not establish that Defendant failed to accommodate her disability. See Ungerleider v. Fleet Mortg. Grp. of Fleet Bank, 329 F. Supp. 2d 343, 355 (D. Conn. 2004) (stating "failure to immediately provide [the plaintiff] with the specific accommodation that she sought does not constitute a refusal to provide a reasonable accommodation, particularly when [the defendant] was working to provide that accommodation."). Thus, Plaintiff has failed to establish that Defendant failed to provide her with a reasonable accommodation.
Plaintiff fails to show that she could have performed the essential job duties of a special needs school bus driver with an air-conditioned bus. Further, assuming arguendo Plaintiff could have performed the job duties at issue with an air-conditioned bus, Defendant provided Plaintiff with this accommodation within two months of her request. Plaintiff does not present evidence that Defendant was in a position to offer her an air-conditioned bus sooner, or that the two month delay was unreasonable or intentional. As a result, Plaintiff cannot establish a claim under the ADA for failure to reasonably accommodate a disability. Accordingly, Defendant's objections to the R&R [Doc. No. 64] [*12]  are hereby GRANTED.2

2. Plaintiff's Objections to the R&R
Plaintiff objects to the R&R's recommendation that her retaliation and discrimination claims under the ADA and Title VII be dismissed. Below, the undersigned addresses these claims and Plaintiff's corresponding objections in turn.

a. Plaintiff's retaliation claims under Title VII and the ADA
In both her second amended complaint and her response to Defendant's motion for summary judgment, Plaintiff asserts that the Defendant's alleged retaliatory action on which she bases her retaliation claims under Title VII and the ADA is her termination on March 2, 2010 [Doc. No. 32, 1; Doc. No. 50, 29]. In the R&R, Magistrate Judge Fuller recommends that these claims be dismissed because Plaintiff failed to establish causation between her statutorily protected activity and the alleged retaliatory act of her termination. Specifically, Magistrate Judge Fuller asserts that the over five [*13]  month gap between Plaintiff's protected activity of filing a charge with the EEOC, which occurred on September 17, 2009, and her termination, which occurred on March 2, 2010, did not, standing alone, establish causation.
In her objections to the R&R, Plaintiff asserts that "[t]he retaliation did not begin when they terminated me; it began when they put me out on non-paid leave" [Doc. No. 63, 1]. This argument is nonsensical. Plaintiff was placed on leave without pay on August 13, 2009, more than a month before she performed the statutorily protected act of filing a charge with the EEOC. Obviously, Defendant could not have retaliated against Plaintiff for filing a charge with the EEOC before said charge was actually filed. Therefore, Plaintiff's objections concerning her Title VII and ADA retaliation claims are without merit.

b. Plaintiff's Title VII race discrimination claim
In recommending that Plaintiff's Title VII race discrimination claim be dismissed, Magistrate Judge Fuller states the following: "[Plaintiff] has not provided facts or evidence to establish that Defendant's denial of an air-conditioned bus was an adverse employment action for purposes of Title VII, nor has she shown that [*14]  Defendant treated similarly situated employees outside of her class more favorably" [Doc. No. 61, 28]. In her objections to the R&R, Plaintiff asserts that "Carl Jones a white employee . . . was issued an air condition[ed] bus" [Doc. No. 63, 1]. To support her argument that Carl Jones is similarly situated but received preferential treatment, Plaintiff claims that Carl Jones "had less seniority then [sic] me" [id.]. However, the evidence in the record shows that Carl Jones was hired more than two years before Plaintiff [Doc. No. 47-3, 3]. Therefore, the Court cannot accept Plaintiff's assertion that Carl Jones had less seniority. Brown v. Passmore, 445 F. App'x 187, 188 (11th Cir. 2011) ("When there are opposing versions of the facts, and one version is 'blatantly contradicted by the record,' a court should not consider the contradicted version in deciding a motion for summary judgment." (quoting Scott v. Harris, 550 U.S. 372, 380, 127 S. Ct. 1769, 167 L. Ed. 2d 686 (2007))).
More importantly, Plaintiff still fails to show that Defendant's initial denial of her request for an air-conditioned bus constitutes an adverse employment action. To establish a prima facie case of race discrimination under Title VII, a plaintiff must show "that he was a qualified member of a protected class and was subjected to an adverse employment action [*15]  in contrast to similarly situated employees outside the protected class." Shepard v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 470 F. App'x 726, 731 (11th Cir. 2012) (internal quotation marks, alterations, and citation omitted). For the purposes of Title VII analysis, an "adverse employment action" is defined as "a significant change in employment status, such as hiring, firing, failing to promote, reassignment with significantly different responsibilities, or a decision causing a significant change in benefits." Burlington Indus., Inc. v. Ellerth, 524 U.S. 742, 761, 118 S. Ct. 2257, 141 L. Ed. 2d 633 (1998). Here, Defendant's failure to immediately provide Plaintiff with an air-conditioned bus did not constitute an adverse employment action, as it did not involve a change in the terms, conditions, and benefits of Plaintiff's employment. As Plaintiff cannot establish that she suffered an adverse employment action, her race discrimination claim is without merit. Therefore, Plaintiff's objection regarding her Title VII race discrimination claim is denied.

c. Plaintiff's disability claim based on her employment termination
In her second amended complaint, Plaintiff asserts a claim "under . . . Title VII . . . for disability and race discrimination" [Doc. No. 32, 1]. However, as Title VII does not cover disability discrimination, such a claim is invalid under Title VII. [*16]  Clifton v. Ga. Merit Sys., 478 F. Supp. 2d 1356, 1361 (N.D. Ga. 2007) (dismissing a disability discrimination claim under Title VII "[b]ecause disability discrimination is not covered by Title VII."). Magistrate Judge Fuller, in consideration of Plaintiff's pro se status, construed this asserted cause of action as a claim alleging her termination constituted disability discrimination under the ADA.3 Erring on the side of caution given Plaintiff's pro se status at the time her second amended complaint was filed,4 the undersigned likewise construes Plaintiff's second amended complaint to assert a claim under the ADA that alleges Plaintiff's termination was based on disability discrimination.
In its motion for summary judgment, Defendant states, assuming arguendo that Plaintiff establishes a prima facie case of discrimination under the ADA, that Plaintiff was terminated for job abandonment after failing to [*17]  report to work after being notified that an air-conditioned bus was available to her [Doc. No. 47-1, 33-34]. In short, Defendant has articulated a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for Plaintiff's termination. Curry v. Sec'y, Dep't of Veterans Affairs, 518 F. App'x 957, 963 (11th Cir. 2013) (stating that, once a plaintiff establishes a prima facie case of disability discrimination, "the defendant must offer a legitimate, non-discriminatory justification for the employment decision.") Therefore, the burden is on the Plaintiff to establish that Defendant's articulated reason for her termination is a pretext for discrimination. Id. at 964.5 An asserted reason for an alleged adverse employment action is not pretext for discrimination "unless it is shown both that the reason was false, and that discrimination was the real reason." St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 515, 113 S. Ct. 2742, 125 L. Ed. 2d 407 (1993). Plaintiff fails to meet this burden.
In her objections to the R&R, Plaintiff claims that she did not return to work because she "never heard from my employer stating that they could accommodate me with an air condition[ed] bus" [Doc. No. 63, 2]. However, Plaintiff presents no evidence in support of this assertion. In fact, the record shows that Plaintiff was called to return to work once an air-conditioned school bus became available in October 2009 [Doc. No. 47-3, 2; 47-8, 2].6 Further, Plaintiff does not dispute that she failed to return to work. By failing to produce sufficient evidence that Defendant's proffered reason for her termination was pretext for discrimination, Plaintiff cannot survive summary judgment. Clark v. Coats & Clark, Inc., 990 F.2d 1217, 1228 (11th Cir. 1993) (stating "to avoid summary judgment [a plaintiff] must introduce significantly probative evidence showing that the asserted reason is merely a pretext for discrimination."). Thus, Plaintiff's objection regarding her ADA discrimination claim is without merit.
For the reasons explained supra, Plaintiff does not raise a valid objection to the R&R. Accordingly, Plaintiff's objections to the R&R [Doc. No. 63] are hereby DENIED.

II. CONCLUSION
Having considered carefully the evidence on record and the objections filed by the Defendant and the Plaintiff, Defendant's objections to the R&R [Doc. No. 64] are hereby GRANTED and Plaintiff's objections to the R&R [Doc. No. 63] are hereby DENIED. The Court hereby ADOPTS in part and REJECTS in part the R&R [Doc. No. 61]. Accordingly, Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. No. 47], in its entirety, is hereby GRANTED.
As there are no further issues outstanding, the Clerk is DIRECTED to CLOSE THIS ACTION.
IT IS SO ORDERED, this 17th day of September, 2013.
/s/ Steve C. Jones
HONORABLE STEVE C. JONES
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

