Hoback v. City of Chattanooga
United States District Court for the Eastern District of Tennessee
August 4, 2011, Filed
Case No. 1:10-CV-74

Reporter
2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 86431 *; 191 L.R.R.M. 2534; 2011 WL 3420664
MICKEL G. HOBACK, Plaintiff, v. CITY OF CHATTANOOGA, Defendant.
Subsequent History: Magistrate's recommendation at Hoback v. City of Chattanooga, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 136931 (E.D. Tenn., July 17, 2012)
Related proceeding at Hoback v. City of Chattanooga, 2012 Tenn. App. LEXIS 475 (Tenn. Ct. App., July 20, 2012)
Remittitur granted, in part, Remittitur denied by, in part, Motion for new trial denied by, Motion granted by, in part, Motion denied by, in part Hoback v. City of Chattanooga, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 124794 (E.D. Tenn., Sept. 4, 2012)
Counsel:  [*1] For Mickel G. Hoback, Plaintiff: Phillip C Lawrence, Lawrence, Lawrence & Richardson, PLLC, Chattanooga, TN.
For City of Chattanooga, Defendant: Crystal R Freiberg, Phillip A Noblett, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Patrick P H Bobo, Office of the Chattanooga City Attorney, Chattanooga, TN.
Judges: CURTIS L. COLLIER, CHIEF UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: CURTIS L. COLLIER
Opinion



MEMORANDUM
Before the Court are several dispositive motions: a motion for summary judgment filed by Plaintiff Mickel G. Hoback ("Hoback") (Court File No. 25), a supplemental motion for summary judgment filed by Hoback (Court File No. 31), and a motion for partial summary judgment filed by Defendant the City of Chattanooga ("the City") (Court File No. 29). For the following reasons, the Court will DENY Hoback's motion for summary judgment (Court File No. 25), DENY Hoback's supplemental motion for summary judgment (Court File No. 31), and GRANT the City's motion for partial summary judgment (Court File No. 29).

I. RELEVANT FACTS
Hoback was hired as a police officer by the Chattanooga Police Department ("CPD") on July 21, 2000. In 2002, Hoback took a brief leave from the CPD to enter basic training for the United States Army. Following basic training,  [*2] Hoback returned to the CPD until June 22, 2004, when his National Guard unit was activated and deployed to Iraq. Hoback served in Iraq until being honorably discharged on November 27, 2005. In February 2006 Hoback resumed his duties as a CPD police officer.
At some point after returning from Iraq, Hoback was diagnosed with Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder ("PTSD"). Hoback received counseling and treatment, including psychotropic medication, from the Veterans Administration ("VA"). On April 13, 2009, Hoback met with Dr. Estella Acosta of the VA. During the course of the meeting, Dr. Acosta became concerned that Hoback was suicidal and dangerous. She filled out a Certificate of Need for Involuntary Commitment, which stated Hoback was "depressed and despondent and states that he is feeling suicidal," and further said "[Hoback] indicated using a gun although he stated he does not own a gun." Hoback was not involuntarily committed, however; apparently he slipped out the back door of the clinic while Dr. Acosta was making arrangements for his committal.
After leaving the VA clinic, Hoback drove himself to the VA hospital in Murfreesboro, Tennessee and checked himself in. He was kept overnight,  [*3] and released the next day. The CPD became aware of the attempted involuntary commitment of Hoback on April 14, 2009. On that date, the Bradley County Sheriff's Department called CPD to inform CPD it was attempting to serve emergency committal papers on Hoback, and to ask CPD's help in locating Hoback. After some investigation, CPD discovered Hoback had already checked himself into the VA hospital. Also on April 14, 2009, Freeman Cooper, CPD Chief of Police, wrote a letter relieving Hoback from duty, and placing him on administrative leave. The letter further stated Hoback would be required to complete a "fitness for duty" psychological examination.
In April and May 2009, Donald L. Brookshire, Psy.D., met with Hoback several times to conduct the fitness for duty psychological examination. In a seven-page, single-spaced report, Dr. Brookshire concluded Hoback was "not psychologically fit to safely perform the duties as a police officer." Following this evaluation, Hoback was told he needed to either apply for another position with the City, or file for Family Medical Leave Act ("FMLA") benefits.1 Hoback did neither. Subsequently, Hoback requested a second evaluation be performed by another  [*4] psychologist. In June and July 2009, Hoback was evaluated by Terrell M. McDaniel, Ph.D. Dr. McDaniel's report, while acknowledging Dr. Brookshire's conclusion may have been justified at the time, concluded Hoback was now fit for duty as a police officer. However, the report advised that "adequately monitoring Mr. Hoback's behavior and mental health status will be essential but difficult," and recommended he be placed in "a position that provides acceptable levels of monitoring at the beginning of his reengagement," and continue receiving intensive counseling and psychological monitoring for at least 90 days.
On July 21, 2009, after Hoback had exhausting all of his personal leave time, Chief Freeman terminated Hoback's employment with the CPD based on Dr. Brookshire's determination Hoback was not fit for duty. Chief Freeman did not significantly rely upon Dr. McDaniels' report, because he viewed its conditions regarding the need to continue actively monitoring Hoback as belying the formal conclusion that Hoback was now fit for duty. Following his termination,  [*5] Hoback exercised his right to appeal to a panel of the Chattanooga City Council. After a hearing on November 9, 2009, his termination was upheld by a 2-1 vote. Hoback then filed this lawsuit.

II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
Summary judgment is proper if the movant shows, based on the materials in the record, "that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). First, the moving party must demonstrate no genuine issue of material fact exists. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986); Leary v. Daeschner, 349 F.3d 888, 897 (6th Cir. 2003). The Court views the evidence, including all reasonable inferences, in the light most favorable to the non-movant. Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co., Ltd. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 587, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986); Nat'l Satellite Sports, Inc. v. Eliadis, Inc., 253 F.3d 900, 907 (6th Cir. 2001). However, the non-movant is not entitled to a trial based solely on its allegations, but must submit significant probative evidence to support its claims. Celotex, 477 U.S. at 324; McLean v. 988011 Ontario, Ltd., 224 F.3d 797, 800 (6th Cir. 2000). Should the non-movant fail to provide evidence  [*6] to support an essential element of its case, the movant can meet its burden of demonstrating no genuine issue of material fact exists by pointing out such failure to the court. Street v. J.C. Bradford & Co., 886 F.2d 1472, 1479 (6th Cir. 1989).
The moving party is entitled to summary judgment if the non-movant fails to make a sufficient showing on an essential element for which it bears the burden of proof. Celotex, 477 U.S. at 323. In short, if the Court concludes a fair-minded jury could not return a verdict in favor of the non-movant based on the record, the Court may enter summary judgment. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 251-52, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986); Lansing Dairy, Inc. v. Espy, 39 F.3d 1339, 1347 (6th Cir. 1994).

III. ANALYSIS
Hoback claims his termination by the City was in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq., the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 ("Rehabilitation Act"), 29 U.S.C. §§ 791 et seq., and the Uniform Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 ("USERRA"), 38 U.S.C. §§ 4301 et seq. He has moved for summary judgment on all claims. He has also filed a supplemental motion for summary judgment, asking the Court to find  [*7] his psychological examination by Dr. Brookshire was not "job-related and consistent with business necessity." The City has moved for partial summary judgment, seeking a favorable disposition only on the USERRA claim. The Court will address each of Hoback's three claims in turn.

A. ADA Claim
Hoback moves for summary judgment on the claim his termination by the City violated the ADA. The ADA states an employer may not "discriminate against a qualified individual with a disability." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). A "qualified" individual is "an individual with a disability who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of [the] employment position." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). Reasonable accommodations include "job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, reassignment to a vacant position, . . . and other similar accommodations." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(9)(B). "Discrimination" includes an employer's "not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified . . . employee unless [the employer] can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of [its] business." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A);  [*8] see also U.S. Airways, Inc. v. Barnett, 535 U.S. 391, 396, 122 S. Ct. 1516, 152 L. Ed. 2d 589 (2002). When, as here, an ADA plaintiff premises his claim upon direct evidence, the following framework applies:
(1) The plaintiff bears the burden of establishing that he or she is disabled.
(2) The plaintiff bears the burden of establishing that he or she is "otherwise qualified" for the position despite his or her disability:
(a) without accommodation from the employer;
(b) with an alleged "essential" job requirement eliminated; or
(c) with a proposed reasonable accommodation.
(3) The employer will bear the burden of proving that a challenged job criterion is essential, and therefore a business necessity, or that a proposed accommodation will impose an undue hardship upon the employer
Kleiber v. Honda of Am. Mfg., 485 F.3d 862, 869 (6th Cir. 2007) (citation omitted).
Here, Hoback claims the City discriminated against him on account of his PTSD by not allowing him to continue working in his same position, or, alternatively, reasonably accommodating his PTSD. In arguing for summary judgment, Hoback necessarily takes the position there are no genuine issues of material fact as to any element of the ADA claim. The Court disagrees.
The  [*9] City does not contest Hoback's PTSD was a "disability" within the meaning of the ADA, so the Court will take this element as established for purposes of the present motion. However, there are significant, genuine issues of material fact regarding whether Hoback was "otherwise qualified" for a police officer position which preclude summary judgment. Hoback argues he was uncontestedly "otherwise qualified" to continue working as a police officer, despite his PTSD. Hoback cites Dr. McDaniels' opinion he was fit for duty, and also argues the symptoms of his PTSD were wholly irrelevant to his job performance, since they only were evident in the context of counseling sessions, not while he was working. Alternatively, Hoback argues he could have performed his job with unspecified "reasonable accommodations," which he was allegedly not offered.
However, the conclusion Hoback was "otherwise qualified" to continue as a police officer is plainly based on contestable factual premises, among them: that Dr. Brookshire's psychological evaluation was unreliable, that Dr. McDaniels' evaluation was more reliable, that PTSD manifesting itself in suicidal ideation and contemplated gun use bears no relevance  [*10] to any "essential job functions" of a police officer, and that, even if the PTSD did impede essential job functions, Hoback could have performed if offered "reasonable accommodations." Construing the facts most favorably to the City, as the Court must, the Court concludes a reasonable fact-finder would not be bound to find the City violated the ADA in terminating Hoback. Accordingly, summary judgment for Hoback is improper on this claim.2

B. Rehabilitation Act Claim
Hoback moves for summary judgment on the claim his termination violated the Rehabilitation Act. The standards for proving a claim  [*11] under the Rehabilitation act are essentially the same as under the ADA. See Doe v. Salvation Army, 531 F.3d 355, 357 (6th Cir. 2008) ("We review claims brought under the Rehabilitation Act as we would claims brought under the Americans with Disabilities Act."); see also 29 U.S.C. § 794(d) ("The standards used to determine whether [the Rehabilitation Act] has been violated in a complaint alleging employment discrimination under this section shall be the standards applied under title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act."). Just as genuine issues of material fact regarding whether Hoback was "otherwise qualified" for his position preclude summary judgment on the ADA claim, so these issues preclude summary judgment on the Rehabilitation Act claims.

C. USERRA Claim
Hoback moves for summary judgment on the claim his termination violated the USERRA. The City also moves for summary judgment on this claim. The USERRA prohibits adverse employment actions in which the employee's membership in the uniformed services is a "motivating factor" in the employer's action, unless the employer can show such action would have been taken regardless of such membership. See 38 U.S.C. § 4311(c). "The plaintiff  [*12] may prove the factual question of discriminatory motivation by direct or circumstantial evidence." Hance v. Norfolk S. Ry., 571 F.3d 511, 518 (6th Cir. 2009). If there is no direct evidence, the plaintiff must present circumstantial evidence tending to show discriminatory intent:
Discriminatory motivation under the USERRA may be reasonably inferred from a variety of factors, including proximity in time between the employee's military activity and the adverse employment action, inconsistencies between the proffered reason and other actions of the employer, an employer's expressed hostility towards members protected by the statute together with knowledge of the employee's military activity, and disparate treatment of certain employees compared to other employees with similar work records or offenses.
Id. (quotation omitted). After the plaintiff makes this showing, the burden "shifts to the employer to prove the affirmative defense that legitimate reasons, standing alone, would have induced the employer to take the same adverse action." Id. (quotation omitted).
Here, however the facts are construed, Hoback has not made a plausible showing he was discriminated against because of his service  [*13] in the Army.3 Hoback was promptly re-employed upon his return from Iraq, and remained employed by the CPD for the next four years. See 38 U.S.C. § 4316(c)(1) (prohibiting an employer, who re-employs a service member who worked for the employer for more than 180 days before his service-related absence, from terminating that employee for at least one year, except for cause); see also 38 U.S.C. § 4312(e)(2)(A) (providing a maximum two-year convalescence period for military service-related injuries during which time a service member is entitled to reemployment rights). There is absolutely nothing in the record suggesting Hoback was terminated because of four-years-dormant animus towards his military service, rather than the fitness for duty examination in which he was found no longer qualified to perform as a police officer. Neither is there circumstantial evidence pointing to any animus by the City towards veterans. In fact, it is undisputed that approximately 12.5% of the CPD's officers are current or former members of the military. See Becker v. Dep't of Veterans Affairs, 414 F. App'x 274, 277 (Fed. Cir. 2011) (finding a prospective employer's interviewing of other veterans implies  [*14] the plaintiff's military service was not a motivating factor in the employer's decision not to interview the plaintiff). Because there is no evidence, either direct or circumstantial, suggesting Hoback's military service was a "motivating factor" in the City's decision to terminate him, the City is entitled to summary judgment on Hoback's USERRA claim.

IV. CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated above, the Court will DENY Hoback's motion for summary judgment (Court File No. 25), DENY Hoback's supplemental motion for summary judgment (Court File No. 31), and GRANT the City's motion for partial summary judgment (Court File No. 29). Hoback's ADA and Rehabilitation Act claims will proceed to trial.
An order shall enter.
/s/
CURTIS L. COLLIER
CHIEF UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

