Hopple v. Joint Comm'n on Accreditation of Healthcare Orgs.
United States District Court for the Southern District of Florida
May 4, 2022, Decided; May 5, 2022, Entered on Docket
CASE NO. 21-61209-CIV-COHN/STRAUSS

Reporter
2022 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 81714 *; 2022 WL 1734473
JULIA HOPPLE, Plaintiff, v. JOINT COMMISSION ON ACCREDITATION OF HEALTHCARE ORGANIZATIONS, d/b/a THE JOINT COMMISSION, Defendant.
Subsequent History: Appeal filed, 06/08/2022
Counsel:  [*1] For Julia Hopple, Plaintiff: Courtney Anne Salas, LEAD ATTORNEY, Miami, FL; Anthony Carlos Hevia, Hevia Law Firm, Coral Gables, FL.
For The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, Defendant: Alen H. Hsu, Weiss Serota Helfman Cole & Bierman, P.L., Boca Raton, FL; Matthew Tucker Ramenda, Weiss Serota Helfman Cole & Bierman, Ft Lauderdale, FL; Paul W. Coughenour, PRO HAC VICE, Clark Hill PLC, Birmingham, MI; Robert N. Dare, PRO HAC VICE, Clark Hill PLC, Detroit, MI; Samuel Zeskind, Weiss Serota Helfman Cole Bierman & Popok, PL, Ft. Lauderdale, FL.
Judges: JAMES I. COHN, Unites States District Judge.
Opinion by: JAMES I. COHN
Opinion



ORDER GRANTING DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
THIS CAUSE is before the Court on Defendant Joint Commission on Accreditation of Health Care Organizations' ("TJC") Motion for Summary Judgment [DE 36] ("Motion"). The Court has considered the Motion, Plaintiff Julia Hopple's Response [DE 38], TJC's Reply [DE 40], and the record in this case, and is otherwise advised in the premises. For the reasons stated herein, the Court will grant the Motion.

I. Background
Plaintiff brings this action under the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101, et seq., against her former employer, TJC, for alleged discrimination based [*2]  on a disability and the failure to accommodate same. Her two-count Amended Complaint asserts a claim under the ADA and a claim under the Florida Civil Rights Act ("FCRA"). DE 13.
Plaintiff began working for TJC in 2012 as a Field Representative, also referred to as a Surveyor. DE 37 ¶ 3. TJC evaluates and accredits health care organizations and, as a Surveyor, Plaintiff "was responsible for conducting on-site surveys at a variety of health care organizations nationwide to determine a facility or organization's degree of compliance with applicable standards and functionality of care delivery systems." DE 37 ¶ 4.
Plaintiff was diagnosed with Parkinson's disease in 2012. DE 38 ¶ 69. On May 8, 2018, she traveled by plane from her home in Pennsylvania to Phoenix, Arizona to conduct a survey. Upon her arrival, she experienced walking and stability issues at the Phoenix airport. DE 38-11. Five days later, her doctor wrote a letter—which Plaintiff submitted to TJC—explaining that "[a]fter 7 years of [Parkinson's disease], [Plaintiff] is and will continue to have limits and special accommodations needed for work." DE 38-1. He continued that, although Plaintiff was being treated with medication, [*3]  her disease "tends to progress relentlessly" and "because of [Plaintiff's] Parkinson's disease, [she] will become stiff and more slow if [she is] forced to sit for prolonged periods of time." Id. For this reason, her doctor "encourage[d] travel to be limited to Eastern and Central Times." Id.
TJC's Associate Director of Employee Relations, Ruth Metsch, subsequently discussed Plaintiff's restrictions and requested accommodation with her. DE 37-11. Plaintiff recalled that during conversations with Metsch and Plaintiff's supervisor, Wayne Murphy, about Plaintiff's requested accommodation, Metsch and Murphy initially "pretty much said it wasn't going to be happening, because nobody had ever requested regional [travel] and that surveyors had to be able to travel the whole United States." DE 37-2 ("Hopple Dep.") at 42:21-24. In late June 2018, Metsch and Murphy informed Plaintiff that TJC would not be accommodating her request. DE 37-12. Plaintiff continued to travel nationwide in her role as a Surveyor for the remainder of 2018. Hopple Dep. at 47:1-7.
On December 3, 2018, Plaintiff informed Metsch and Murphy that she had experienced difficulty walking after traveling to the Los Angeles area [*4]  to conduct a survey. DE 38-11. She asked them to "please reconsider the accommodation I asked for previously, that I be limited to travelling within the Eastern and Central time zones?" Id. On December 20, 2018, Murphy approved Plaintiff's accommodation request for a 6-month period but explained that "[t]here is no guarantee that it will be extended" because "this kind of indefinite accommodation presents operational challenges." DE 37-14.
Diane Hill, TJC's Senior Survey Planning Representative, is responsible for scheduling or assigning all surveys for TJC's 90 homecare Surveyors, including Plaintiff. DE 37 ¶ 11. Those Surveyors inform Hill, approximately two or three months in advance, of the weeks they want to work. Id. ¶ 12. Hill then compares the Surveyors' availability with the schedule of the facility surveys that are due and assigns a Surveyor to conduct a particular survey. Id. During Plaintiff's temporary accommodation period beginning in January 2019, "as soon as [Hill] got the availability for the next two months or three months . . . [she] would schedule [Plaintiff] first because [she] had more [survey] options when availability first comes in . . ." DE 37-7 ("Hill Dep.") [*5]  at 24:2-5. In other words, she would "schedule [Plaintiff] first and try to find the surveys . . . that would keep her in a designated region" before scheduling the other Surveyors. Id. at 24:10-12.
In an April 2019 email, Hill told Murphy that she was having difficulty scheduling surveys for Plaintiff within her requested geographic regions. DE 37-15.1 She explained that this had forced her to "pull-forward" several surveys—meaning schedule them prior to their due date or the expiration of the facilities' prior certification—in order to fill Plaintiff's schedule. Hill Dep. at 59:24-60:25. Metsch also testified in her deposition that Plaintiff's geographic restrictions made it a "challenge . . . to keep [her] busy." DE 37-5 ("Metsch Dep.) at 32:10-12.
In July 2019, Plaintiff requested that her accommodation be extended. DE 37-17. TJC denied Plaintiff's request, explaining that during Plaintiff's accommodation period TJC struggled to identify surveys within Plaintiff's requested travel area and that it "presented operational challenges that cannot be continued on a longer term, indefinite basis." Id. Accordingly, TJC stated that they expected Plaintiff to resume traveling nationwide [*6]  beginning in September 2019. Id. Plaintiff resigned after she was scheduled to perform a survey in California in early September 2019, stating that she felt she had "no choice based on the fact that [TJC] has denied my request for continued accommodation . . ." DE 37-20.

II. Legal Standard
The Court will grant summary judgment if the pleadings, the discovery and disclosure materials on file, and any affidavits show "that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56. The movant "bears the initial responsibility of informing the district court of the basis for its motion, and identifying those portions of [the record] which it believes demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). To discharge this burden, the movant must demonstrate a lack of evidence supporting the nonmoving party's case. Id. at 325.
After the movant has met its burden under Rule 56, the burden of production shifts to the nonmoving party who "must do more than simply show that there is some metaphysical doubt as to the material facts." Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co., Ltd. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986). The nonmoving party may not rely merely on allegations or denials in its own pleading, but instead must come forward [*7]  with specific facts showing a genuine issue for trial. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56; Matsushita, 475 U.S. at 587.
As long as the nonmoving party has had ample opportunity to conduct discovery, it must come forward with affirmative evidence to support its claim. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 257, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). "A mere 'scintilla' of evidence supporting the opposing party's position will not suffice; there must be enough of a showing that the jury could reasonably find for that party." Walker v. Darby, 911 F.2d 1573, 1577 (11th Cir. 1990). If the evidence advanced by the nonmoving party is merely colorable, or is not significantly probative, summary judgment may be granted. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249-50.

III. Discussion
To establish a prima facie case for disability discrimination under the ADA, Plaintiff must show that: (1) she is disabled; (2) she is a qualified individual; and (3) she was subjected to unlawful discrimination because of her disability. Holly v. Clairson Indus., L.L.C., 492 F.3d 1247, 1255-56 (11th Cir. 2007).2 In its Motion, TJC argues that Plaintiff fails to make out the first prong of her prima facie case because she has not established a disability under the ADA. Next, TJC asserts that Plaintiff is not a "qualified individual" under the second prong because she has not shown that she could perform the essential functions of her position with or without a reasonable accommodation. TJC also argues that Plaintiff failed [*8]  to identify a reasonable accommodation or show that she needed an accommodation, and that her requested accommodation imposed an undue hardship on TJC.
A. Plaintiff Has Established a Disability Under the ADA and FCRA
TJC claims that although Plaintiff provided medical documentation and testimony regarding her Parkinson's disease, she does not meet the ADA's definition of disabled because "she has not presented any evidence of the timing, frequency, and duration of her impairments or otherwise shown a substantial limitation of a major life activity." DE 36 at 4. The ADA defines the term "disability" as (1) a physical or mental impairment that "substantially limits one or more" of an individual's "major life activities," (2) a "record of such an impairment," or (3) "being regarded as having such an impairment" as described in subsection (1). 42 U.S.C. § 12102(1). Under the ADA, "major life activities include, but are not limited to, ... sleeping, walking, standing, lifting, ... [and] bending[.]" Id. at § 12102(2)(A). When it enacted the ADA Amendments Act of 2008 (the "ADAAA"), Pub.L. No. 110-325, 122 Stat. 3553, Congress indicated that one of its purposes was to "convey that the question of whether an individual's impairment is a disability under the ADA should not demand extensive [*9]  analysis." Mazzeo v. Color Resolutions Intern., LLC, 746 F.3d 1264, 1268 (11th Cir. 2014) (citation omitted). See also United States Equal Employment Opportunity Comm'n v. St. Joseph's Hosp., Inc., 842 F.3d 1333, 1344 (11th Cir. 2016) (noting that "this threshold issue should not require extensive analysis.").
Here, Plaintiff has clearly presented evidence of a physical impairment that impacts her ability to walk. Hopple Dep. at 18:22-24 ("[w]hen I have to sit for long, extended periods of time, it's difficult to walk normally."). She has detailed the nature of her walking difficulties, explaining that her "balance is off" and she "do[es] a lot of shuffling" after sitting for prolonged periods of time. Id. at 18:16-19. Her physician has also specifically connected these problems to her Parkinson's disease. DE 38-1. Given this record, the threshold issue of whether Plaintiff's impairment qualifies as a disability under the ADA certainly does not require extensive analysis. Plaintiff has explained her medical condition and the limitations on "major life activities" resulting from this condition. No more is required. See Mazzeo, 746 F. 3d at 1269 (holding that because the plaintiff's doctor "explained [her] medical condition, what specific pain the condition caused, and the limitations on 'major life activities' . . . resulting from the condition and pain" a more "detailed discussion" of the effects [*10]  of plaintiff's back condition was unnecessary).
Although, in light of the above-described factual record, the Court finds that extensive analysis is not required to conclude that Plaintiff has established an ADA disability, it is still worth discussing the recently decided Eleventh Circuit cases relied upon by TJC. TJC cites Lewis v. City of Union City, 934 F.3d 1169 (11th Cir. 2019) and Munoz v. Selig Enterprises, Inc., 981 F.3d 1265 (11th Cir. 2020) for the proposition that Plaintiff must provide evidence regarding the severity, frequency, and duration of her impairments in order to permit a finding that her impairments substantially limit a major life activity. The Court finds both Lewis and Munoz distinguishable due to the differences in the nature of the impairments at issue in those cases compared to the nature of Plaintiff's impairment here.
In Lewis, the only evidence that the plaintiff's impairment substantially limited a major life activity was "plaintiff's own testimony that she has 'periodic ... shortness of breath,' and [her primary care doctor's] testimony that this could—but, notably, not that it did—affect Ms. Lewis's ability to sleep." Lewis, 934 F.3d at 1180. In Munoz, the plaintiff claimed to have been "ill from 2011 to 2017 with ovarian cysts, uterine fibroids, and endometriosis" and testified that she suffered "extreme pain, [*11]  exhaustion, sleep interruption, and lack of bodily function control." Munoz, 981 F.3d at 1273.
Unlike here, in neither Lewis nor Munoz was there evidence of an activity or situation that triggered or exacerbated the plaintiffs' conditions. Thus, in Lewis for example, the court clearly needed "evidence of the severity, frequency, and duration of [plaintiff's] episodes" to analyze whether a reasonable jury could conclude that plaintiff was substantially limited in a major life activity. Lewis, 934 F.3d at 1180. Strictly requiring all of this type of evidence in this case, however, would be illogical. For one, the frequency of Plaintiff's impairments clearly depends on how often she sits for prolonged periods of time. And she has offered evidence of the severity of impairment—she has described needing the assistance of an airport employee to walk from the baggage claim area at the Phoenix airport to the rental car shuttle. DE 38-11. She also offered evidence relevant to the duration of her impairment, noting that "[a]fter the ride to the rental cars and the drive to Globe AZ I was much better due to the fact that my Sinemet kicked in." Id.
In sum, given the nature of Plaintiff's impairment—that it is triggered by a specific activity—she has offered [*12]  sufficient evidence for the Court to find that a reasonable jury could conclude that she was substantially limited in a major life activity.
B. Plaintiff is Not a Qualified Individual Because She Has Failed to Show That She Can Perform an Essential Function of Her Position
To make out the second prong of her prima facie case and show that she is a qualified individual, Plaintiff must show that she can perform the essential functions of her position with or without reasonable accommodations. Holly, 492 F.3d at 1256. Essential functions are "the fundamental job duties of the employment position the [disabled employee] holds or desires." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(1). Whether a function of a position is essential is evaluated on a case-by-case basis by examining a number of factors, including: (1) the employer's judgment of what it believes to be the essential functions, (2) any written description of the position, (3) the amount of time spent on the job performing the function, (4) the consequences of not requiring the employee to perform the function, (5) the terms of the collective bargaining agreement, (6) the work experience of past incumbents in the job, and (7) the current work experience of incumbents in similar jobs. D'Angelo v. ConAgra Foods, Inc., 422 F.3d 1220, 1230 (11th Cir. 2005). The ADA regulations [*13]  also identify three nonexclusive reasons that a job function may be deemed essential: "(1) the reason the position exists is to perform the function; (2) there are a limited number of employees available among whom the performance of the job function can be distributed; and (3) the function is highly specialized so that the incumbent in the position was hired for his or her expertise or ability to perform the particular function." Holbrook v. City of Alpharetta, 112 F.3d 1522, 1526 (11th Cir. 1997) (citing 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(2) (1996)).
An accommodation is reasonable and necessary under the ADA only if it will enable the employee to perform the essential functions of the job. Earl v. Mervyns, Inc., 207 F.3d 1361, 1365 (11th Cir. 2000). The employee has the burden of identifying a reasonable accommodation. Id. at 1365. An accommodation is not reasonable if it places an undue hardship on the employer. Lucas v. W.W. Grainger, Inc., 257 F.3d 1249, 1255 (11th Cir. 2001).
"To determine the appropriate reasonable accommodation, it may be necessary for [an employer] to initiate an informal, interactive process with the qualified individual with a disability in need of the accommodation" to identify the employee's limitations and any possible accommodations. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3). "[A]n employer is not required to accommodate an employee in any manner in which that employee desires." Earl, 207 F.3d at 1367 (internal quotation marks omitted). Nor does the [*14]  ADA require an employer to eliminate an essential function of an employee's job or reallocate job duties to change the essential functions of a job. Lucas, 257 F.3d at 1260; Earl, 207 F.3d at 1367.
TJC argues that every factor relevant to determining whether a task is an essential function "supports the conclusion that nationwide travel . . . was an essential function of Plaintiff's position." DE 36 at 7.3 Plaintiff ignores these factors, and instead appears to argue that nationwide travel was not an essential function of Plaintiff's Surveyor position principally because "[t]he reason that the [Surveyor] position exists is not to fly extended periods of time, but to conduct surveys at specified facilities for accreditation purposes." DE 38 at 20 (discussing 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(2)(i)). This overly simplistic, conclusory assertion is no substitute for a meaningful analysis of the relevant factors, which overwhelmingly support a finding that nationwide travel was an essential function of Plaintiff's position.
First, TJC clearly considered nationwide travel to be an essential function. Its Chief Human Resources Officer, Associate Director of Employee Relations, and Plaintiff's Field Director all testified that they considered nationwide travel an essential [*15]  function of the Surveyor position. DE 37 ¶ 10. Plaintiff also admitted that her understanding while she was employed by TJC was that nationwide travel was considered essential. Hopple Dep. At 81:10-12. While this factor is not controlling, it is entitled to substantial weight. D'Angelo, 422 F.3d at 1234.
The written job description provides additional evidence that nationwide travel was an essential function of Plaintiff's position. The first sentence states that "Field Representatives, with minimal immediate direction or supervision, survey and/or review health care organizations throughout the United States." DE 37-3 at 1 (emphasis added). Later, the job description's list of "essential job duties and functions" that Field Representatives must be able to perform includes extensive travel and specifies that "Field representatives must be able to travel to all types of airports and in whatever type of ground transportation is necessary to enable them to timely perform their duties." Id. at 3. Finally, the "Physical Abilities" section of the job description requires an ability "to engage in extensive travel as set forth above, including . . . flying on small airplanes and into small airports, traveling in all [*16]  types of weather conditions, etc." Id. at 7. Statutorily, the Court is bound to consider this as evidence of the essential functions of Plaintiff's position. See 42 U.S.C. 12111(8) ("if an employer has prepared a written description before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job, this description shall be considered evidence of the essential functions of the job.")
The next factor—the amount of time spent by Plaintiff on surveys which required nationwide travel, specifically travel to Western states—further supports the conclusion that nationwide travel was an essential function of her position. In 2016, approximately 30% of Plaintiff's surveys were located in the Pacific or Mountain time zones. DE 37 ¶ 18. That figure rose to approximately 45% in 2017 and 48% in 2018. Id. ¶¶ 19, 21. Clearly, a significant portion of Plaintiff's job prior to 2019 consisted of performing surveys in Western states. Accordingly, this factor strongly weighs in favor of a finding that nationwide travel was an essential function of Plaintiff's position.
Next, the consequence of not requiring Plaintiff to perform surveys in Western states was twofold: (1) TJC had to find other Surveyors to perform those surveys, and [*17]  (2) TJC had to find other surveys in the Eastern and Central time zones for Plaintiff to perform. TJC does not contend that it had difficulty finding other Surveyors to perform surveys in Western states. Rather, it merely argues that those surveys were "foisted disproportionately on other home health surveyors, creating an inequitable disparity in work assignments." DE 36 at 16. While this could have conceivably had a negative impact on morale, TJC has not shown that this was a serious consequence of not requiring Plaintiff to perform surveys in Western states.
TJC has shown, however, that it experienced at least some difficulty finding surveys in Eastern and Central time zones for Plaintiff to perform. As set forth above, during Plaintiff's accommodation period Hill began scheduling surveys for Plaintiff before she scheduled any surveys for TJC's other Surveyors. While this was a departure from TJC's ordinary business practices, there is no evidence that it represented a significant burden to Hill or TJC. On the other hand, the Court finds that TJC needing to "pull forward" multiple surveys before they were due in order to populate Plaintiff's schedule did negatively impact its operations. [*18]  Hill testified that some facilities take issue with this practice because their accreditations generally last three years from the date of certification, so if, for example, a survey is scheduled three months prior to a facilities' due date, then their cycle starts (and ends) earlier than necessary. Hill Dep. 14:8-15, 63:2-18. Accordingly, this factor—the consequence of not requiring Plaintiff to perform surveys in Western states—weighs moderately in favor of a finding that nationwide travel was an essential function of Plaintiff's position.
As for the final two relevant factors, the experience of past and current employees, Plaintiff does not dispute that the work experience of other home health Surveyors from 2016 to 2019 reflects a substantial and ongoing pattern of nationwide travel, particularly to California. DE 37 ¶ 64. At her deposition, Plaintiff claimed that she "knew of some people that were regionalized at certain points in time, as well as someone who did not go to the west coast for 15 months." Hopple Dep. at 83:3-11. She identified three home health Surveyors who she understood had received some type of accommodation involving limited air travel. Id. at 85:6-22. TJC's [*19]  records, however, show that except for temporary periods when a travel accommodation was granted, each Surveyor identified by Plaintiff traveled repeatedly to California and other Western states. DE 37 ¶ 53. The Court therefore agrees with TJC that the travel records of its home health Surveyors weigh in favor of finding that nationwide travel was an essential function of Plaintiff's position.
In sum, every relevant factor supports a finding that nationwide travel was an essential function of Plaintiff's position as a Surveyor with TJC. As noted above, Plaintiff does not argue otherwise in her Response. Instead, she focuses on the reasons that a job function may be considered essential that are set forth in 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(2), which differ from the seven factors bearing on whether a particular function is essential that are set forth in 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(3) and discussed above. Specifically, section 1630.2(n)(2) of the ADA regulations states that:
A job function may be considered essential for any of several reasons, including but not limited to the following:
(i) The function may be essential because the reason the position exists is to perform that function;
(ii) The function may be essential because of the limited number of employees available [*20]  among whom the performance of that job function can be distributed; and/or
(iii) The function may be highly specialized so that the incumbent in the position is hired for his or her expertise or ability to perform the particular function.
29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(2)(i)-(iii). TJC does not suggest that nationwide travel is an essential function because of the limited number of employees who perform this function or because it is highly specialized. But the record evidence, including the first sentence of the job description, clearly supports a finding that the reason the Surveyor position exists is to "survey and/or review health care organizations throughout the United States." DE 37-3 at 1. Plaintiff's argument that "[t]he reason that the Field Representative position exists is not to fly extended periods of time, but to conduct surveys at specified facilities for accreditation purposes" ignores the undisputed fact that these surveys must conducted on-site and some degree of travel is therefore inherently part of the reason the position exists.
Accordingly, the Court finds that nationwide travel was an essential function of Plaintiff's position. As such, Plaintiff was required to identify an accommodation that would allow [*21]  her to travel nationwide, including to Western states. Earl, 207 F.3d at 1367. Plaintiff admits that she never identified such an accommodation. Hopple Dep. 59:18-21. This is fatal to her claims. Because no reasonable jury could conclude that Plaintiff was a "qualified individual" under the ADA or FCRA, her discrimination claims fail.

III. Conclusion
For the foregoing reasons, it is hereby ORDERED AND ADJUDGED as follows:
1. Defendant Joint Commission on Accreditation of Health Care Organizations' Motion for Summary Judgment [DE 36] is GRANTED.
2. The Court will enter a separate Final Judgment consistent with this Order. DONE AND ORDERED in Chambers at Fort Lauderdale, Broward County, Florida, this 4th day of May, 2022.
/s/ James I. Cohn
JAMES I. COHN
Unites States District Judge

FINAL JUDGMENT
THIS CAUSE is before the Court following its Order Granting Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment [DE 41.] Accordingly, it is
ORDERED AND ADJUDGED as follows:
1. Judgment is hereby entered in favor of Defendant Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations d/b/a The Joint Commission and against Plaintiff Julia Hopple. Plaintiff shall recover nothing from Defendant in this matter.
2. The Clerk of Court is DIRECTED [*22]  to CLOSE the case and DENY any pending motions as moot. DONE AND ORDERED in Chambers at Fort Lauderdale, Broward County, Florida, this 4th day of May, 2022.
/s/ James I. Cohn
JAMES I. COHN
Unites States District Judge


End of Document

