Hoskins v. City of Atlanta
United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division
March 16, 2018, Decided; March 16, 2018, Filed
CIVIL ACTION NO. 1:15-CV-508-AT

Reporter
2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 228434 *; 2018 WL 7075597
MICHAEL HOSKINS, Plaintiff, v. CITY OF ATLANTA, Defendant.
Prior History: Hoskins v. City of Atlanta, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 228433 (N.D. Ga., Jan. 26, 2018)
Counsel:  [*1] For Michael Hoskins, Plaintiff: Thomas Colin Wooldridge, LEAD ATTORNEY, Wooldridge & Jezek, LLP, Atlanta, GA USA.
For City of Atlanta doing business as City of Atlanta Fire and Rescue Department, Defendant: Anissa DeAnne Floyd, Robert Nathaniel Godfrey, City of Atlanta Law Department, Atlanta, GA USA; Timothy M. Boughey, Elarbee, Thompson, Sapp & Wilson, LLP, Atlanta, GA USA; Y. Soo Jo, Office Of The United States Attorney-Atl600, Atlanta, GA USA.
Judges: Amy Totenberg, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Amy Totenberg
Opinion



ORDER
This matter is before the Court on the Magistrate Judge's Report and Recommendation ("R&R") [Doc. 93] that Plaintiff's motion for summary judgment should be denied and Defendant's motion for summary judgment should be granted. The Court has reviewed the R&R, Plaintiff's objections to the R&R (Doc. 95), as well as the parties' underlying cross-motions for summary judgment (Docs. 59, 62).
Plaintiff, a firefighter, claims to have made a request for a reasonable accommodation to Defendant, his employer, to provide training materials in an electronic format based on his disability of dyslexia. Specifically, he emailed Deputy Chief Meadows:
This correspondence is yet another attempt to get [*2]  instructional materials in an electronic format prior to courses starting for the purpose of preparing for the promotional testing. It is documented that I am a person with a specific disability, dyslexia. Now, as a person with this particular disability certain accommodations should be made, to enable me to be successful in my endeavors as far [as] advancing within the fire department.
(Doc. 95-2.) He stated in another portion of the email, "I ask [that you] please provide all of the available instructional materials to me as soon as possible." (Id.) Deputy Chief Meadows responded, with Deputy Chief Simmons1 copied on the email:
I am unfamiliar with a study list or material that the department has distributed in regards to an upcoming promotional examination. If you are in possession of such a study list, please forward it to Chief Simmons and me at your earliest convenience.
(Id.) Plaintiff did not respond to this email but instead appears to have treated Deputy Chief Meadows's response as a rejection of his request for access to the available instructional materials.
Plaintiff contends that Defendant failed to adequately respond to his initial request and thereby failed to accommodate [*3]  him in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 ("ADA"). Defendant claims that Plaintiff's request was not sufficiently specific or reasonable to trigger any duty to provide an accommodation under the ADA or even to engage in the interactive process (i.e., the process of working with a disabled employee to determine the limitations of the disability and potential accommodations to overcome those limitations). Both sides claim there is no factual dispute as to Plaintiff's request for a reasonable accommodation (or lack thereof) and Defendant's response (or lack thereof). Both sides also claim that the other caused the breakdown in any interactive process. The Magistrate Judge agreed with Defendant's position and recommended granting summary judgment in favor of Defendant.
The record is slim in this case and leaves much to be desired. The parties essentially argue over the meaning of two emails — Plaintiff's email to Deputy Chief Meadows and his email response — which raise questions that do not appear to be fully answered by the current record. For instance, there seems to be a factual dispute about the meaning of the phrase "all of the available instructional materials" [*4]  in Plaintiff's email and how different ranking officials in the fire department have interpreted it, not to mention how Plaintiff himself has interpreted it. (Compare Simmons Depo., Doc. 72-1 at 262, with Meadows Depo., Doc. 68-1 at 473.)
The law is similarly somewhat muddled on what constitutes a request for a reasonable accommodation that triggers the employer's duty to provide one. See Holly v. Clairson Indus., L.L.C., 492 F.3d 1247, 1261 (11th Cir. 2007) (noting that the Eleventh Circuit has not "determined precisely what form the request must take" and that the inquiry is a "fact-intensive" one); compare Hialeah Housing Authority, 418 Fed. App'x 872, 876-77 (11th Cir. 2011) (finding that employee's counsel's statement that he "had a disability that prevented him from going up and down stairs" may constitute a sufficient request), and EEOC Notice No. 915.002, EEOC Enforcement Guidance: Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under the Americans with Disabilities Act, Question 15. (Oct. 17, 2002) (indicating that an employee's statement "that her wheelchair cannot fit under the desk in her office" constitutes a sufficient request), with Frazier-White v. Gee, 818 F.3d 1249, 1256 (11th Cir. 2016) (finding employee's request for "an extension to continue to receive care" related to her disability [*6]  was too indefinite to constitute a reasonable request). (See also Doc. 93 at 9-10 (in the R&R, the cases cited by the Magistrate Judge that discuss the requirement for "specific" requests for accommodation).)
Additionally, with respect to the interactive process, ADA regulations state that it may be necessary in some circumstances for an employer "to initiate an informal, interactive process with the individual with a disability." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3). The Eleventh Circuit has interpreted this language to mean that "[l]iability simply cannot arise under the ADA when an employer does not obstruct an informal interactive process; makes reasonable efforts to communicate with the employee and provide accommodations based on the information it possesses; and the employee's actions cause a breakdown in the interactive process." Meyer v. Sec'y, U.S. Dep't of Health & Human Servs., 592 Fed. Appx. 786, 792 (11th Cir. 2014) (citing Stewart v. Happy Herman's Cheshire Bridge, Inc., 117 F.3d 1278, 1287 (11th Cir. 1997)). Courts have waded into factually intensive analyses to determine whether an employer has "obstruct[ed]" the interactive process" or failed to "make reasonable efforts" to communicate, and they have come out on either side. Id.; compare Alabi v. Atlanta Pub. Sch., No. 1:12-CV-0191-AT, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 188129, 2011 WL 11785485, at *12 (N.D. Ga. Sept. 26, 2011) (finding that the employer failed to engage in the interactive process where it initially began [*7]  trying to identify a reasonable accommodation for two weeks, but subsequently, it "kept providing new excuses . . . not to provide" an interpreter when the employee kept requesting one), with Meyer, 592 F. App'x at 792 (finding that the employer did not obstruct the interactive process where it discussed options for accommodation, later changed the accommodation and spoke to the employee about it, and the employee "did not tell [the employer] that she disapproved of the change, nor did she request a different accommodation"). Here, Defendant raises a legitimate defense that Plaintiff may not have participated in good faith in the interactive process. And Plaintiff raises the same contention as to Defendant's participation.
The Court is concerned about the parties' high likely fees and costs if this case proceeded to trial (and after three-plus years of litigation already), relative to a realistic estimate of Plaintiff's damages based solely on his alleged lack of access to training materials. Proof of damages is not a cinch in this context.
Given the issues flagged herein, the Court is of the view that mediation of this case might be more productive than pushing the case towards further litigation or appeal.4 [*8]  There are serious problems on both sides. Accordingly, there is the reality here of a potential trial based on disputes of fact or, alternatively, the dismissal of Plaintiff's claim based on asserted deficiencies in his response to Deputy Chief Meadows's email. The Court prefers to defer ruling on the pending R&R to a date after the parties have honestly faced these problems in their respective postures in this case.
The Court therefore ORDERS the parties to engage in mediation and REFERS this case to Magistrate Judge Linda T. Walker for mediation. The Court HOLDS IN ABEYANCE the R&R [Doc. 93] and ADMINISTRATIVELY CLOSES5 this case pending the mediation. The mediation shall be completed by April 30, 2018, unless additional time is needed or requested by Magistrate Judge Walker. In the event the mediation is not successful, the parties shall move to re-open the case within five days of the conclusion of mediation. In the event the mediation is successful, the parties shall notify the Court within five days of the conclusion of mediation and shall file the necessary documents to dismiss this case by a date certain at the conclusion of mediation.
IT IS SO ORDERED this 16th day of March, [*9]  2018.
/s/ Amy Totenberg
Amy Totenberg
United States District Judge


End of Document

