Howze v. City of Pittsburgh
United States District Court for the Western District of Pennsylvania
August 20, 2020, Decided; August 20, 2020, Filed
2:16-CV-01298-MRH

Reporter
2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 151948 *
ANASTACIA HOWZE, Plaintiff, vs. CITY OF PITTSBURGH, Defendant,
Prior History: Howze v. City of Pittsburgh, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 197932 (W.D. Pa., Nov. 30, 2017)
Counsel:  [*1] For ANASTACIA HOWZE, Plaintiff: Martell Harris, LEAD ATTORNEY, Kraemer Manes & Associates, Pittsburgh, PA; Danielle M. Parks, Kraemer Manes & Associates, LLC, Pittsburgh, PA.
For CITY OF PITTSBURGH, Defendant: Kezia O. L. Taylor, LEAD ATTORNEY, City of Pittsburgh Law Department, Pittsburgh, PA; Matthew S. McHale, LEAD ATTORNEY, Lourdes Sanchez Ridge, City of Pittsburgh Department of Law, Pittsburgh, PA; Stephanie L. Eggar, City of Pittsburgh - Department of Law, Pittsburgh, PA.
Judges: Cynthia Reed Eddy, Chief United States Magistrate Judge.
Opinion by: Cynthia Reed Eddy
Opinion



REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION
Cynthia Reed Eddy, Chief United States Magistrate Judge.

I. RECOMMENDATION
Plaintiff Anastacia Howze ("Plaintiff") brings the present action asserting race, gender and disability discrimination claims against her former employer, the City of Pittsburgh ("Defendant" or "City"). Presently before the court for consideration are the following:
1. Plaintiff's partial motion for summary judgment (ECF No. 124); and
2. Defendants' motion for summary judgment (ECF No. 127).
The cross motions for summary judgment are fully briefed and ripe for disposition. The court has subject matter jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1331. For the reasons that [*2]  follow, it is respectfully recommended that Defendant's motion for summary judgment be granted and Plaintiff's partial motion for summary judgment be denied.

II. REPORT
a. Background
Plaintiff is an African American woman who alleges she suffered an injury during work rendering her disabled and that she was discriminated against on the basis of her sex/gender and race. (ECF No. 126 at ¶¶ 1-2). She began working for the City as a part time employee within the Department of Public Works in 1999. (ECF No. 129 at ¶ 1). In 2001, she moved to a full-time position within the same department. Id. In 2004, Plaintiff moved to the Department of Finance in a division called the Office of Management and Budget ("OMB"). Id. The facts supporting her claims occurred during her time in the OMB.
She alleges the following claims against the City: (1) a claim for retaliation in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C § 12111 et seq.1 ("Count I"); (2) a claim for retaliation on the basis of her disability in violation of the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act ("PHRA"), 43 P.S. § 955 et seq.2 ("Count II"); (3) a claim for race discrimination and retaliation for failure to promote in violation of the PHRA3 ("Count III"); (4) a claim [*3]  for sex and/or gender discrimination in violation of the PHRA4 ("Count VII5 "); (5) a claim for disability discrimination for failure to accommodate in violation of the ADA6 ("Count VIII"); and (6) a claim for disability discrimination and failure to accommodate in violation of the PHRA7 ("Count IX").

Facts related to Plaintiff's sex/gender and race discrimination claims
In 2007, Plaintiff began working as an Inventory Specialist in the OMB. She held that position until September 2014 when the duties of Inventory Specialist were eliminated by the City. According to the City, in January 2014, Mayor William M. Peduto took office and began modernization and changes in the City's staffing and operations to make more efficient use of public resources and to remedy the City's financial distress. The City maintains that as part of this modernization and automation efforts, several clerical and administrative positions were eliminated as unnecessary. The City maintains that Plaintiff's position as Inventory Specialist was clerical and/or administrative in nature and was eliminated. Plaintiff maintains that the Inventory Specialist position was not a clerical position, but rather consisted of auditing [*4]  duties which she performed as an Inventory Specialist. Plaintiff does not specifically recount what auditing duties she completed as an Inventory Specialist. Further Plaintiff alleges the City did not eliminate this position, but rather renamed it as "Fixed Asset Analyst" position which was comprised of her previously assigned duties and auditing duties. Plaintiff does not specify what duties she had that overlap with the new "Fixed Asset Analyst" position. The City maintains that the Fixed Asset Analyst position involves much more decisional duties and is a much more senior role than that of the former Inventory Specialist position that Plaintiff had and the only overlapping duties between the two positions are data entry for the City's assets which takes an hour or two a week. (ECF No. 141 at p. 25). Plaintiff claims that while she applied for and was qualified for this position, it was filled by a white male, Peter McDevvitt. (ECF No. 136 at ¶ 2(d)). There is no record evidence besides Plaintiff's own testimony that she applied for and was qualified for this position.
In 2014, Plaintiff emailed a Job Analysis Questionnaire ("JAQ") to Jennifer Sample Presutti, the Director of OMB. [*5]  A JAQ is a tool City employees can use to list responsibilities that they believe are above and beyond their job description so the City can evaluate whether the employee's title and/or compensation should be adjusted. The JAQ is reviewed by a supervisor for accuracy and then forwarded to the head of the department. A JAQ itself does not result in a pay increase or promotion, as that decision is made by Human Resources constituent with applicable civil service collective bargaining standards. Ms. Presutti forwarded Plaintiff's JAQ to Plaintiff's supervisor, Deb Lestitian. Ms. Lestitian and Ms. Presutti met with Plaintiff to discuss her JAQ where Plaintiff indicated that she believed she was doing more than the duties in her job description. Specifically, Plaintiff believed she was doing the work of an auditor. According to the City, neither Ms. Lestitian nor Ms. Presutti agreed that Plaintiff was doing the work of an auditor, that she should be paid as an auditor nor that she was earning less than she should be. According to the City, auditors exist only as part of the City's Controller's office which is separate and distinct from the OMB office. Plaintiff maintains that she was doing [*6]  the work of an auditor and duties of the Fixed Asset Manager but does not explain what those duties were. (ECF No. 136 at ¶ 6(a)).
In 2014, Bob Yakish, who was the Fixed Asset Manager for the City and Plaintiff's direct supervisor, retired. Mr. Yakish's duties were temporarily split between other OMB staff members. Plaintiff alleges that she took over all of Mr. Yakish's duties upon his retirement. The City alleges that while they did not initially plan to hire a replacement for the Fixed Asset Manager position, with Mr. Yakish's absence, the need to have someone in that position became apparent and the position was reinstated. It is unclear from the record when the City decided to reinstate this position. Thereafter, from May 12, 2014 through May 17, 2014, the position for Fixed Asset Manager was publicly posted seeking candidates for the position. (ECF No. 130-1 at 63). Plaintiff alleges that other City employees told her that the Fixed Asset Manager position was either not going to be reinstated and that it was already filled, and she was never told to apply for it. It is undisputed that Plaintiff did not apply for the position of Fixed Asset Manager.
Kevin Forsythe applied for this [*7]  position and was hired as the Fixed Assets Manager for the City. Mr. Forsythe is a white male. It is unclear from the record when Mr. Forsythe applied for this position and when he was interviewed for it. Mr. Forsthye was offered the Fixed Asset Manager on May 28, 2014.8
Plaintiff alleges that she was then told to train Mr. Forsythe on all of her own job duties and thereafter, she was accused by Ashbaugh not to have enough work to do. The City disputes this and maintains that Plaintiff was asked to describe her job duties to Mr. Forsythe as a form of onboarding or orientation and that Mr. Forsythe was trained by Rea Price and Jen Presutti. (ECF No. 141 at p. 26). The City admits that a former City employee Ryan Lalle's clerical and administrative duties were transferred to Plaintiff when he left because Plaintiff did not have a full workload and Plaintiff received training and instruction regarding how to perform those tasks. (ECF No. 141 at 28).

Facts Underlying Plaintiff's Disability Discrimination Claim
In mid-2015, when Plaintiff's position of Inventory Specialist became obsolete, the City worked with Plaintiff's union representatives, Human Resources, and the Law Department to, within [*8]  the bounds of the union's collective bargaining agreement, create a new position of Procurement Specialist specifically for Plaintiff within OMB in order to retain her as an employee. It is undisputed that Plaintiff's new position of Procurement Specialist was clerical in nature and was created specifically for Plaintiff.
In September 2015, days after Plaintiff had accepted the Procurement Specialist position, she fell at work and sustained a concussion. Because of her injuries she was out of work until January 2016 and was under the care of a worker's compensation physician through UPMC WorkPartners. In December 2015, WorkPartners notified the City that Plaintiff could return to work with restrictions as of January 1, 2016. Plaintiff was notified that she had to return to work on January 6, 2016. On March 9, 2016, Plaintiff was released to full duty. Later that month, Plaintiff began seeing another physician not related to WorkPartners who recommended additional restrictions and on June 28, 2016, an independent medical examiner provided an affidavit of recovery stating that Plaintiff was no longer experiencing symptoms due to her injury. Plaintiff continued to call off from work complaining [*9]  of headaches and used break time in an erratic manner.
On July 22, 2016, Plaintiff requested short-term disability and requested a reduced schedule. On July 28, 2016, the City sent Plaintiff a letter saying that they were considering her requests to be a request for reasonable accommodations. The letter also asked that she fill out a documentation of disability form and provide information from her doctor regarding whether these injuries were from her worker's compensation claim and identifying what reasonable accommodations the City could make that would help her perform her essential job functions. On August 19, 2016, Jen Olzinger presented a letter to the City's ADA Committee explaining that Plaintiff's requests for accommodations presented an undue hardship as 90% of Plaintiff's job tasks involved the use of a computer. OMB created non-computer tasks for Plaintiff to do and asked interns to cover computer tasks, but their internships were concluding and would no longer be able to complete those tasks. On August 23, 2016, Ms. Olzinger asked Plaintiff for clarification on her restrictions by noon the next day so that the ADA Committee could consider information prior to its meeting [*10]  the Friday of that week. Two days later, the City received a note from Plaintiff's doctor stating that Plaintiff's hours should be restricted to five hours per day through August 19, then six hours per day through August 26 , then seven hours per day through September 2, with computer and reading limited to four total hours per day. On August 29, 2016, the ADA Accommodation Review Board denied Plaintiff's accommodation request via letter. The letter indicated that "OMB has attempted to honor your asserted restrictions in accordance with your doctor's recommendations and has even gone so far as to map out a schedule which would maximize the amount of necessary work you are able to accomplish with the asserted restrictions." (ECF No. 129 at ¶ 19). The Board further noted that her "position is clerical, and the essential functions of this position require both computer use and reading. The accommodation you request will not permit you to perform the essential functions of your position." Id. The Board indicated that there were no vacant, equivalent positions for which Plaintiff was qualified which Plaintiff could be transferred as an accommodation, as all of the equivalent positions were [*11]  clerical in nature and required computer use and reading as essential job functions. The Board also noted that Plaintiff had not engaged in the interactive process in good faith as required by the ADA because she refused to provide all medical information requested.
On September 7, 2016, the City sent a letter to Plaintiff indicating it had received notice from Plaintiff's physician that Plaintiff was provided a full duty release and recommended five to ten-minute breaks every hour. OMB agreed to work with Plaintiff to coordinate a schedule allowing frequent breaks. On January 19, 2017, Plaintiff was suspended for a day for violating break and time off policies.
This lawsuit was initiated on August 25, 2016. In February 2017, the City determined that due to continued automation of City functions, Plaintiff's Procurement Specialist position was no longer needed and would be eliminated. Plaintiff was notified on March 31, 2017 that her Procurement Specialist position would be eliminated.
b. Standard of Review
The standard for assessing a motion for summary judgment under Rule 56 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure is well-settled. A court should grant summary judgment if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and [*12]  admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. "Only disputes over facts that might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law will properly preclude the entry of summary judgment." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). Furthermore, "summary judgment will not lie if the dispute about a material fact is 'genuine,' that is, if the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party." Id. at 250.
On a motion for summary judgment, the facts and the inferences to be drawn therefrom should be viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. See Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 150, 120 S. Ct. 2097, 147 L. Ed. 2d 105 (2000); Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co., Ltd. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 587-88, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986); Huston v. Proctor & Gamble Paper Prod. Corp., 568 F.3d 100, 104 (3d Cir. 2009) (citations omitted). It is not the court's role to weigh the disputed evidence and decide which is more probative, or to make credibility determinations. See Anderson, 477 U.S. at 255; Marino v. Indus. Crating Co., 358 F.3d 241, 247 (3d Cir. 2004); Boyle v. County of Allegheny, 139 F.3d 386, 393 (3d Cir. 1998). "Only disputes over facts that might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law will properly preclude the entry of summary judgment." Anderson, 477 U.S at 247-48. An issue is "genuine" if a reasonable jury could possibly hold in the nonmovant's favor with respect to that issue. Id. "Where the record taken as a whole could not lead a reasonable [*13]  trier of fact to find for the nonmoving party, there is no 'genuine issue for trial'." Matsushita, 475 U.S. at 587; Huston, 568 F.3d at 104.
A plaintiff may not, however, rely solely on his complaint to defeat a summary judgment motion. See, e.g., Anderson, 477 U.S. at 256 ("Rule 56(e) itself provides that a party opposing a properly supported motion for summary judgment may not rest upon mere allegation or denials of his pleading, but must set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial."). Allegations made without any evidentiary support may be disregarded. Jones v. UPS, 214 F.3d 402, 407 (3d Cir. 2000).
This standard does not change merely because there are cross-motions for summary judgment. Appelmans v. City of Phila., 826 F.2d 214, 216 (3d Cir. 1987). "Cross-motions are no more than a claim by each side that it alone is entitled to summary judgment." Rains v. Cascade Indus., Inc., 402 F.2d 241, 245 (3d Cir. 1968). When considering cross-motions for summary judgment, a court is precluded from granting summary judgment to either side—even if the parties stipulate that no more evidence is needed—when there are any genuine issues of material fact. Facenda v. N.F.L. Films, Inc., 542 F.3d 1007, 1024 (3d Cir. 2008). In resolving such cross-motions, "the court is bound to view the evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving party with respect to each motion." Stilp v. Contino, 743 F.Supp.2d 460, 465 (M.D.Pa. 2010) (citations omitted).
c. Discussion
Discrimination and retaliation claims under Title VII, ADA and PHRA are [*14]  analyzed using the familiar McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework. McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 802-04, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). See also Wishkin v. Potter, 476 F.3d 180, 185 (3d Cir. 2007) (applying the McDonnell Douglas burden shifting framework to ADA discrimination claims); Daniels v. Sch. Dist. of Philadelphia, 776 F.3d 181, 192 (3d Cir. 2015) (applying McDonnell Douglas burden framework to PHRA discrimination claims). This "analysis proceeds in three stages. First, the plaintiff must establish a prima facie case of discrimination [or retaliation]. If the plaintiff succeeds in establishing a prima facie case, the burden shifts to the defendant to articulate some legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the employee's rejection. Finally, should the defendant carry this burden, the plaintiff then must have an opportunity to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the legitimate reasons offered by the defendant were not its true reasons, but were a pretext for discrimination." Jones v. Sch. Dist. of Philadelphia, 198 F.3d 403, 410 (3d Cir. 1999) (internal citations and quotation marks omitted). "The ultimate burden or persuading the trier of fact that the defendant intentionally discriminated against the plaintiff remains at all times with the plaintiff." Texas Dep't of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 252-53, 101 S. Ct. 1089, 67 L. Ed. 2d 207 (1981).
Because there are competing motions for summary judgment, each motion will be addressed in turn.
i. The City's Motion for Summary Judgment

1. Failure to Accommodate [*15]  in violation of the ADA (Counts VIII and IX)
Plaintiff alleges that the City failed to accommodate her disability in violation of the ADA and PHRA by failing to grant her requests for accommodation in August 2016 and because the City "abused the interactive process by needlessly forcing Plaintiff to obtain numerous medical documents and clarifications and threatening termination if she did not comply in as little as 24 hours." (ECF No. 120 at ¶ 78-80; 85-87).9
The City argues it is entitled to summary judgment because there is no evidence of record supporting Plaintiff's claims that it failed to accommodate her or that it abused the interactive process.
To succeed on a failure to accommodate claim, a Plaintiff must establish the following four elements: "(1)[s]he was disabled and his employer knew it; (2) [s]he requested an accommodation or assistance; (3) [her] employer did not make a good faith effort to assist; and (4) [s]he could have been reasonably accommodated." Gardner v. SEPTA, 410 F. Supp. 3d 723, 741 (E.D. Pa 2019) (citing Capps v. Mondelez Global, LLC, 847 F.3d 144, 157 (3d Cir. 2017))
As to Plaintiff's claim that the City did not participate in the interactive process in good faith because it required her to submit medical documentation supporting her request for an accommodation within a 24 [*16]  hour period, this does not constitute bad faith engagement in the interactive process. Employers can show good faith in numerous ways, including showing that they have met with the employee who has requested an accommodation, by requesting information about the employee's condition and limitations, asking the employee what accommodation she specifically wants, showing some sign of having considered the employee's request and offer and discuss available alternatives when the request is too burdensome. Taylor v. Phoenixville Sch. Dist., 184 F.3d 296, 317 (3d Cir. 1999). While it is unclear from the record in what instance(s) Plaintiff was only given a 24-hour window to submit medical documentation, it is immaterial here because Plaintiff has failed to show how this is anything other than a good faith attempt to engage in the interactive process. The only instance in the record that supports such an allegation is on August 23, 2016 when Plaintiff was asked to provide clarification on her work restrictions by noon the next day for the City's ADA Committee to consider that information in its upcoming meeting. Compare (ECF No. 129 at p. 18) with (ECF No. 136 at 18(a) (admitted)). Two days later, Plaintiff's physician submitted documentation to the City [*17]  supporting Plaintiff's accommodation request. Placing a requirement to submit medical documentation to support a request for accommodation is not evidence that an employer acted in bad faith while engaging in the interactive process. Again, Plaintiff has offered no evidence and the record includes no evidence to show that she was denied an accommodation for failing to submit her medical documentation or suffered any adverse action from failing to timely submit the documentation. In fact, a request for medical documentation by the City evidences a willingness to participate in the interactive process by considering her treating physician's recommendations and the City is entitled to summary judgment on this claim.
As to Plaintiff's claim that she could have been reasonably accommodated because the requested accommodations did not result in an undue hardship on the City, the City is entitled to summary judgment on this claim.
Plaintiff takes issue with the City's denial of her request for accommodation made in late-July 2016 requesting that Plaintiff's hours be restricted to five hours per day through August 19, six hours per day through August 26 and seven hours per day through September [*18]  2, with computer and reading limited to four total hours per day.
In determining whether a genuine issue of material fact exists regarding the reasonableness of Plaintiff's requested accommodation, Plaintiff must make a prima facie showing that her proposed accommodation is reasonable on its face. US Airways, Inc. v. Barnett, 535 U.S. 391, 401-02, 122 S. Ct. 1516, 152 L. Ed. 2d 589 (2002). Here, the only request for accommodation that the City denied was in connection with Plaintiff's request made in August 2016 that her hours be restricted to five hours per day through August 19, 2016, then restricted to six hours per day through August 26, 2016 and then restricted to seven hours per day through September 2, 2016, with computer and reading limited to a total of four hours per work day. Prior to this requested accommodation, the City granted Plaintiff an accommodation to work restricted hours as well as limited her computer usage and reading time. Plaintiff has carried the relatively light burden of showing that her proposed accommodation for limited working hours and limited computer usage is facially reasonable.
The burden shifts to the City to prove that Plaintiff's requested accommodation was unreasonable or would cause undue hardship. Id.; Shapiro v. Twp. of Lakewood, 292 F.3d 356, 361 (3d Cir. 2002). The ADA contemplates that the [*19]  undue hardship will affect the employer's "operation of the business." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). The ADA "does not require an employer to create a new position in order to accommodate an employee with a disability, or to transform a temporary light duty position into a permanent position." Bender v. Norfolk S. Corp., 994 F. Supp. 2d 593, 613 (M.D. Pa. 2014) (citations omitted). Additionally, "[a]n accommodation that would result in other employees having to work harder or longer hours is not required." Milton v. Scrivner, Inc., 53 F.3d 1118, 1125 (10th Cir. 1995). It is undisputed that the requested accommodation would cause an undue hardship on the City by negatively affecting its operation of business. The City found that granting her accommodation resulted in other members of Plaintiff's department to take on her computer responsibilities, resulting in having to pay those employees overtime or compensate for the time they worked, and slowed production. (ECF No. 130-2 at 26-27). In particular, one of Plaintiff's core functions was to create purchase orders using the computer system in a timely manner and her request for accommodation limiting her computer usage to 4 hours per day resulted in vendors not being paid in a timely manner and resulted in complaints to the OMB department and the department being 15% behind schedule in completing [*20]  contracts which had a negative trickle-down effect to all departments run by the City. Id. Additionally, the City informed Plaintiff that she could not be transferred into another position for which she was qualified because all equivalent clerical positions required computer use and reading as an essential job function and that there were no vacant lower-level positions for the same reason. (ECF No. 130-2 at 29-30). While Plaintiff argues that the City cannot show an undue hardship because it previously granted her similar accommodations, the ADA does not require an employer to transfer a temporary light-duty position into a permanent light-duty position.
Accordingly, because no reasonable jury could conclude that the City failed to accommodate Plaintiff, it is respectfully recommended that judgment be entered in the City's favor on Plaintiff's claims under the ADA and PHRA for its failure to accommodate (Counts VIII and IX). See Salley v. Circuit City Stores, Inc., 160 F.3d 977, 979 n.1 (3d Cir. 1998) ("Pennsylvania courts generally interpret the PHRA in accord with its federal counterparts, among them the ADA."); See also Chmill v. City of Pittsburgh, 488 Pa. 470, 490, 412 A.2d 860, 871 (1980) (the PHRA should be construed in light of the principles of fair employment law emerging from federal anti-discrimination statutes). [*21] 

2. Retaliation in violation of the ADA and PHRA (Counts I and II)
Plaintiff claims that she was retaliated against for filing charges with the EEOC and PHRC regarding suspected disability discrimination because the City did not accommodate Plaintiff's disabilities. (ECF No. 120 at 42, 47). She claims this retaliation took the form of a hostile work environment by "being manipulated and lied to regarding work policies and procedures; including personal packages[,]" her employment duties were removed resulting in a demotion, and she was ultimately terminated. (ECF No 12 at 46, 47).
The City first argues that it is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's claims for retaliation on the basis of her disability pursuant to the ADA and PHRA (Counts I and II respectively) because she has failed to establish a prima facie case of retaliation and because the City acted for legitimate non-discriminatory reasons. The City also argues that Plaintiff has not suffered a hostile work environment. (ECF No. 128 at 8-10, 11).
Plaintiff's claim for hostile work environment on the basis of disability will be addressed first. A claim for a hostile work environment based on disability requires a showing that: [*22]  (1) Plaintiff is a qualified individual with a disability under the ADA; (2) she was subject to unwelcome harassment; (3) the harassment was based on her disability or a request for an accommodation; (4) the harassment was sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of her employment and to create an abusive working environment; and (5) that the City knew or should have known of the harassment and failed to take prompt effective remedial action. Walton v. Mental Health Ass'n. of Se. Pennsylvania, 168 F.3d 661, 667 (3d Cir. 1999).
While Plaintiff asserts that she suffered a hostile work environment because she was admonished for having personal packages delivered to work, admonished for using her work computer for personal use, admonished for wearing jeans to work, admonished for making copies and taking photos of the employee sign-in sheet, and forced to follow non-union over-time policies, such allegations do not rise to the level to create a hostile work environment. (ECF No. 135 at 8-9). Further, there is no record evidence that Plaintiff's perceived harassment of being told by various supervisors not to have personal packages delivered to work, use her work computer for personal use, make copies or take photographs of the employee sign in sheet and [*23]  dress appropriately were driven by a discriminatory animus or were so severe or pervasive as to alter the conditions of her employment, unreasonably interfered with her work performance or constituted an abusive work environment. Harris v. Forklift Sys., Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 22, 114 S. Ct. 367, 126 L. Ed. 2d 295 (1993). It is undisputed that while various supervisors reminded Plaintiff to adhere her conduct to these policies that she was never disciplined for noncompliance. Compare (ECF No. 129 at p. 11) with (ECF No. 136 at 15; p 11(d)). A "bad relationship with a supervisor" or "unpleasant work environment" is not enough to show a severely abusive work environment. Quick v. GEO Grp., Inc., No. 3:18-CV-93, 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 16872, 2020 WL 532343, at *12 (W.D. Pa. Feb. 3, 2020) (citing Walton, 168 F.3d at 667. See also Harris, 510 U.S. at 21. ADA does not require a "happy or even a civil workplace." Ballard-Carter v. Vanguard Grp., 703 F. App'x 149, 152 (3d Cir. 2017). Considering the totality of the circumstances that Plaintiff alleges constituted a hostile work environment, no reasonable jury could conclude that she suffered from a hostile work environment and therefore the City is entitled to judgment as a matter of law for Plaintiff's claim for a hostile work environment based upon her disability.10
Turning to Plaintiff's remaining claims of disability retaliation which she alleges resulted in her demotion and ultimately termination, the court employs [*24]  the three-step McDonnell Douglas burden shifting framework to analyze Plaintiff's claims. Fogleman v. Mercy Hosp., Inc., 283 F.3d 561, 567 (3d Cir.2002).
In the first step of the McDonnell Douglas framework, the Plaintiff must prove a prima facie case of retaliation. In so doing, the plaintiff has the burden of showing that (1) she engaged in protected activity, (2) an adverse employment action was taken against her either after or contemporaneous with the protected activity, and (3) there is a causal connection between her protected activity and the adverse employment action. Krouse v. Am. Sterilizer Co., 126 F.3d 494, 500 (3d Cir. 1997). See also Chmill, 412 A.2d at 871 (the PHRA should be construed in light of the principles of fair employment law emerging from federal anti-discrimination statutes).
The City does not dispute that Plaintiff filing EEOC and PHRC complaints against the City constitutes protected activity. The City argues that while under normal circumstances the elimination of a position would constitute an adverse employment action, in this circumstance it does not constitute an adverse employment action because Plaintiff's position of Inventory Specialist was eliminated due to the new administration's city-wide automation efforts of clerical-natured positions. (ECF No. 128 at 7). The City also points to the fact [*25]  that it created a new position especially for Plaintiff after it eliminated her position which resulted in no change in compensation and that she was qualified for. Id.
An adverse employment action to set forth a prima facie case of retaliation can be shown by "a significant change in employment status, such as hiring, firing, failing to promote, reassignment with significantly different responsibilities, or a decision causing a significant change in benefits." Burlington Indus., Inc. v. Ellerth, 524 U.S. 742, 761, 118 S. Ct. 2257, 141 L. Ed. 2d 633 (1998). The elimination of the Inventory Specialist position, reassignment to the Procurement Specialist position and eventual elimination of the Procurement Specialist position is prima facie evidence that Plaintiff suffered an adverse employment action. The City's arguments for the reasons why these employment decisions were made are better considered as legitimate non-discriminatory reasons and will be considered under that framework.
Next, the City argues that Plaintiff has failed to meet the third element of a prima facie case for disability retaliation, i.e., causal connection between Plaintiff's protected activity and the adverse employment actions. At the prima facie stage, Plaintiff "must produce evidence sufficient to raise [*26]  the inference that her protected activity was the likely reason for the adverse [employment] action." Carvalho-Grevious v. Delaware State Univ., 851 F.3d 249, 259 (3d Cir. 2017) (emphasis and alteration in original) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). In meeting this burden, a plaintiff can rely on a "broad array of evidence to demonstrate the causal link between [the] protected activity and the adverse [employment] action taken." Marra v. Philadelphia Hous. Auth., 497 F.3d 286, 302 (3d Cir. 2007), as amended (Aug. 28, 2007) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). Such evidence includes an "employer's inconsistent explanation for taking an adverse employment action, . . . a pattern of antagonism, . . . or temporal proximity unusually suggestive of retaliatory motive[.]" Carvalho-Grevious v. Delaware State Univ., 851 F.3d 249, 260 (3d Cir. 2017) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). Likewise, the proffered evidence viewed in totality "may suffice to raise the inference." Kachmar v. SunGard Data Sys., Inc., 109 F.3d 173, 177 (3d Cir. 1997).
Here, no reasonable juror could conclude that Plaintiff sufficiently raised the inference of retaliatory animus necessary for a prima facie showing of a causal connection. The record is undisputed that the City maintained at all times that the Procurement Specialist and Inventory Specialist positions were going to be eliminated because the new mayoral administration sought to automate clerical [*27]  positions, so Plaintiff cannot rely on any purported inconsistency in the City's explanation for eliminating these positions. Plaintiff does not argue a pattern of antagonism, but rather argues that the temporal proximity constitutes causation.
As to Plaintiff's claim that her Inventory Specialist position was eliminated due to the City's retaliation of her ADA protected activities, Plaintiff's position of Inventory Specialist was eliminated in mid-2015 before she ever suffered her concussion and fell under the purview of the ADA. It is undisputed that Plaintiff suffered her concussion in September 2015 after she accepted the new Procurement Specialist position. Therefore, Plaintiff has failed to raise any inference that she was retaliated against by eliminating her position as Inventory Specialist because of on her disability. Therefore, it is respectfully recommended that judgment be entered for the City on this claim.
As for Plaintiff's claim that her position of Procurement Specialist was eliminated in retaliation for engaging in protected activity under the ADA, Plaintiff has not adduced sufficient evidence from which a reasonable factfinder could determine that her engagement in [*28]  protected activity was the likely reason that the position was eliminated. Plaintiff alleges that because her position was eliminated during the pendency of this lawsuit, that in and of itself constitutes temporal proximity. "[M]ere passage of time is not legally conclusive proof against retaliation." Robinson v. Southeastern Pa. Transp. Auth., 982 F.2d 892, 894 (3d Cir.1993). See also Krouse, 126 F.3d at 504 (employee's return to work after employee engaged in protected activity with no evidence of antagonism or retaliatory animus does not establish temporal proximity prong to find causation). The fact that her position was eliminated while this lawsuit was pending does not in and of itself constitute causation. Plaintiff to points to no record evidence showing any evidence suggestive that the likely reason for the City eliminating the Procurement Specialist position was because of her filing EEOC charges and this lawsuit regarding her disability. Accordingly, Plaintiff has failed to establish a prima facie showing of causation and it is respectfully recommended that judgment be entered in the City's favor on this claim.
Even assuming that Plaintiff could establish causation for the elimination of the Procurement Specialist position, she has failed to show pretext.
Under the McDonnell [*29]  Douglas burden shifting framework, in the second step of the analysis, the burden shifts to the City to produce evidence that its decision to eliminate Plaintiff's Procurement Specialist position were legitimate and non-discriminatory.
The City "satisfies its burden of production by introducing evidence which, taken as true, would permit the conclusion that there was a nondiscriminatory reason for the unfavorable employment decision." Fuentes v. Perskie, 32 F.3d 759, 763 (3d Cir. 1994) (citations omitted). The City "need not prove that the tendered reason actually motivated its behavior, as throughout this burden-shifting paradigm the ultimate burden of proving intentional discrimination always rests with the plaintiff. . . . Once the employer answers its relatively light burden by articulating a legitimate reason for the unfavorable employment decision, the burden of production rebounds to the plaintiff, who must now show by a preponderance of the evidence that the employer's explanation is pretextual (thus meeting the plaintiff's burden of persuasion)." Id. at 763. (internal citations omitted).
Here, the City has met its burden of introducing evidence of a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for eliminating the positions that Plaintiff held [*30]  — that it was due to efforts by the new mayoral administration to automate clerical positions within the system, including the Inventory Specialist and Procurement Specialist positions. Therefore, the third step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis is employed and the burden of production shifts back to Plaintiff to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the City's explanation of eliminating the Inventory and Procurement Specialist positions was pretextual.11
To show pretext, Plaintiff must discredit her employer's articulated reasons for her termination by demonstrating "such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, incoherencies, or contradictions in the employer's proffered legitimate reasons for its action that a reasonable factfinder could rationally find them unworthy of credence and hence infer that the employer did not act for the asserted nondiscriminatory reasons." Fuentes, 32 F.3d at 765 (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). Plaintiff must show that the City's proffered reasons were just not wrong, but that they were so plainly wrong that they could not have been the City's real reason to take such an employment action. Keller v. Orix Credit All., Inc., 130 F.3d 1101, 1109 (3d Cir. 1997). To meet this burden, Plaintiff [*31]  must point to record evidence showing "(1) that the proffered reasons had no basis in fact[;] (2) that the proffered reasons did not actually motivate [the act;] or (3) that they were insufficient to motivate discharge." Petrikonis v. Wilkes-Barre Hosp. Co., No. 11-280, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 155487, 2013 WL 5877000, at *7 (M.D.Pa. Oct. 30, 2013) (quoting Harding v. Careerbuilder, LLC, 168 Fed.Appx. 535, 538 (3d Cir.2006)) aff'd, 582 Fed.Appx. 126 (3d Cir.2014). Plaintiff is not required to show that the City acted with a discriminatory purpose, nor is Plaintiff required to show any additional evidence beyond her prima facie case. Proudfoot v. Arnold Logistics, LLC, 59 F. Supp. 3d 697, 705 (M.D. Pa. 2014), aff'd, No. 14-4703, 629 Fed. Appx. 303, 2015 WL 5881530 (3d Cir. Oct. 8, 2015) (citations omitted).
Plaintiff has offered no evidence that would lead a reasonable factfinder to reasonably infer that the City terminated Plaintiff's employment for any other reason but for the fact that it was eliminating clerical-based positions within the City for automation reasons. Plaintiff argues that she was told that she would not be retained while there was an active lawsuit. Supporting this factual scenario, Plaintiff submitted an affidavit authored on August 12, 2019 and disclosed to opposing counsel for the first time when Plaintiff submitted it for consideration with her response to the City's summary judgment motion on December 12, 2019. (ECF No. 140 at 1-2). Discovery closed in this matter on 6/19/2019. (ECF No. 92). An affidavit [*32]  is not newly discovered evidence and this affidavit was authored following the close of discovery. Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 37(c)(1) provides that "[i]f a party fails to provide information . . . as required by Rule 26(a) or (e), the party is not allowed to use that information or witness to supply evidence on a motion, at a hearing, or at a trial, unless the failure was substantially justified or is harmless." Substantial justification exists where there is "a genuine dispute about whether the party was required to make the disclosure." Kacian v. Brennan, No. 3:12-cv-102, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 32629, 2017 WL 933142, at *3 (W.D. Pa. Mar. 8, 2017). See also United States v. Brace, 334 F.R.D. 472, 478 (W.D. Pa. 2020). There is no dispute that Plaintiff was required to disclosure her own affidavit prior to the close of discovery. Further, the failure to disclose evidence is harmless only "if it involves an honest mistake, coupled with sufficient knowledge by the other party of the material that has not been produced." Smith v. Allstate Ins. Co., 912 F. Supp. 2d 242, 249 (W.D. Pa. 2012). Failure to disclose Plaintiff's own affidavit until after the close of discovery at for the first time at the summary judgment stage is not harmless. Plaintiff has deprived the City the opportunity to conduct any discovery into the allegations set forth in the affidavit and discovery has closed which inhibits the City's ability to cure any prejudice. [*33]  Plaintiff may not at the last minute produce an affidavit recounting facts she has ostensibly known for years to defend a summary judgment motion. Elena Myers Court v. Loews Philadelphia Hotel, Inc., No. CV 16-4848, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 206378, 2017 WL 6406458, at *5 (E.D. Pa. Dec. 15, 2017). Accordingly, the court will not consider Plaintiff's affidavit (ECF No. 125-2) in considering the pending motions for summary judgment.12 Plaintiff has offered no evidence that calls into question the City's proffered reason to eliminate the Procurement Specialist position was anything other than due to the City's decision to automate clerical positions within the City. Accordingly, Plaintiff has failed to meet her burden of showing pretext and it is respectfully recommended that judgment be entered in the City's favor for her ADA retaliation claims (Counts I and II).

3. Race and Sex/Gender Discrimination under the PHRA (Counts III, VII)13
Plaintiff alleges that she suffered racial and sex discrimination in violation of the PHRA when the City hired Mr. Forsythe, a white male, as the Fixed Asset Manager and gave Plaintiff's job duties to him, which Plaintiff alleges resulted in a failure to promote and a demotion. SAC (ECF No. 120 at ¶ 65). Additionally, Plaintiff alleges that [*34]  she was paid less than "similarly situated male counterparts in her position as auditor." Id. at ¶ 71.
As to Plaintiff's claim that she was passed over for a promotion and demoted, the City argues that Plaintiff has failed to make a prima facie case and that it had legitimate non-discriminatory reasons for making these decisions.
Where a plaintiff alleges an adverse employment action for the failure to promote, the plaintiff carries "the initial burden . . . of establishing a prima facie case of discrimination." McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802. A plaintiff establishes a prima facie case by demonstrating: (1) she belongs to a protected class; (2) that she applied and was qualified for a job for which the employer was seeking applicants; (3) that despite her qualifications, she was rejected; and (4) after her rejection, the position remained open and the employer continued to seek applicants from individuals with her qualifications. Fuentes, 32 F.3d at 763 (quoting McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802).
As to Plaintiff's claim for failure to promote her to the Fixed Asset Manager position, it is undisputed that she never applied for the position although it was publicly posted. Plaintiff dismisses this fact by arguing that other employees told her that the City was not hiring [*35]  for that position, so that is why she never applied. However, this does not dispute the fact that the position was publicly posted and available for applications. The fact that Plaintiff did not think they were accepting applications does not dispute the fact that the City was publicly accepting applications for this position. Therefore, no reasonable jury could conclude that Plaintiff applied for the position of Fixed Asset Manager and demonstrated the prima facie case for race discrimination for failing to promote/hire for the Fixed Asset Manager position. It is therefore respectfully recommended that judgment be entered in the City's favor for this claim.14
As to Plaintiff's claim that she was demoted by having her job duties given to Mr. Forsythe when he began his position of Fixed Asset Manager and her reassignment to the Procurement Specialist position, Plaintiff has failed to establish a prima facie adverse employment action.
Where a plaintiff alleges an adverse employment action based upon altered job duties, the "core inquiry is whether a reasonable jury could determine that the employee's employment was substantially worsened." Jakomas v. City of Pittsburgh, 342 F. Supp. 3d 632, 643 (W.D. Pa. 2018) (citations omitted). If an "employee's salary, [*36]  reporting requirements, and general duties remain the same, there is typically insufficient evidence of an adverse employment action." Id. (citing Fiorentini v. William Penn Sch. Dist., 150 F.Supp.3d 559, 567 (E.D. Pa. 2016)). While the employee does not need to show a reduction in pay or benefits to show an adverse employment action, the employee must show that her employment was substantially worsened by involving, for example, "different working conditions, status, skill, and authority." Bearley v. Friendly Ice Cream Corp., 322 F.Supp.2d 563, 577 (M.D. Pa. 2004). See Jakomas, 342 F. Supp. 3d at 643 (temporary promotion to acting manager and assumption of additional duties and subsequent demotion to previous title and wages does not constitute an adverse employment action).
As for Plaintiff's claim that she suffered an adverse employment action when she was demoted when her job duties were taken from her and given to Mr. Forsythe when he took his management positions, such a claim is not supported by the record. The record is clear that Mr. Forsythe's predecessor was terminated because the City originally intended to eliminate that position. After the City eliminated the Fixed Asset Manager position, it delegated those responsibilities to other City employees, including Plaintiff. The City then determined that the Fixed Asset Manager position was necessary and [*37]  re-created the position. After Mr. Forsythe was hired, the duties previously delegated to other City employees, including Plaintiff, were given to Mr. Forsythe as the Fixed Asset Manager. This temporary restructuring of the Fixed Asset Manager position does not constitute an adverse employment action against Plaintiff. Accordingly, it is respectfully recommended that summary judgment be entered in favor of the City on this claim.
As for Plaintiff's claim that she suffered an adverse employment action when she transitioned from Inventory Specialist to Procurement Specialist, such a claim is not supported by the record. It is undisputed that Plaintiff did not suffer a reduction in pay or benefits when she transitioned from Inventory Specialist to Procurement Specialist. There is also no record evidence that her job responsibilities were so materially altered so as to set her up only for failure. Plaintiff does not point to any job responsibilities for which Plaintiff was not qualified to be completing in her role as Procurement Specialist. In fact, the position was created specifically for Plaintiff and her qualifications. Accordingly, no reasonable juror could conclude that Plaintiff [*38]  suffered from an adverse employment action when she was transferred into the role of Procurement Specialist and it is respectfully recommended that summary judgment be granted in favor of the City on this claim.
As for Plaintiff's remaining claim that she was paid less than a white-male auditor, this claim also fails because she has not alleged that she held the role or completed duties as an auditor. An employee may suffer an adverse employment action by being paid less than someone not in a protected class for equal work. The crux of an unequal pay claim is that the employee is being paid less for equal work. To establish a prima facie case of discriminatory pay, Plaintiff must demonstrate that she was "performing work substantially equal" to white and/or male employees who were compensated at a higher rate than she was. Aman v. Cort Furniture Rental Corp., 85 F.3d 1074, 1087 (3d Cir. 1996) (citations omitted). While Plaintiff claims that the City hired Peter McDevitt, a white male, as a Fixed Asset Analyst and paid him more than Plaintiff for the same duties that Plaintiff performed as an Inventory Specialist, Plaintiff does not support this conclusory statement with any record evidence. Plaintiff does not provide any information regarding what her [*39]  duties were compared to what the duties of a Fixed Asset Analyst were. In comparison, the record evidence supports a finding that the Fixed Asset Analyst position required more decisional duties and was a more senior role than an Inventory Specialist and that the only overlapping duty between the two positions was data entry of City assets. It must also be noted here that a court is not required to scour "records and transcripts, without specific guidance, in order to construct specific findings of fact" to support Plaintiff's claims. Holland v. New Jersey Dept. of Corrections, 246 F.3d 267, 285 (3d Cir.2001). Moreover, Plaintiff's argument that she should have been paid as an auditor because she submitted a JAQ arguing to the City that she should be paid more, and the City's failure to pay her more does not constitute an adverse employment action. To so find would make every rebuffed request for a raise an actionable claim. Accordingly, it is respectfully recommended that judgment be entered in the City's favor for Plaintiff's claims of race and sex/gender discrimination (Counts III and VII).
ii. Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment15
Although it is recommended that the City's motion for summary judgment be granted in its entirety, obviating the need to address [*40]  Plaintiff's motion for summary judgment, Plaintiff's motion nonetheless fails on the merits.
First, Plaintiff argues that because the City canceled meetings with her to find her another position after the Procurement Specialist position was eliminated because she filed a lawsuit is direct evidence of retaliation and she is entitled to summary judgment.
First, these allegations are not set forth in Plaintiff's complaint and are not connected to any of her pending claims. Plaintiff was given the opportunity to amend her complaint after the close of all discovery and did so. She did not include such allegations in her complaint and they should not be considered here. See Premier Comp Sols., LLC v. UPMC, No. 19-1838, ___ F.3d ___, ___, 2020 WL 4668235, at *2 (3d Cir. Aug. 12, 2020) (a party must show good cause to amend a complaint after a court deadline by showing due diligence). Even if Plaintiff's allegations were properly raised, Plaintiff has not provided any legal basis that would entitle to her to judgment as a matter of law for the City's decision to not meet with her to discuss her continued employment. Accordingly, it is respectfully recommended that Plaintiff's motion be denied in this respect.
Next Plaintiff argues that she is entitled to summary judgment for her claim related to the City's [*41]  failure to promote Plaintiff to the Fixed Assets Manager position because Jennifer Sample-Prescutti's testimony at her deposition contradicts other record evidence. First, to grant summary judgment because contradictory evidence exists would force the court to make credibility determinations, which is wholly inappropriate for a court to do. Notwithstanding, any alleged contradiction is immaterial, as it is undisputed that the City publicly posted the Fixed Assets Manager position. Plaintiff's argument is therefore rejected.
Lastly, Plaintiff argues that she is entitled to summary judgment for her claim related to the City's failure to promote her to the Fixed Assets Manager position because she claims she was told that the position was not going to be filled. However, undisputed record evidence shows that the City publicly posted the Fixed Assets Manager position, as explained supra and Plaintiff's argument is rejected.
d. Conclusion
Based on the foregoing, it is respectfully recommended that Defendant's motion for summary judgment be granted in its entirety and Plaintiff's motion for summary judgment be denied in its entirety. Therefore, pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(B) and (C), Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 72, and the Local Rules for Magistrates, [*42]  the parties have until September 3, 2020 to file objections to this report and recommendation. Unless Ordered otherwise by the District Judge, responses to objections are due September 10, 2020. Failure to file timely objections may constitute a waiver of any appellate rights. Brightwell v. Lehman, 637 F.3d 187, 193 n. 7 (3d Cir. 2011).
Dated: August 20, 2020.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Cynthia Reed Eddy
Cynthia Reed Eddy
Chief United States Magistrate Judge


End of Document

