Johnson v. Sterilmed, Inc.
United States District Court for the Central District of California
May 18, 2015, Decided; May 18, 2015, Filed
CV 14-1532 PSG (AJWx)

Reporter
2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 200274 *; 2015 WL 13918815
Ronell Johnson v. Sterilmed, Inc.
Counsel:  [*1] Attorneys for Plaintiff(s): Not Present.
Attorneys for Defendant(s): Not Present.
Judges: Philip S. Gutierrez, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Philip S. Gutierrez
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES - GENERAL

Proceedings (In Chambers): Order GRANTING IN PART and DENYING IN PART Defendant's motion for summary judgment.
Pending before the Court is Defendant Sterilmed, Inc.'s ("Sterilmed" or "Defendant") motion for summary judgment. Dkt. # 23. The Court held oral argument on the matter on May 18, 2015. After considering the arguments made during oral argument as well as in the moving, opposing, and reply papers, the Court GRANTS IN PART AND DENIES IN PART the motion.
I. Background1
This case arises out of Sterilmed's employment and termination of Plaintiff Ronell Johnson ("Johnson" or "Plaintiff"). Sterilmed - a company in the business of reprocessing medical devices - employed Plaintiff as an on-site technician from July 29, 2008 until October 29, 2013. Declaration of Cindy Bjerke ("Bjerke Decl."), Exs. D, E, I; Plaintiff's Response to Defendant's Statement of Uncontroverted Facts ("Pff.'s Response to Def.'s SUF") ¶¶ 1, 5; Defendant's Response to Plaintiff's Statement of Uncontroverted Facts ("Def.'s Response to Pff.'s SUF") [*2]  ¶ 86. Plaintiff alleges, inter alia, that Defendant took various discriminatory actions against him because of his disability and because he is African American and that it failed to pay him accurate wages. See generally Opp.
As an on-site technician, Plaintiff was responsible for collecting medical devices used at hospitals and surgery centers, cleaning them, and shipping them to Sterilmed for reprocessing. Bjerke Decl., Ex. J; Declaration of Ronell Johnson ("Johnson Decl.") ¶¶ 17-20. Specifically, Johnson testified in deposition that "[e]ach [operating room] or each department that [was] reprocessing with [Defendant] . . . would have a bin placed in the room so that [the medical staff] [was] able to throw [the devices] in as they finished the surgeries." Declaration of Mindy S. Novick ("Novick Decl.), Ex. A ("Johnson Depo.") 46:15-20. These devices included trocars, harmonic scalpels, bits, burrs, blades, clip appliers, and compression sleeves, but were not supposed to include needles, scalpels, or broken glass. Johnson Depo 43:15-44:3; Pff.'s Response to Def.'s SUF ¶ 10. After collecting the bins, Plaintiff would wash the devices, place them in the bins, and ship them to Defendant [*3]  for reprocessing. Johnson Depo. 47:18-48:8. Plaintiff states in his declaration that some locations did not have an area for him to clean the devices, so he would take the bins "to [his] house . . . and clean the contaminated devices in [his] backyard." Johnson Decl. ¶¶ 29, 30.
After completing training at Sterilmed's facility in Minnesota, Plaintiff was assigned to work as an on-site technician in hospitals and surgery centers in Southern California; the centers were located in downtown Los Angeles, the San Gabriel Valley, Glendale, Santa Monica, Beverly Hills, and the San Fernando Valley. Johnson Decl. ¶¶ 25-31.
Plaintiff testified during his deposition that when he began working for Sterilmed he worked forty hours a week and serviced between ten and fifteen facilities that he visited two to three times a week. Johnson Depo. 32:7-21. Plaintiff would "try to come up with [his] own schedule" but would still have to run it by his supervisor. Id. 33:11-18. Johnson also stated during his deposition that the facilities did not have a particular time when they wanted him to pick up the bins and that sometimes after attempting to get them, he had to "go back the next day to those facilities" [*4]  to retrieve the bins and that there were times when he went to pick up bins at facilities and found out that there were no devices to pick up. Id. 42:5-22; 52:14-19. Plaintiff devised his own collection route. 57:10-14. Plaintiff also stated that he was responsible for reporting the hours that he worked and does not dispute that during the times that he was a full-time employee for Sterilmed he consistently reported that he worked "8:00 to 4:00" shifts. Id. 38:3-5; Pff.'s Response to Def.'s SUF ¶ 23.
Although Plaintiff does not dispute that he consistently reported that he worked eight hours a day, he declared that it took him at least nine hours a day to complete his weekly collections. See Johnson Decl. ¶ 30. He also stated in his declaration that he was responsible for much work that could only be done at home in the evenings - for example, Plaintiff claims that he had to send confirmation emails to Sterilmed's customers, was "required to prepare periodic department business reviews on each customer to submit to corporate headquarters," and to "attend by phone a monthly business meeting" that ran for ninety minutes. Id. ¶¶ 34-36. Because of these, and other tasks, Plaintiff contends [*5]  that he was working fifty hours a week and was only compensated for forty from September 2008 until November of 2012. Id. ¶ 37. Plaintiff claims that he was told by his managers DeLena Neal and Brad Smith, as well as a senior on-site technician Roxana Parkes, to fill out his time cards recording only eight hours and that "overtime had to be preapproved and that it would not be approved if requested." Id. ¶ 33.
When Plaintiff was hired, he was scheduled to work for forty hours, and he was considered a full-time employee, but his status changed from a full-time to a part-time employee several times during his employment with Sterilmed. According to Cindy Bjerke, one of Plaintiff's supervisors, an employee's status can change from full-time to part-time if Defendant loses an account or stops collecting certain products. Novice Decl., Ex. C ("Bjerke Decl.") 48:23-49:6. Plaintiff, himself, testified that although he did not know what would precipitate taking accounts from employees he has "seen Sterilmed take people's hours all the time from them. So everybody is always, probably, somewhat stressed out on the job. You don't know if you're going to be full time - be full time today or part [*6]  time tomorrow. It's a very stressful environment to work in." Johnson Depo. 93:13-21.
In October 2008, for example, Plaintiff's employee status changed from a full-time employee to a part-time employee. Bjerke Decl., Ex. N. When Plaintiff became a part-time employee, he was no longer eligible for Company sponsored basic life insurance or medical and dental insurance. Id. Plaintiff conceded that they cut his hours after they "removed a couple accounts" so he did not need to collect from those hospitals or surgery centers anymore. Johnson Depo. 40:19-41:2.
After Sterilmed added accounts - giving him more facilities to service - in February of 2009, Plaintiff's employee status changed from part-time to full-time as his hours increased from fifty hours per week to eighty hours per week. Bjerke Decl., Ex. O; Pff.'s Response to Def.'s SUF ¶¶ 30, 31. As a full-time employee, Plaintiff was, again eligible for company sponsored life insurance as well as medical and dental insurance. Pff.'s Response to Def.'s SUF ¶ 32.
A. Comments Made by Bjerke
In June 2012, Cindy Bjerke ("Bjerke") became Plaintiff's supervisor. Johnson Decl. ¶ 42. Plaintiff declares that on that same month Bjerke, Brad Smith ("Smith"), [*7]  who had been promoted to a regional manager, and Walt Porterfield ("Porterfield"), Plaintiff's account manager, spent two days going with Plaintiff to his "accounts" to "review the operations." Id. On the second day, Plaintiff arrived to one of the facilities in his car - a black 528i BMW - while the others arrived in a second car. Id. ¶ 43. As they walked down the corridor of the facility, a hospital, Plaintiff remembers Bjerke referring to his car as the "black bitch." Id. Although Plaintiff admits that he did not see her, she was walking behind him and Plaintiff recognized her voice. Id. He states that both he and Smith looked at her in disbelief. Id. According to Plaintiff, they "visited approximately five additional accounts later that day" and "at each stop, Cindy Bjerke would refer to [his] car as the 'black bitch.'" Id. ¶ 44. Plaintiff also submits an email that Bjerke sent him where she wrote, "You ROCK!! And so does BB!" Johnson Decl., Ex. 11.
B. Needle Stick Incident
Around three months later, on September 27, 2012, Plaintiff suffered an accident - he was pricked by a needle in one of his collection bins while servicing the Community Memorial hospital in Ventura, California [*8]  ("Community Memorial"). Pff.'s Response to Def.'s SUF ¶¶ 54, 55; Johnson Decl. ¶¶ 49, 50. This is not the first time that Plaintiff had seen needles at bins collected from Community Memorial.
Plaintiff declares that since he "had taken over the Community Memorial account in February 2012, there had been a problem with putting sharps [sic] instruments, hypodermic needles, in the Sterilmed bins at the hospital." Johnson Decl. ¶ 46. According to Plaintiff, he constantly reminded the staff at Community Memorial that this practice was unacceptable and placed "NO SHARPS" signs on the Sterilmed bins, but the problem continued. Id. ¶¶ 46, 47. Plaintiff declares that he notified Porterfield who told him that he did not want to make an issue out of it because it was a big account. Id. ¶ 47. Plaintiff continued to tell Porterfield as well as Bjerke, but according to Plaintiff, they were both non-responsive. Id. ¶ 47, 48.
After the needle stick incident, Plaintiff tried to call Bjerke, but was unable to reach her, and after calling Sterilmed's human resources department, was told to seek medical attention. Id.¶¶ 52, 53. Plaintiff called his doctor's office and was told to go see his doctor immediately. [*9]  Id. ¶ 53. The doctor told Plaintiff that he had potentially been exposed to the HIV virus, the Hepatitis C virus, or some other unknown disease, that he had to be tested for six months, and that he should take antiviral HIV medication as a precaution. Id. Plaintiff felt stressed and anxious. Johnson Depo. 101:10-14. Plaintiff notes that after he started the antiviral HIV medication he "developed abdominal pain, nausea and diarrhea" and did not know "if the pain was a side effect of the medication, or if it was the first signs of HIV;" he became anxious, irritable, and depressed. Id.¶ 57.
After the incident, Plaintiff took the rest of the day off and told Sterilmed that he would be taking the next day off as well. Id.¶ 54. Plaintiff declared that Bjerke called him "wanting to know who was going to cover [his] assigned schedule" and seemed to not care about the incident. Id.
Plaintiff returned to work a few days after the incident and when he picked up bins at Community Memorial he, again, found sharp devices in the Sterilmed bins. Id. ¶ 56; Pff.'s Response to Def.'s SUF ¶¶ 62, 63. He complained to Bjerke and Porterfield and was told not to worry about it and that they would take care [*10]  of it. Johnson Decl. ¶ 58. Plaintiff states that he was "told that Walt Porterfield would schedule an in service training session with the hospital staff to remind them to put the sharp instruments into the sharps containers and not in the Sterilmed bins." Id. Plaintiff, however, wanted "stronger steps to be taken to protect [his] health." Id. Specifically, he wanted "the hospital to be told that if they could not comply with simple public health standards, Sterilmed would no longer service the account." Id.
Instead, Plaintiff noticed sharp objects when he returned to Community Memorial and, once again, contacted Bjerke and Porterfield. Id.¶ 59. According to Plaintiff, a few days after he contacted them, he received a counseling memo from Bjerke in which she wrote that they expected the following "moving forward": (1) that Plaintiff "[p]erform one AM shift or In-Service a month;"2 (2) that Plaintiff identity the key contacts at Community Memorial; (3) that Plaintiff "continue to grow [his relationship] with [the key contacts] to include ongoing education;" (4) that he identify the persons at Community Memorial to send weekly education thank you emails; (5) that he begin sending thank [*11]  you emails immediately; and (6) that he report his hours accurately because although his entries reflected that he began work at 8am, he stated during a call that he did not begin work until after dropping off his daughter at 8:30am. Johnson Decl. ¶ 60, Ex. 36.
Thinking that Bjerke did not care if Community Memorial ever stopped putting sharp objects in the Sterilmed bins, Plaintiff called the "Ventura County Health Care Agency, Environmental Waste Department and made a complaint." Id. ¶ 61.
A week after Plaintiff made his complaint, Porterfield contacted him and told him that Community Memorial no longer wanted him to collect bins there. Id. ¶ 63. Later, plaintiff writes, he was told to only pick up certain devices, and eventually to pick up the operating room bins and to ship them without first cleaning them. Id.
Plaintiff writes that as all of this was happening, his health continued to deteriorate. Id. ¶ 66. Plaintiff was diagnosed with gastritis and he started seeing a psychologist to help with his "anxiety and depression." Id.
C. Employment Status Change
On October 23, 2012, Plaintiff sent Bjerke an email with a list of ten facilities that needed to come "off his [*12]  cluster" after she asked him to identity inactive accounts. Pff.'s Response to Def.'s SUF ¶33. A week later, Bjerke told Plaintiff that she would be removing those ten accounts from his cluster and assigned a few additional accounts. Id. ¶¶ 35, 36. After these accounts were removed from Plaintiff's "cluster" he was told that his employment status would change from full-time to part-time during a meeting held on November 7, 2012. Id.¶¶ 37, 38; Johnson Decl. ¶ 70. As a part-time employee, Plaintiff no longer had medical insurance and would lose his health benefits including the health benefits he "was using and needed for HIV testing." Johnson Decl. ¶¶ 70, 76, 77. Plaintiff was "in a state of shock" and tried to explain his situation to Bjerke, but "she cut [him] off." Johnson Decl. ¶ 70.
According to Plaintiff, the demands at work did not change because he was still required to service a full load even after those accounts were removed. Plaintiff's Statement of Uncontroverted Facts ("Pff.'s SUF") ¶ 106; Johnson Decl. ¶ 70 ("I wanted to tell her that I still had a full time cluster and route, with the large hospitals that I serviced and the remaining surgery centers that had devices."). [*13]  According to Plaintiff, Defendant imposed a new schedule where he went to certain facilities less often which lead to bins overflowing and angry hospital staff. Id. ¶ 75. Although Plaintiff says that he had no control over the new schedule, he was concerned because "the on-site technician was always blamed for overflowing bins at their facilities and if the problem persisted it would be considered grounds for termination." Id.
With no health insurance, Plaintiff was unable to see his doctor or his psychologist and his health continued to deteriorate; his abdominal pain became unbearable and he became "increasingly depressed." Id. ¶¶ 76, 78, 80.
D. Medical Leave
On December 6, 2012, Plaintiff went on a medical leave and subsequently began to receive state disability benefits and eventually qualified for his wife's medical insurance. Id. ¶ 82. Julie Triplett ("Triplett"), in Defendant's Human Resources department, sent Plaintiff paperwork for leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act ("FMLA"), but Plaintiff did not complete it. Pff.'s Response to Def.'s SUF ¶ 71. Defendant claims that it nonetheless treated Plaintiff's leave as a job-protected FMLA leave. Def.'s Statement of Uncontroverted [*14]  Facts ("Def.'s SUF") ¶ 72.
On February 8, 2013, Triplett sent Plaintiff a letter notifying him that his FMLA leave was to expire later that month, to which Plaintiff responded by sending in a form from one of his doctors. Pff.'s Response to Def.'s SUF ¶¶ 74, 75. Defendant extended Plaintiff's leave through May 13, 2013. Id. ¶76. On May 9, 2013, Plaintiff sent Defendant another letter from his doctor requesting an extension to the leave and Defendant granted leave through July 10, 2013. Id. ¶ 77. Triplett contacted Plaintiff again on July 29, 2013 regarding his work status. Id. ¶ 78. Defendant received another doctor's note from Plaintiff requesting an extension through October 28, 2013. Id.¶ 79.
E. Termination
Defendant mailed Plaintiff a letter on October 17, 2013 letting him know that they had granted his previous request, but that no further leave would be available under the circumstances. Id. ¶ 80. According to Plaintiff, he did not receive this letter - which was mailed by UPS rather than first class - until October 27, 2013 and was, therefore, unable to get a doctor's note. Johnson Decl. ¶ 86. On October 29, 2013, after not hearing anything from Plaintiff, Defendant terminated [*15]  his employment. Pff.'s Response to Def.'s SUF ¶ 81.
On February 28, 2014, Plaintiff filed a First Amended Complaint ("FAC") against Defendant asserting the following causes of action: (1) race discrimination in violation of the California Fair Employment and Housing Act, Cal. Gov. Code § 12900, et seq. ("FEHA"); (2) disability discrimination in violation of FEHA; (3) failure to investigate and take remedial action in violation of FEHA; (4) retaliation in violation of FEHA; (5) failure to reasonably accommodate in violation of FEHA; (6) failure to engage in the interactive process in violation of FEHA; (7) wrongful termination in violation of public policy; (8) failure to pay overtime in violation of Cal. Labor Code § 510; (9) failure to provide meal and rest breaks in violation of Cal. Labor Code § 226.7; and (10) violation of Business and Professions Code § 17200 ("UCL"). FAC.
II. Legal Standard
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56(a) provides that a "court shall grant summary judgment if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). An issue of fact is genuinely disputed and material if it cannot be reasonably resolved in favor of either party and may affect the outcome of the suit. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 238 (1986); In re Barboza, 545 F.3d 702, 707 (9th Cir. 2008).
The party moving for summary judgment bears the initial burden of showing that there is no genuine issue [*16]  of material fact. See Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). "[M]ere allegation and speculation do not create a factual dispute for purposes of summary judgment." Nelson v. Pima Cmty. Coll., 83 F.3d 1075, 1081-82 (9th Cir. 1996) (citation omitted). A party asserting that a fact cannot be genuinely disputed must support that assertion by citing to "materials in the record, including depositions, documents, electronically stored information, affidavits or declarations, stipulations (including those made for purposes of the motion only), admissions, interrogatory answers, or other materials." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(1)(A).
If the non-movant will bear the burden of proof on an issue at trial, the moving party can satisfy its summary judgment burden by "'showing' - that is, pointing out to the district court - that there is an absence of evidence to support the nonmoving party's case." Celotex, 477 U.S. at 325. The non-moving party must then "come forth with evidence from which a jury could reasonably render a verdict in the non-moving party's favor." In re Oracle Corp. Sec. Litig., 627 F.3d 376, 387 (9th Cir. 2010). The non-moving party must set forth specific evidence showing that there is a genuine issue for trial, and "may not rest upon the mere allegations or denials of his pleading." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 256.
On summary judgment, the Court may not weigh conflicting evidence or make credibility determinations. Soremekun v. Thrifty Payless, Inc., 509 F.3d 978, 984 (9th Cir. 2007). It must draw [*17]  all reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 255; Soremekun, 509 F.3d at 984.
III. Discussion
Defendant argues that Plaintiff cannot establish the elements of any of his claims or "create a genuine triable issue of fact" and that, therefore, summary judgment in its favor is warranted. Mot. 9:18-23. The Court analyzes each argument in turn.
A. Discrimination in Violation of FEHA
Plaintiff contends that he suffered discrimination based on race and on his disability. Opp. 9:18-19:22.
California's FEHA provides in pertinent part: "It is an unlawful employment practice...(a) For an employer, because of the race, religious creed, color, national origin, ancestry, physical disability, mental disability, medical condition, ...marital status, sex, ...age, or sexual orientation of any person...to discharge the person from employment..." Cal. Gov. Code § 12940.
"Because of the similarity between state and federal employment discrimination laws, California courts look to pertinent federal precedent when applying [their] own statutes." Guz v. Bechtel Nat'l, Inc., 24 Cal. 4th 317, 354, 100 Cal. Rptr. 2d 352, 8 P.3d 1089 (2000). For example, California courts recognize the three-step "burden-shifting" framework articulated by the Supreme Court in McDonnell-Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). See id. Under that test, once Plaintiff makes out a prima facie [*18]  case for discrimination, the burden of production shifts to the employer to offer a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the challenged employment action. See Chuang v. Univ. of Cal. Davis, Bd. of Trustees 225 F.3d 1115, 1123-24 (9th Cir. 2000). After the employer does so, the burden shifts back to the plaintiff to show that the employer's articulated reason for the challenged action is pretextual. Id. at 1124.
However, "although the McDonnell Douglas burden shifting framework is a useful tool to assist plaintiffs at the summary judgment stage so that they may reach trial, nothing compels the parties to invoke the McDonnell Douglas presumption." McGinest v. GTE Serv. Corp., 360 F.3d 1103, 1122 (9th Cir. 2004) (internal quotations omitted). Instead, "when responding to a summary judgment motion, the plaintiff is presented with a choice regarding how to establish his or her case. [Plaintiff] may proceed by using the McDonnell Douglas framework, or alternatively, may simply produce direct or circumstantial evidence demonstrating that a discriminatory reason more likely than not motivated [his or her employer]." Id.

i. Race Discrimination
Plaintiff's race discrimination cause of action is grounded on his allegation that Defendant took certain actions - including, reducing his status to a part-time employee and eventually terminating him - against [*19]  him because he is African American. Opp. 9:18-13:6.
To establish a prima facie case of discrimination a plaintiff must show that "(1) he or she was a member of a protected class, (2) he or she was qualified for the position sought or was performing competently in the position held, (3) he or she suffered an adverse employment action, such as termination, demotion, or denial of an available job, and (4) some other circumstance suggests discriminatory motive." Guz v. Bechtel Nat. Inc., 24 Cal. 4th 317, 354, 100 Cal. Rptr. 2d 352, 8 P.3d 1089 (2000).
Defendant argues that it is entitled to summary judgment as to Plaintiff's first cause of action for race discrimination under the McDonnell Douglas framework because there is no evidence supporting a prima facie case of discrimination and Plaintiff cannot show that Defendant's articulated reasons for its actions were mere pretext. Mot. 10:16-13:13. Plaintiff responds to the motion to invoking both frameworks - the McDonnell Douglas framework and by arguing that there is direct evidence of race discrimination. Opp. 9:18-13:6.
Regardless of the framework utilized, after assessing the evidence submitted by the parties, the Court is convinced that summary judgment in favor of Defendant is appropriate as to this cause of action because [*20]  Plaintiff fails to show that there is any evidence such that a reasonable trier of fact could find that Defendant took actions against him because of his race. See McGinest, 360 F.3d at 1123 (regardless of whether Plaintiff uses the McDonnell Douglas framework, Plaintiff "must produce some evidence suggesting the [her employer's adverse action] was due in part or whole to discriminatory intent, and so must counter [her employer's] explanation" for the action); see also Chuang, 225 F.3d at 1127 ("a plaintiff can prove pretext in two ways: (1) indirectly, by showing that the employer's proffered explanation is unworthy of credence because it is internally inconsistent or otherwise not believable, or (2) directly, by showing that unlawful discrimination more likely motivated the employer") (internal quotation omitted).
The California Supreme Court recently clarified the extent of causation that Plaintiffs must prove to prevail on a FEHA claim. See Harris v. City of Santa Monica, 56 Cal. 4th 203, 232, 152 Cal. Rptr. 3d 392, 294 P.3d 49 (2013). To establish unlawful discrimination under FEHA, "the plaintiff must produce evidence sufficient to show that an illegitimate criterion was a substantial factor in the particular employment decision. Requiring the plaintiff to show that discrimination was a substantial motivating factor, rather [*21]  than simply a motivating factor, more effectively ensures that liability will not be imposed based on evidence of mere thoughts or passing statements unrelated to the disputed employment decision." Id. (internal quotation omitted) (emphasis in original). Plaintiff may support his theory of causation with either circumstantial or direct evidence. See id. ("the law generally makes no distinction between circumstantial and direct evidence"); see also Hicks v. KNTV Television, Inc., 160 Cal. App. 4th 994, 1003, 73 Cal. Rptr. 3d 240 (2008) (Plaintiff "has the burden to produce substantial evidence that the employer's stated nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse action was untrue or pretextual, or evidence the employer acted with a discriminatory animus, or a combination of the two, such that a reasonable trier of fact could conclude the employer engaged in intentional discrimination") (internal quotations omitted); Hicks v. KNTV Television, Inc., 160 Cal. App. 4th 994, 1003, 73 Cal. Rptr. 3d 240 (2008) (internal quotation omitted). "[S]peculation cannot be regarded as substantial responsive evidence." Martin v. Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., 29 Cal. App. 4th 1718, 1735, 35 Cal. Rptr. 2d 181 (1994).
Here, Plaintiff claims that Bjerke, his supervisor, subjected him to various adverse employment actions because of her "personal animus against Plaintiff, a person of color." Opp. 12:22-25. As outlined above, in June 2012, Plaintiff visited the facilities that [*22]  he serviced with Bjerke, Smith, and Porterfield. Johnson Decl. ¶ 42. It was during this visit that Bjerke called his car a black bitch. Id. A couple of days later, Bjerke sent him an email referring to BB. Id.,Ex. 11. Plaintiff offers no other evidence suggesting that Bjerke harbored racist feelings towards Plaintiff. Nevertheless, drawing all reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, the Court assumes that Bjerke's comments were racist and that her comments, alone, were discriminatory. Even then, Plaintiff fails to show how a reasonable fact finder could find that those comments are connected to the allegedly adverse employment actions.
Specifically, four months later, after Plaintiff was punctured by a needle at Community Memorial, Bjerke sent him a counseling email instructing him to grow his relationship with Defendant's key contact there. Id., Ex. 36. In November 2012, Bjerke cut Plaintiffs hours so that he became a part-time employee. Id. ¶ 70. Then Defendant terminated Plaintiff in October 2013 after he was on leave for ten and a half months. Pff.'s Response to Def.'s SUF ¶ 81. Looking at this timeline, and the lack of any evidence other than the June 2012 [*23]  comments, the Court does not see how Bjerke's comments are more than discriminatory thoughts unconnected to these employment actions.
The California Supreme Court is clear:
[S]ection 12940(a) does not purport to outlaw discriminatory thoughts, beliefs, or stray remarks that are unconnected to employment decisionmaking. Racist, sexist, or other biased comments...alone do not support a claim under section 12940(a), nor do bigoted thoughts or beliefs by themselves. Were it otherwise, the causation requirement in section 12940(a) would be eviscerated. Section 12940(a) does not prohibit discrimination "in the air." It prohibits discrimination that causes an employer "...to discharge the person from employment..."
Harris, 56 Cal. 4th at 231 (citing Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(a)).
The Court does not doubt that these comments were hurtful and made Plaintiff uncomfortable, but untethered to Defendant's employment actions, they constituted no more than discrimination "in the air" and are not sufficient to prevent summary judgment in favor of Defendant. Id. (citing with approval the caution that "statements by decisionmakers unrelated to the decision process itself" cannot establish, by itself, that improper bias was a motivating factor behind a particular employment decision) (quoting Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, 490 U.S. 228, 277, 109 S. Ct. 1775, 104 L. Ed. 2d 268 (1989) (conc. opn. of O'Connor, J.)). [*24] 
Accordingly, the Court GRANTS summary judgment in favor of Defendant as to Plaintiff's first cause of action for race discrimination in violation of FEHA.

ii. Disability Discrimination
Plaintiff claims that he was rendered disabled after he was punctured with a needle in September 2012. Opp. 13:22-14:10. Specifically, he alleges that he developed a fear of being stuck with a needle again. Id. According to Plaintiff, Defendant took the following adverse actions against him because of this disability: (1) Bjerke sent him a counseling memo where she instructed him to continue to grow his relationship with contacts at Community Memorial; (2) Bjerke cut his hours and Defendant changes his status to a part-time employee even though he still had a full-time workload; (3) Defendant denied Plaintiff's worker's compensation claim; and (4) Plaintiff was terminated. Id. 16:2-17:14.
To establish a prima facie case of disability discrimination under FEHA, Plaintiff must prove: (1) he suffered from a disability, or was regarded as suffering from a disability; (2) is otherwise qualified for employment; and (3) was subjected to an adverse employment action because of the disability or perceived disability. [*25]  Sandell v. Taylor-Listug, Inc., 188 Cal. App. 4th 297, 310, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 453 (2010); see also Swonke v. Sprint, Inc., 327 F. Supp. 2d 1128, 1133 (N.D. Cal. 2004). The parties analyze this cause of action under the McDonnell Douglas framework. See Mot. 13:14-1:22; Opp. 13:7-19:22.

1. Prima Facie Case of Discrimination
For purposes of this motion, Defendant concedes that Plaintiff suffered a disability under FEHA. Mot. 14 n.4. According to Defendant, however, Plaintiff has no evidence to support that the second and third elements of a disability discrimination cause of action. Id. 14:3-15:14.
Defendant argues that Plaintiff was not a qualified individual under FEHA because he was not medically released to return to work for over ten months. Id. 14:3-20. The Court agrees with Defendant that an individual's prolonged leave of absence, with no anticipated return date, could support that conclusion. See Swonke, 327 F Supp. 2d at 1133-1136 (finding that there was no genuine issue of material fact as to whether plaintiff was qualified under FEHA when plaintiff submitted multiple notes from his doctor representing that he was unable to return to work). Defendant's argument, however, assumes that the only adverse employment action that it took was terminating Plaintiff because he took this leave of absence. That is not the case.
Plaintiff argues that he was a qualified individual [*26]  when Bjerke sent him the counseling memo and when he became a part-time employee. See Opp. 15:1-11. Plaintiff's theory of liability is that these actions led to his leave, which culminated in his termination. The Court agrees with Plaintiff that there is sufficient evidence to create a genuine issue of fact regarding his status as a qualified individual. According to Plaintiff, his disability was the fear of being pricked by a needle again, and other than his fear of servicing facilities like Memorial Community, where the staff did not abide by industrial and regulatory standards, he was fully able to perform his tasks. Id.
Defendant's argument that there is no genuine issue of material as to the third element of a disability discrimination claim also fails. See Mot. 14:21-15:14. The Court disagrees with Defendant that "there is no evidence suggesting that Defendant subjected Plaintiff to an adverse employment action based on his disability." Id. 14:23-26. Defendant points out that it "immediately instructed Plaintiff to seek medical attention after learning about the September 27, 2012 needle stick incident." Id. 15:1-2. Even if that is true, there is also evidence that Plaintiff was [*27]  subjected to adverse employment actions soon after he made it clear to Bjerke that he feared being pricked by a needle again.
Plaintiff complained to Bjerke and to Porterfield several times about the needles in the Sterilmed bins from Community Memorial and declares that they were non-responsive. See Johnson Decl. ¶¶ 47, 48, 58. According to Johnson, at one point Porterfield told him that the Community Memorial account was a big account and that he did not want to make an issue out of it. Id. ¶ 47. The needle incident occurred on September 27, 2012, and shortly thereafter, on October 11, 2012, Bjerke sent him a counseling memo in which she instructed him to continue to grow his relationship with contacts at Community Memorial. Id., Ex. 36. This memo was sent after Plaintiff had complained multiple times of Community Memorial's continual failure to stop placing needles in the bins that Plaintiff collected. Then on November 7, 2012, Plaintiff's status was changed to a part-time employee. Id. ¶ 70. Plaintiff argues that this change came because of his disability - fear of being struck by a needle again - and Bjerke's hostility to his condition. Considering the many times that Plaintiff [*28]  complained about Community Memorial, and Porterfield's comment that this was a big account, the Court finds that there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Defendant took these actions due to Plaintiff's disability. This is especially so in light of the timing of these actions.
Accordingly, the Court finds that Plaintiff has sufficient evidence from which a reasonable fact trier could find that he has established a prima facie case of disability discrimination.
2. Legitimate, Non-Discriminatory Reasons for Challenged Employment Actions or Pretext
The burden now shifts to Defendant so show that these alleged adverse actions were taken for legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons. See Chuang, 225 F. 3d at 1123-24. If it does, Plaintiff must show that these reasons are pretextual. See id. at 1124. The Court will analyze both of these steps together.
As to the first alleged adverse employment action - the counseling memo from Bjerke - Defendant simply characterizes it as a "personnel decision" that "reflects Bjerke's work expectations for Plaintiff going forward." Reply 6:7-15. Although Defendant is correct that a subjective disagreement with an employer's decision does not automatically render that decision discriminatory, [*29]  here Defendant does not actually provide a reason for this action. Simply characterizing it as a personnel decision is not sufficient. Plaintiff has sufficient evidence that Defendant's reasons are pretextual. According to Plaintiff, the "in-service" marketing meetings that Bjerke instructs him to do had previously been considered ineffective. Opp. 18:3-5. Johnson also declares that Porterfield had the "primary responsibility of developing the contacts" at Community Memorial. John Decl.¶ 60. Lastly, Plaintiff declared that Bjerke falsely accused him of not entering his hours correctly; he explained that although his daughter's school started at 8:30, he dropped her off at 8am. See id. Defendant offers no explanation as to why this email was sent so soon after Plaintiff's needle incident. In light of these circumstances, Plaintiff has submitted sufficient evidence to support his contention that Defendant's reasons are prextextual.
Second, Defendant contends that the reason that Plaintiff became a part-time employee was that "ten accounts were removed from his cluster." Reply 6:16-19. Although this is a legitimate reason for the status change, Plaintiff has submitted sufficient evidence [*30]  to create a genuine issue of material fact as to whether this reason is mere pretext. As discussed above, the status change came very shortly after Plaintiff became disabled due to the needle incident. Furthermore, Plaintiff testified that during the conversation in which he was told that his employment status was going to change, he wanted to explain his situation to Bjerke, but was cut off.
Third, Plaintiff alleges that the third adverse employment action was Defendant's denial of his worker's compensation claim. Defendant does not address this argument and, therefore, fails to provide a legitimate reason for this action.
As to the fourth adverse employment action - Plaintiff's termination - the Court finds that Defendant did meet its burden of showing that the action was taken for legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons. After waiting over ten months, in which Plaintiff communicated with Defendant only through notes from his doctor, Defendant terminated his employment. The Court agrees with Defendant that it would be unreasonable for Defendant to hold Plaintiff's position open indefinitely. In response, Plaintiff argues that the fact that Defendant mailed a letter extending his disability [*31]  until October 29, 2013 via UPS, rather than by first class mail, shows that Defendant's reasons for terminating his employment were pretextual. Opp. 19:10-22. Plaintiff's argument is nonsensical. The fact that the letter arrived on October 27, 2013, and gave Plaintiff only two days to speak to his doctor, does not show that Defendant's actions were motivated by discriminatory intent.
Nevertheless, Defendant's argument that Plaintiff has no evidence to prevail on a disability discrimination claim fails.
Accordingly, Defendant's motion for summary judgment as to Plaintiff's second cause of action for disability discrimination under FEHA is DENIED to the extent that Plaintiff's claim is based on (1) the counseling memo; (2) the denial of worker's compensation; and (3) the status change to part-time employee. Defendant's motion is GRANTED to the extent that Plaintiff's claim is based on his termination.
B. Retaliation in Violation of FEHA
According to Plaintiff, Defendant took certain adverse employment actions against him in retaliation for his complaints regarding needles found in Sterilmed bins at Community Memorial. Opp. 20:14-22:3.
The elements of a retaliation claim under FEHA are: (1) [*32]  Plaintiff engaged in a protected activity; (2) plaintiff's employer subjected him to an adverse employment action; and (3) there was a casual link between the protected activity and the employer's action. Yanowitz v. L'Oreal USA, Inc., 36 Cal. 4th 1028, 1042, 32 Cal. Rptr. 3d 436, 116 P.3d 1123 (2005).
Defendant contends that summary judgment is warranted because Plaintiff has "absolutely no evidence to suggest that his reduced hours/benefits and termination were related to his alleged complaints." Mot. 17:6-10. The Court disagrees.
As outlined above, even before the needle accident, Plaintiff complained to both Porterfield and Bjerke about the practices at Community Memorial and neither addressed the issue. See Johnson Decl. ¶¶ 47, 48. Instead Porterfield told him that he did not want to make a big issue about this problem because Community Memorial was a big account. See id. ¶ 47. After the accident, Plaintiff became more adamant about the issues at Community Memorial even going as far as making a formal complaint at the Ventura County Health Care Agency, Environmental Waste Department. Id. ¶¶ 58,59, 61. The timing of these events, and the adverse employment actions described above support that there was a casual connection between Plaintiff's complaints and Defendant's actions. [*33]  At the very least, it suggests that Bjerke and Porterfield were frustrated with Plaintiff's demand and a reasonable fact finder could find that that frustration motivated, for example, their decision to cut Plaintiff's hours.
Defendant argues that even if Plaintiff has sufficient evidence to create a genuine issue of fact as to this casual link, he has failed to show that Defendant's legitimate reasons were mere pretext. Making all reasonable inferences in favor of Plaintiff, however, the Court finds that Plaintiff has sufficient evidence, as described above, to at least create a material issue that Defendant's decisions to send Plaintiff a counseling memo and to make him a part-time employee were pretextual.
Consequently, the Court DENIES Defendant's motion for summary judgment as to Plaintiff's fourth cause of action for retaliation in violation of FEHA to the extent that Plaintiff's claim is based on (1) the counseling memo; (2) the denial of worker's compensation; and (3) the status change to part-time employee. Defendant's motion is GRANTED to the extent that Plaintiff's claim is based on his termination.
C. Failure to Investigate and Take Remedial Action in Violation of FEHA
Under [*34]  FEHA, it is a violation to "fail to take all reasonable steps necessary to prevent discrimination and harassment from occurring." Cal. Govt. Code § 12940(k).
First, Defendant avers that "because Plaintiff cannot establish race or disability discrimination under FEHA, his failure to prevent discrimination claim fails as a matter of law." Reply 10:5-6. This argument is foreclosed by the Court's denial of Defendant's motion as to Plaintiff's cause of action for disability discrimination.
Second, Defendant contends that it is not liable under § 12940(k) because "it adopted and maintained appropriate anti-discrimination and anti-retaliation policies and communicated essential information about those policies to its employees." Mot. 16:3-7. However, Defendant makes no effort to show the Court how its policies were appropriate or what "essential information" it provided to Plaintiff. See Mot. 16:3-12.
Accordingly, the Court DENIES Defendant's motion as to Plaintiff's third cause of action for failure to investigate and take remedial action in violation of FEHA.
D. Failure to Reasonably Accommodate in Violation of FEHA
To prevail on a failure to accommodate claim, a plaintiff must meet the following elements: "(1) the plaintiff has [*35]  a disability under the FEHA, (2) the plaintiff is qualified to perform the essential functions of the position, and (3) the employer failed to reasonably accommodate the plaintiff's disability." Scotch v. Art Institute of California-Orange County, Inc., 173 Cal. App. 4th 986, 1009-10, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d 338 (2009).
Defendant argues that, assuming that Plaintiff was disabled and qualified to perform the functions of his position, Plaintiff's claim for failure to accommodate fails because there is no genuine issue of fact that it provided Plaintiff with a reasonable accommodation when it allowed him to take an extended leave of absence for over ten months. Mot. 18:27-19:3. The Court agrees that Plaintiff fails to show that an indefinite leave of absence is a reasonable accommodation request.
Plaintiff's theory of liability, however, is not that he was denied accommodation because he was not granted an indefinite leave of absence, but that Defendant did not take the necessary actions to ensure that staff at Community Memorial stopped placing needles in the Sterilmed bins that he collected. Opp. 22:5-24. After considering the evidence submitted by the parties, the Court agrees with Defendant that it reasonably accommodated Plaintiff's request.
When accommodating an employee's request, "the employer is not [*36]  obligated to choose the best accommodation or the accommodation the employee seeks" rather the employer, "has the ultimate discretion to choose between effective accommodations, and may choose the less expensive accommodation or the accommodation that is easier for it to provide." Hanson v. Lucky Stores, Inc., 74 Cal. App. 4th 215, 228, 87 Cal. Rptr. 2d 487 (1999) (quotations and citations omitted).
Here, after Plaintiff developed his disability - his fear of being pricked by a needle at Community Memorial - he told Bjerke and Porterfield about that the bins continued to contain needles. Johnson Decl. ¶ 58. Plaintiff was told that they would take care of it and that Porterfield would schedule an "in service training session with the hospital staff to remind them to put the sharps instruments into the sharps containers and not in the Sterilmed bins." Id. Plaintiff wanted Defendant to tell Community Memorial that it would stop servicing them if they refused to comply with Sterilmed's requirement that they not place needles in the Sterilmed bins. Id. In light of the fact that Plaintiff had told Bjerke and Porterfield about needles in bins even before the accident, a reasonable juror could find that a training session was not an adequate response.
However, after the needles [*37]  continued to appear in the bins - and after Plaintiff reported this issue to the County - Plaintiff was told that he would only pick up certain devices from Community Memorial and eventually was told to pick up bins and ship then "as is" to Sterilmed without first cleaning them. Id. ¶ 63. Having Plaintiff ship the bins "as is" ensured that he had no contact with the devices or exposure to needles. Plaintiff asserts that because Defendant did not threaten to top servicing Community Memorial if they continued to place sharps in the bins, their accommodation was not reasonable. The Court disagrees. Plaintiff fails to submit any evidence from which a reasonable juror could find that Defendant's accommodation was not reasonable. Defendant was able to continue servicing Community Memorial, and in that way continue getting their business, without exposing Plaintiff to the needles, thereby accommodating his disability.
Accordingly, the Court GRANTS Defendant's motion for summary judgment as to Plaintiff's fifth cause of action for failure to accommodate in violation of FEHA.
D. Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process in Violation of FEHA
FEHA requires that an employer engage an interactive [*38]  process to ascertain an appropriate accommodation for an employer who has a disability that is known or apparent. See Cal. Govt. Code §§ 12926.1(e), 12940(n).
Defendant argues that there is no genuine issue that it engaged in an interactive process to address the only accommodation that Plaintiff requested - time off. Mot. 20:2-12. The Court agrees. The evidence shows that Defendant constantly reached out to Plaintiff to discuss his return back to work and granted multiple extensions to his leave of absence.
According to Plaintiff, however, Defendant failed to engage in the interactive process because it did not communicate with Plaintiff to ensure that he continued to "work in his position as an on-site technician." Opp. 23:4-15. While the Court agrees that Defendant's decision to make Plaintiff a part-time employee could be seen by a trier of fact as a discriminatory act - which is not the issue here - it fails to see how Defendant's attempt to first educate the staff at Community Memorial, and then having Plaintiff collect their bins without washing the devices, does not warrant summary judgment in favor of Defendant. These discrete actions show that Defendant was specifically addressing Plaintiff's alleged request to [*39]  ensure that he not be exposed to needles from Community Memorial. Plaintiff's evidence does not support his theory that Defendant failed to address his request, even if it does support that Defendant's subsequent actions may be seen be a trier of fact as discriminatory.
Accordingly, the Court GRANTS summary judgment in favor of Defendant as to Plaintiff's sixth cause of action for failure to engage in the interactive process in violation of FEHA.
F. Wrongful Termination in Violation of Public Policy
"[D]isability discrimination can form the basis of a common law wrongful discharge claim." City of Moorpark v. Super. Ct., 18 Cal. 4th 1143, 1161, 77 Cal. Rptr. 2d 445, 959 P.2d 752 (1998). "To establish a claim for wrongful discharge in violation of public policy, a plaintiff must plead and prove (1) termination or other adverse employment action; (2) the termination or other action was a violation of a fundamental public policy, as expressed in a constitutional, statutory, or regulatory provision; and (3) a nexus between the adverse action and the employee's protected status or activity." Rope v. Auto-Chlor Sys. of Wash., Inc., 220 Cal. App. 4th 635, 660, 163 Cal. Rptr. 3d 392 (2013) (citing Yanowitz v. L'Oreal USA, Inc., 36 Cal. 4th 1028, 1042, 32 Cal. Rptr. 3d 436, 116 P.3d 1123 (2005)). Plaintiff recognizes that his wrongful determination claim rises and falls with the FEHA claim. See Opp. 23:15-24 ("Plaintiff's wrongful termination in violation of public policy claim [*40]  is based on Plaintiff's FEHA claims.").
Here, as discussed above, the Court has granted Defendant's motion to dismiss Plaintiff's disability cause of action to the extent that it is based on Plaintiff's termination. Having found that Defendant's decision to terminate Plaintiff is lawful, it is appropriate to GRANT Defendant's motion for summary judgment as to Plaintiff's seventh cause of action for wrongful termination in violation of public policy.
G. Wage and Meal Claims
Under the California Labor Code, an employer must compensate an employee at the rate of no less than one-half times the regular rate of pay for any hours worked in excess of (1) eight hours in one workday or (2) forty hours in any one workweek. See Cal. Labor Code § 510(a). An employer is not responsible for providing overtime pay, however, unless the employer "knows or should have known that an employee is or was working overtime." Morillion v. Royal Packing Co., 22 Cal. 4th 575, 585, 94 Cal. Rptr. 2d 3, 995 P.2d 139 (2000).
This code also provides that an employer must provide employees with an uninterrupted thirty-minute meal period whenever an employee works more than five hours in one day and one ten-minute rest period for every four hours or major fraction thereof worked. See Cal. Labor Code §§ 226.7, 512. The Supreme Court has made clear, however, that [*41]  although an employer must relieve an employee of all duty, it "need not ensure that the employee does no work." Brinker Restaurant Corp. v. Superior Court, 53 Cal. 4th 1004, 1034, 139 Cal. Rptr. 3d 315, 273 P.3d 513 (2012).
Defendant avers that even assuming that Plaintiff worked more than eight hours a day and missed meal and rest breaks, he cannot establish liability because there is no genuine issue of material fact that defendant is not liable under the California Labor Code. Specifically, Defendant argues that Plaintiff provides no evidence that it knew or should have known that Plaintiff was working overtime and that Plaintiff had the ability to control his daily schedule and take meal and rest breaks whenever he wanted. Mot. 21:1-23:16. The Court agrees.
As to the first issue, Plaintiff testified that there was much variability in his work schedule - facilities did not have a particular time that they wanted the bins to be picked up, there were times when he went to pick up bins only to find that they were empty, he could device his own route - which supports Defendant's contention that there was no way for it to know if Plaintiff was working overtime unless he noted it in his time sheets or notified one of his supervisors. Johnson Depo. 32:7-21; 33:11-18; 42:5-22; 52:14-19. That one [*42]  of Plaintiff's supervisors told him that overtime was only allowed if approved, and that it would not be approved, still does not create a genuine issue of material fact that Defendant was not aware if Plaintiff was working overtime. See Johnson Decl. ¶ 33.
Furthermore, Plaintiff also admit that he had the ability to control his daily schedule - he was not required to collect bins from facilities at certain times - and managed his own routes. Johnson Depo. 42:5-22; 52:14-19; 57:10-14. There is no evidence that Defendant prevented Plaintiff from taking meal or rest breaks. Given the flexibility in Plaintiff's schedule the Court agrees that there is no genuine issue of material fact as to Plaintiff's ability to take the required meal and rest breaks.
Accordingly, the Court GRANTS Defendant's motion for summary judgment as to Plaintiff's eighth cause of action for failure to pay overtime in violation of California Labor Code § 510 and Plaintiff's ninth cause of action for failure to provide meal and rest breaks in violation of California Labor Code § 226.7.
H. UCL Claim
The UCL prohibits any "unlawful, unfair, or fraudulent business act or practice." Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 17200. To succeed on a UCL claim under any of its three prongs, a plaintiff must establish that the [*43]  defendant engaged in a prohibited practice and that as a result of the defendant's actions, he or she suffered actual injury. Marolda v. Symantec Corp., 672 F.Supp.2d 992, 1003 (N.D. Cal. 2009).
Here, Plaintiff's theory of liability is premised on Defendant's alleged violation of the California Labor Laws. See FAC ¶¶ 123-128; Opp. 24:22-24 ("Wage and hour violations also violate the business and professions code."). Accordingly, because summary judgment as to Plaintiff's wage and hour violations is warranted, it is also appropriate to grant summary judgment as to the UCL claim.
Therefore, the Court GRANTS summary judgment as to Plaintiff's tenth cause of action for violation of the UCL.
I. Punitive Damages
California Civil Code § 3294(a) permits punitive damages in cases "for the breach of an obligation not arising from contract, where it is proven by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant has been guilty of oppression, fraud, or malice." Cal. Civ. Code § 3294(a). In cases against a corporation, a plaintiff must adequately allege "the advance knowledge and conscious disregard, authorization, ratification or act of oppression, fraud, or malice . . . on the part of an officer, director, or managing agent of the corporation." Id. at § 3294(b). The California Supreme Court has explained that an officer, director, [*44]  or managing agent is one who "exercise[s] substantial discretionary authority over decisions that ultimately determine corporate policy." Roby v. McKesson Corp., 47 Cal. 4th 686, 714, 101 Cal. Rptr. 3d 773, 219 P.3d 749 (2009).
Defendant contends that summary judgment in its favor is appropriate as to Plaintiff's request for punitive damages because there is no genuine issue that (1) Smith, Bjerke, and Triplett were not managing agents of Defendant and (2) the actions taken by these individuals do not constitute "fraud, oppression, or malice." Mot. 24:9-25:10. The Court agrees with Defendant's first argument and, therefore, declines to address its second contention.
Bjerke wrote in a declaration that in her capacity as a field service direction, she was responsible for:
(1) managing the field service work teams (e.g., hiring, scheduling, training, etc.); (2) working with Account Managers and Regional Business Directors to ensure account service plans are in place for customers; (3) helping to establish and deliver on [her] assigned region's device collection goals; (4) managing the regional expense budget; (5) ensuring OSTs are properly trained and able to provide staff education regarding collection, supply, and the use of reprocessed devices; and (6) responding to customer [*45]  questions.
Bjerke Decl. ¶ 3. In her position, Bjerke declares, her "decisions and job functions did not affect employees outside of [her] region." Id. ¶ 4. Defendant also includes a declaration from Beth Giglio, Defendant's Director of Human Resources, who wrote that Triplett was responsible for "performance management, managing voluntary resignations, managing leave of absence requests, overseeing normal HR related tasks such as complex investigations, and leading business partners through problems solving exercises to motivate and retain staff." Declaration of Beth Giglio ¶¶ 1-3. These descriptions support Defendant's contention that these individuals did not exercise discretionary authority over decisions that determine corporate policy. See Roby, 47 Cal. 4th at 714. Rather, the evidence suggests that these employees carried out Defendant's policies. Defendant also argues that Plaintiff fails to submit any evidence supporting his argument that Defendant's employees were officers, directors, or managing agents of the corporation. See Reply 12:2-5.
In response, Plaintiff simply states that the California Court of Appeal has held that "the scope of a corporate employee's discretion for determining if they are [*46]  a managing agent is a question of fact for decision on a case by case basis to be determined by the trier of fact and not the court on a motion for summary judgment." Opp. 25:18-22. Plaintiff is incorrect. Although the California Court of Appeal held that the scope of an employee's discretion is a question of fact, if concluded that the factual question must be determined by a trier of fact "[i]f there exists a triable issue of fact regarding whether a corporate employee is a managing agent." See Davis v. Kiewit Pacific Co., 220 Cal. App. 4th 358, 366, 162 Cal. Rptr. 3d 805 (2013) (emphasis added). Here, there is no triable issue of fact because Plaintiff has submitted no evidence suggesting that Defendant's employees were managing agents.
Accordingly, the Court GRANTS Defendant's motion as to Plaintiff's request for punitive damages.
IV. Conclusion
For the foregoing reasons, the Court GRANTS IN PART AND DENIES IN PART Defendant's motion for summary judgment.
The Court GRANTS summary judgment in favor of Defendant as to Plaintiff's request for punitive damages and as to the following causes of action:
(1) First cause of action for race discrimination in violation of FEHA;
(2) Second cause of action for disability discrimination to the extent that it is based on Plaintiff's [*47]  termination;
(3) Fourth cause of action for retaliation in violation of FEHA to the extent that it is based on Plaintiff's termination
(4) Fifth cause of action for failure to reasonably accommodate in violation of FEHA;
(5) Sixth cause of action for failure to engage in the interactive process in violation of FEHA;
(6) Seventh cause of action for wrongful termination in violation of public Policy;
(7) Eighth cause of action for failure to pay overtime in violation of Cal. Labor Code § 510;
(8) Ninth cause of action for failure to provide meal and rest breaks in violation of Cal. Labor Code § 226.7; and
(9) Tenth cause of action for a violation of the UCL.
The Court DENIES summary judgment as to the remaining causes of action. Plaintiff may proceed with the following causes of action:
(1) Second cause of action for disability discrimination in violation of FEHA to the extent that the cause of action is based on (1) the counseling memo; (2) the denial of worker's compensation; and (3) the status change to part-time employee;
(2) Third cause of action for failure to investigate and take remedial action in violation of FEHA; and
(3) Fourth cause of action for retaliation in violation of FEHA to the extent that it is based on (1) the counseling [*48]  memo; (2) the denial of worker's compensation; and
(3) the status change to part-time employee.
IT IS SO ORDERED.


End of Document

