Jones v. Lubbock County Hosp. Dist.
United States District Court for the Northern District of Texas, Lubbock Division
November 21, 2019, Decided; November 21, 2019, Filed
Civil Action No. 5:18-CV-151-C

Reporter
2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 237925 *
RICKY JONES, Plaintiff, v. LUBBOCK COUNTY HOSPITAL DISTRICT d/b/a University Medical Center, Defendant.
Subsequent History: Affirmed by, in part, Vacated by, in part, Remanded by Jones v. Lubbock Cty. Hosp. Dist., 834 Fed. Appx. 923, 2020 U.S. App. LEXIS 36192 (5th Cir. Tex., Nov. 18, 2020)
Counsel:  [*1] For Lubbock County Hospital District, doing business as, Lubbock County Hospital District, University Medical Center, Defendants: Don C Dennis, LEAD ATTORNEY, Bar Status: Admitted/In Good Standing, Boerner Dennis & Franklin PLLC, Lubbock, TX.
For Ricky Jones, Plaintiff: J Craig Johnston, LEAD ATTORNEY, Bar Status: Admitted/In Good Standing, Johnston & Miller, Lubbock, TX.
Judges: SAM R. CUMMINGS, SENIOR UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: SAM R. CUMMINGS
Opinion



ORDER
On this day, the Court considered Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment, filed August 15, 2019, along with Plaintiff's Response to Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment, filed September 5, 2019. Plaintiff concedes to the withdrawal of his claim brought under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act and only addresses his remaining claim under the Americans with Disabilities Act in his Response.
Having considered the foregoing, the Court is of the opinion that Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment should be GRANTED.

I. BACKGROUND
Plaintiff, Ricky Jones, claims he was terminated on March 23, 2017, because of a disability—in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), 42 U.S.C. § 12111 et seq. Jones had been employed by University Medical Center (UMC) for many [*2]  years as a respiratory therapist. He also had respiratory/breathing problems due to bronchiectasias, asthma, and pneumonia. After his difficulty with breathing because worse, he requested, in August of 2016, that he be allowed to use supplemental oxygen while working and performing his job duties at UMC. Jones was informed that he would not be allowed to do so due to safety concerns related to the use of a supplemental oxygen apparatus carried in a harness over his shoulder. Specifically, management at UMC stated that the concerns centered upon the physical problems that would be presented by the use of such equipment and the risk to patients such use would entail—including that it could get in the way of proper patient care by Jones and the proper patient care by other staff members when Jones was also standing over and attending to the patient. Or put differently, UMC's concerns were that the supplemental oxygen equipment (shoulder harness, tank, and hoses) would be in the way and impede immediate and proper patient care.
Following the denial of such an accommodation, Jones chose to take leave and work on becoming able to perform his duties without the assistance of supplemental oxygen. [*3]  He asked for an accommodation "to work somewhere else in the hospital." Jones applied for a couple of other positions at UMC where openings existed which would allow him to work while using supplemental oxygen. Jones chose not to pursue those positions and instead chose to take leave to strengthen his breathing ability and be able to perform the duties of his current position without the use of supplemental oxygen.1 He later returned to the work after becoming able to perform his duties without the supplemental oxygen. Unfortunately, Jones had an on-the-job injury on December 30, 2016, and was again forced to take leave to recover from that injury. Jones took leave until February 17, 2017, at which point he again took FMLA leave. He never returned to active work after December 30, 2016, and gave notice of voluntary termination on March 15, 2017.
Prior to giving his voluntary notice of termination, Jones testified in his deposition that he had again requested to be able to perform his job duties while using supplemental oxygen. He was again denied such an accommodation for the same reasons previously stated by UMC. At this point, the job openings for which he had previously sought positions [*4]  at UMC had already been filled and there were no openings in those positions.2 After giving his two-week notice of voluntary termination, Jones sent a number of text messages to others regarding UMC and the termination of another UMC employee in the same department. Jones had previously (on September 16, 2016) been counseled about "spreading malicious rumors and gossip" in violation of UMC policy and was warned that further incidents of this type could result in discipline and/or termination. On March 22, 2017, after learning of the text messages Jones had sent, Jones' supervisor contacted Jones and told him to stop sending such text messages because it violated UMC policy. Jones replied, "I'll stop, but you know as well as I do that gossip goes on up there, 24/7. Listen to it in staff lounge daily. Get real." In essence, Jones' reply admitted that his text messages amounted to gossip—which is in violation of UMC policy. The next day, on March 23, 2017, Jones was terminated for violation of Hospital Policy & Procedure 34, VI, A, 17 which provides: "The following is a list of examples describing employee misconduct: . . . 14. Spreading malicious rumors or gossip. . . ." Following termination, [*5]  Jones sought work as a respiratory therapist at only one other business and chose not to seek work at the other local major medical provider because he did not like them.

II. STANDARD
Summary judgment is appropriate only if "the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any," when viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, "show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 247, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986) (internal quotes omitted). A dispute about a material fact is "genuine" if the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the non-moving party. Id. at 248. In making its determination, the court must draw all justifiable inferences in favor of the non-moving party. Id. at 255. Once the moving party has initially shown "that there is an absence of evidence to support the non-moving party's case," Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 325, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986), the non-movant must come forward, after adequate time for discovery, with significant probative evidence showing a triable issue of fact. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e); State Farm Life Ins. Co. v. Gutterman, 896 F.2d 116, 118 (5th Cir. 1990). Conclusory allegations and denials, speculation, improbable inferences, unsubstantiated assertions, and legalistic [*6]  argumentation are not adequate substitutes for specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial. Douglass v. United Servs, Auto, Assn, 79 F.3d 1415, 1429 (5th Cir. 1996) (en bane); SEC v. Recile, 10 F.3d 1093, 1097 (5th Cir. 1993). To defeat a properly supported motion for summary judgment, the non-movant must present more than a mere scintilla of evidence. See Anderson, 477 U.S. at 251. Rather, the non-movant must present sufficient evidence upon which a jury could reasonably find in the non-movant's favor. Id.

III. DISCUSSION
Plaintiff asserts a claim for disabilities discrimination against Defendant arising under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). As stated above, Plaintiff has voluntarily abandoned his claim for age discrimination.

ADA Discrimination
The ADA prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability and expressly defines such discrimination to include "not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability . . . unless such covered entity can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose undue hardship on the operation of the business of such covered entity." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). To establish a claim for failure to accommodate, a plaintiff must show that: (1) he is a qualified individual with a disability, (2) the employer was aware [*7]  of the disability, and (3) the employer failed to reasonably accommodate the disability. Mzyk v. North East Indep. Sch. Dist., 397 F. Appx. 13, 15 (5th Cir. 2010); Cortez v. Raytheon Co., 663 F. Supp. 2d 514, 524 (N.D. Tex. 2009). A fourth element in some cases in which wrongful termination is also alleged is that the plaintiff was subject to an adverse employment decision on account of his disability. LHC Grp., Inc., 773 F.3d at 697 (quoting Zenor v. El Paso Healthcare Sys., Ltd., 176 F.3d 847, 853 (5th Cir. 1999)).
To maintain a claim under the ADA, an employee must file a timely charge of discrimination with the EEOC and receive a right-to-sue letter prior to filing in federal court. In Texas, the employee must file her charge of discrimination with the EEOC within 300 days (under the most liberal limitations period) of the alleged unlawful employment practice. 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-5(e)(1); Webb v. Cardiothoracic Surgery Assocs. of N. Tex., P.A., 139 F.3d 532, 537 (5th Cir. 1998).3
In an action for discrimination under the ADA, an employee has the option to present direct evidence of discrimination or proceed under the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting analysis. EEOC v. LNC Grp., Inc., 773 F.3d 688, 694 (5th Cir. 2014) (citing McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973)). That burden-shifting analysis first requires the plaintiff to establish a prima facie case of discrimination. See EEOC v. Chevron Phillips Chem. Co., 570 F.3d 606, 615 (5th Cir. 2009).
If the plaintiff is successful in meeting this burden, then the defendant must provide a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the termination. See Chevron Phillips Chem. Co., 570 F.3d at 615. Provided such a reason is proffered, the burden then shifts back to the plaintiff to show that the proffered [*8]  reason is pretextual. See id. Plaintiff has presented no direct evidence of discrimination, and his response brief argues the elements of a prima facie case, so the Court examines this claim under the McDonnell Douglas analysis.

A. Discriminatory termination from employment
Assuming, for the sake of argument, that Plaintiff has established a prima facie case of disability discrimination, the Court finds that (1) Defendant has clearly demonstrated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for terminating Plaintiff; and (2) Plaintiff has failed to produce any summary judgment evidence to show that this proffered reason was a pretext for discrimination. As such, Defendant is entitled to summary judgment on this claim.

B. Reasonable accommodation
"[T]he ADA provides a right only to reasonable accommodation, not to the employee's preferred accommodation or to accommodations that would impose an undue hardship on the employer." Griffin v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 661 F.3d 216, 224 (5th Cir. 2011) (internal quotations omitted). A plaintiff has no absolute right to an accommodation that essentially seeks to modify the daily functions of the job he was hired to do. See id at 224. UMC denied Plaintiff's request to be able to use his supplemental oxygen apparatus based on concerns [*9]  centered around the physical problems that would be presented by the use of such equipment and the risk to patients such use would entail—including that it could get in the way of proper patient care by Jones and other staff members in close proximity. Or put differently, UMC's concerns were that the supplemental oxygen equipment (shoulder harness, tank, and hoses) would be in the way and impede immediate and proper patient care. As such, UMC deemed this requested accommodation to be unreasonable for the duties of the position of respiratory therapist. The Court finds that Plaintiff has failed to create a genuine issue of material fact that such a basis was mere pretext or that such accommodation was reasonable under the circumstances presented.
Plaintiff also requested to be allowed to continue working at UMC by applying for a different position that would allow him to use supplemental oxygen without impeding patient safety or care by himself or other staff members. Here, Defendant made reasonable efforts to allow Plaintiff to apply for other open positions that would allow Plaintiff to remain employed and use the oxygen concentrator. Plaintiff's own testimony indicates that Plaintiff [*10]  chose not to seek one of those positions (even though he was offered the position) after determining that he could continue in his position without the use of supplemental oxygen. His testimony further indicates that when he later was again denied a request for usage of supplemental oxygen in his respiratory therapist position, the alternative position was no longer open and had been filled. Defendant was not required to create a position for Plaintiff or to give him preferential treatment by eliminating job duties that he was physically incapable of performing in his position.
Likewise, Plaintiff was allowed time to take leave to attempt to work on not having to use supplemental oxygen and be able to continue with his duties. Although Defendant does not appear to have taken issue with the extended leave periods utilized by Plaintiff, it does not appear that Plaintiff was seeking additional leave in March of 2017 to again attempt to work on not having to use supplemental oxygen. At any rate, even if he were to attempt to ague that he should have been allowed additional leave at that point, "[i]ndefinite leave is not a reasonable accommodation." Amsel v. Tex. Water Dev. Bd., 464 F. Appx. 395, 400 (5th Cir. 2012) (citing Rogers v. Int 'l Marine Terminals, Inc., 87 F.3d 755, 759-60 (5th Cir. 1996) ("Nothing in the text of the [*11]  reasonable accommodation provision requires an employer to wait an indefinite period for an accommodation to achieve its intended effect.") (citation omitted)).
Other than the one open position Plaintiff sought, and then abandoned seeking, and his request to be able to wear his supplemental oxygen apparatus, he made no other accommodation requests. While the ADA provides for an interactive process to ascertain reasonable accommodations available given an employee's work restrictions, the employer's obligation to participate is triggered only by the employee's request for accommodation. Taylor v. Principal Financial Group, Inc., 93 F.3d 155, 165 (5th Cir. 1996). "If an employee fails to request an accommodation, the employer cannot be held liable for failing to provide one." Id at 165. Here, Plaintiff did not seek any other open position and testified that he was not denied any such open position.

IV. CONCLUSION
In summary, Plaintiff has fallen short of demonstrating a genuine issue of material fact as to the existence discrimination by Defendant. For the foregoing reasons, as well as those argued in Defendant's Motion and Brief, Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment is GRANTED in its entirety.
SO ORDERED this 21st day of November, 2019.
/s/ Sam R. Cummings
SAM R. CUMMINGS [*12] 
SENIOR UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

JUDGMENT
In accordance with the Court's Order of even date granting Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment,
IT IS ORDERED, ADJUDGED, AND DECREED that Plaintiff Ricky Jones' claims asserted against Defendant Lubbock County Hospital District d/b/a University Medical Center are DISMISSED and costs are taxed against Plaintiff.
Dated this 21st day of November, 2019.
/s/ Sam R. Cummings
SAM R. CUMMINGS
SENIOR UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

