Ka West v. Alaska Airlines, Inc.
United States District Court for the District of Alaska
November 19, 2020, Decided; November 19, 2020, Filed
Case No. 3:18-cv-00102-JMK

Reporter
2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 247657 *
KA WEST, Plaintiff, vs. ALASKA AIRLINES, INC., Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Alaska Airlines Inc., Defendant: Naazaneen Hodjat, LEAD ATTORNEY, PRO HAC VICE, Davis Wright Tremaine LLP (Seattle), Seattle, WA; Elizabeth Pifke Hodes, LEAD ATTORNEY, Davis Wright Tremaine LLP (Anch), Anchorage, AK.
For Ka West, Plaintiff: Sara Lynne Bloom, LEAD ATTORNEY, Law Offices of Sara L. Bloom, Anchorage, AK.
Judges: JOSHUA M. KINDRED, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: JOSHUA M. KINDRED
Opinion



ORDER RE: MOTION FOR PARTIAL SUMMARY JUDGMENT, MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT AND MOTION TO STRIKE
[Dockets 48, 51, 78]
Before the Court at Docket 48 is Plaintiff Ka West's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment, and Defendant Alaska Airlines, Inc.'s ("Alaska Airlines") Motion for Summary Judgment at Docket 51. Plaintiff supports her motion with a Memorandum in Support at Docket 49. Alaska Airlines responded in opposition to Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment at Docket 56. Plaintiff replied at Docket 68. Plaintiff responded in opposition to Alaska Airlines' Motion for Summary Judgment at Docket 62. Alaska Airlines replied at Docket 67. Additionally before the Court is Alaska Airlines' Motion to Strike at Docket 78. Plaintiff responded in opposition at Docket 85; Alaska Airlines replied at Docket 88. [*2]  The parties presented oral arguments on August 12, 2020, before the honorable Judge Joshua M. Kindred.1

I. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
Plaintiff Ka West commenced with action against Alaska Airlines on April 23, 2018, alleging Alaska Airlines improperly denied her medical leave in violation of the Family and Medical Leave Act ("FMLA"), and "as a result of this denial, was terminated from her employment and suffered retaliatory discharge for applying and/or taking family medical leave in violation of the FMLA and was discriminated against on the basis of disability in violation of [the Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act ("ADAAA")] and Alaska State Law under AS 18.80.220 and other state laws."2 Specifically, Plaintiff alleged seven different causes of action in her Complaint: (I) retaliation and interference in violation of the FMLA; (II) discrimination in violation of the ADAAA; (III) unlawful termination due to discrimination on the basis of her disability in violation of Alaska Stat. § 18.80.220(a)(1); (IV) disparate treatment in violation of Alaska Stat. § 18.20.220; (V) breach of the duty to engage in the interactive process and provide reasonable accommodation in violation of Alaska Stat. § 18.80.220; (VI) breach of the implied covenant of good faith and [*3]  fair dealing; and (VII) intentional infliction of emotional distress.3
On May 21, 2018, Alaska Airlines filed a motion to dismiss Plaintiff's Complaint under Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 12(b)(1) and 12(b)(6).4 On December 6, 2018, the Court granted in part and denied in part Alaska Airlines' motion to dismiss.5 In pertinent part, the Court dismissed Count II (ADAAA violation) with prejudice and without leave to amend; Count IV (disparate treatment) without prejudice and with leave to amend; Count VI insofar as Plaintiff alleged that Alaska Airlines breached the covenant by violating the Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA) her employment was subject to; and Count VII with prejudice and without leave to amend.6 On December 20, 2018, Plaintiff filed a notice to dismiss Count IV, her disparate treatment claim.7 Remaining are Counts I, III, V, and VI insofar as Plaintiff alleged Alaska Airlines breached the covenant by committing certain statutory violations.8
On March 27, 2020, Plaintiff and Alaska Airlines filed the instant motions for partial summary judgment, and summary judgment, respectively.
On July 10, 2020, Alaska Airlines filed a motion to strike "numerous new documents improperly filed with Plaintiff's Reply to Defendant's Opposition [*4]  to Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment (Dckt. 68-1 through 68-17, 69) and various other documents that are inadmissible, unauthenticated, and unreliable (Dckt. 49-1 through 49-16, 49-20, 49-21, 50, 62-5, 62-10, and 63)."9

II. FACTUAL BACKGROUND
Alaska Airlines hired Plaintiff as a Customer Service Agent on January 22, 2007.10 In December 2012, Plaintiff was diagnosed with stage IV endometriosis and was granted intermittent leave under the FMLA from December 26, 2012, to February 17, 2013.11 In January 2013, Plaintiff underwent surgery to remove her right ovary and fallopian tube and did not work for approximately one and a half months, and later returned to light duty for approximately one month.12 In June 2013, Plaintiff began to experience pain and her doctor advised that she would need another surgery to remove her remaining reproductive organs.13 Plaintiff did not immediately pursue surgery because she "wanted to have a family."14 Plaintiff alleges her symptoms increased beginning in or about July 2015,15 whereby she experienced painful "flare-ups" each month.16
On February 5, 2016, Alaska Airlines gave Plaintiff a Final Warning for poor attendance.17 Eight instances of unsatisfactory [*5]  attendance were listed on the Final Warning.18 Plaintiff's supervisor additionally read her the following message:
February 5, 2016, we met to discuss your ongoing attendance issues. At that time, you were issued a Final Warning. It is absolutely critical that you correct your attendance immediately. Further attendance violations that are not protected by federal or state law will lead to discharge. My focus, as your manager, is on the behaviors I need to see corrected. I want to be clear that it is your responsibility to adhere to our attendance expectations and show up to work when scheduled and on time. If you believe any of your attendance issues are related to personal issues or a medical condition, then you must reach out to Lifeworks (for nonmedical personal issues), Matrix (for FMLA), or Employee Medical Relations (for a discussion about the interactive accommodation process). Even if you believe you are not eligible for FMLA, there may be other options available to you and the time to reach out to them is now so that they may start the process of identifying ways that the company can support your success in meeting our attendance requirements. Otherwise, if you choose to not [*6]  engage these resources, we will assume that you will follow these instructions. If you do not and continue to incur attendance occurrences, then be assured the next step of discipline is discharge.19
This was not the first warning for unsatisfactory attendance Plaintiff had received during her employment with Alaska Airlines.20
On March 2, 2016, Plaintiff had an unscheduled absence from work.21 She requested FMLA protected leave for this absence through Matrix, Alaska Airlines' third-party benefits administrator.22 On March 8, 2016, Matrix informed Plaintiff she was eligible for leave but was required to "furnish documentation to certify" the leave.23
On March 17, 2016, Plaintiff had another unscheduled absence for ten hours.24 Plaintiff saw her medical provider, Dr. Tina Tomsen, to treat her endometriosis on this date.25 Alaska Airlines notes that it chose not to pursue disciplinary action for this absence, although it appears Plaintiff submitted a claim to Matrix for FMLA.26
On March 18, 2016, Matrix received a Certification of Health submitted by Plaintiff's medical provider.27 The medical provider stated that Plaintiff would not require treatment for her endometriosis at least twice a year.28 Matrix [*7]  contacted the medical provider and confirmed that Plaintiff would not require further treatment that year.29
On March 22, 2016, Matrix subsequently denied Plaintiff's March 2, 2016, request for protected FMLA leave, and sent her a notice stating that her medical provider did not certify her absence as being related to a "serious health condition."30
On May 18, 2016, Plaintiff left 3.8 hours early from work due to flare-up of her endometriosis, and received an attendance occurrence.31
On June 6, 2016, Plaintiff reported to work late because she forgot she picked up the shift.32
On June 23, 2016, Plaintiff was counseled by a member of Alaska Airlines and warned that one more attendance occurrence would result in discharge of her employment.33
On July 7, 2016, Plaintiff requested intermittent FMLA leave to retroactively begin on March 17, 2016, which also would have covered the May 18, 2016 absence.34 On that same day, Matrix informed Plaintiff she was eligible for FMLA leave, but again required her to submit a health certification from her medical provider.35
On July 14, 2016, Matrix received the same Certification of Health from Plaintiff's medical provider which stated that she would not require two or [*8]  more visits a year to treat her medical condition.36
On July 18, 2016, Plaintiff received a notice from Alaska Airlines denying her request for intermittent leave beginning on March 17, 2016.37 The notice stated, again, that the request was not approved because the medical provider "did not certify the leave as being related to a serious health condition."38 On July 19, 2016, Plaintiff's medical provider contacted Matrix and asked why Plaintiff's leave requests were denied.39 Matrix "explained the criteria of [serious health condition] under FMLA and if condition changes and requires 2 appts a year then it could qualify moving forward."40 Plaintiff's medical provider informed Plaintiff of the conversation with Matrix.41
On August 18, 2016, Plaintiff visited her medical provider for the second time in 2016.42
On October 4, 2016, Plaintiff requested protected FMLA leave for that date, and received a notification from Alaska Airlines informing her of her eligibility and again requesting a medical certification.43 On October 7, 2016, Alaska Airlines informed Plaintiff that her request for protected leave was denied for the same reason as before—that her medical provider did not certify the leave [*9]  was related to a serious health condition.44
On October 20, 2016, Plaintiff's doctor submitted an updated health certificate which reflected the August 18, 2016 visit.45 On October 21, 2016, Plaintiff was granted unscheduled, intermittent FMLA leave from October 21, 2016, to April 20, 2017.46 Plaintiff subsequently took FMLA leave on November 8, 2016, November 9, 2016, December 5, 2016, December 6, 2016, and January 2, 2017.47
On November 1, 2016, Plaintiff reported to work late because she forgot her start time for this shift.48 In response to this attendance occurrence, on November 14, 2016, Plaintiff was counseled by management about her attendance issues.49
On November 27, 2016, Plaintiff had an unscheduled absence from work to attend a funeral.50 In response to this attendance occurrence, on December 7, 2016, Plaintiff was counseled by her supervisor, Chelsey Janes, and warned that another unprotected absence "could trigger the next step which is discipline."51
On January 19, 2017, Plaintiff arrived to work without her badge.52 Employees are not able to clock-in for shifts without a badge and a late clock-in is considered a "report late."53 By the time Plaintiff was delivered her badge, she clocked-in [*10]  late and received an attendance occurrence.54 In response to this attendance occurrence, on January 23, 2017, Plaintiff again was counseled by her supervisor, Chelsey Janes.55 Plaintiff was advised that she faced possible discharge for her attendance issues.56
On January 31, 2017, Alaska Airlines terminated Plaintiff's employment, citing five absences in the Notice of Termination:
05/18/16 Absent 3.8 hrs
06/06/16 Absent 2.7 hrs
11/01/16 Absent 0.5 hrs
11/27/16 Absent 8.0 hrs
01/19/17 Absent 0.1 hrs57
Plaintiff took action to appeal the termination through her union, but ultimately was unsuccessful.58

III. LEGAL STANDARD

A. Jurisdiction and Applicable Law
Plaintiff moves for summary judgment on Count I (retaliation and interference in violation of the FMLA) and Count V (breach of duty to engage in interactive process and provide reasonable accommodation in violation of Alaska Stat. § 18.80.220(a)(1)).59 Alaska Airlines moves for summary judgment on all four remaining claims: Count I; Count III (disability discrimination in violation of Alaska Stat. § 18.80.220); Count V; and Count VI (breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing based on state law claims).60 The Court has jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1331 because this is a civil action with certain [*11]  claims arising under federal law.61 The Court has supplemental jurisdiction over Plaintiff's related state law claims.62

1. Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA)
The FMLA entitles an eligible employee to 12 workweeks of leave during any 12-month period because of a serious health condition that renders them unable to perform the functions of their job.63 The FMLA provides job security to employees suffering from medical conditions, while also taking into account "employers' needs to operate their businesses efficiently and profitably."64 Two substantive employee rights are created: "first, the employee has a right to use a certain amount of leave for protected reasons, and second, the employee has a right to return to his or her job or an equivalent job after using protected leave."65
Under 29 U.S.C. § 2615(a)(1), an employer may not "interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of or the attempt to exercise, any right provided."66 When an employee alleges a violation of § 2615(a)(1), it is known as an "interference" claim.67 To prove an interference claim, "an employee must establish that: (1) [s]he was eligible for the FMLA's protections, (2) h[er] employer was covered by the FMLA, (3) [s]he was entitled to leave under the FMLA, [*12]  (4) [s]he provided sufficient notice of h[er] intent to take leave, and (5) h[er] employer denied h[er] FMLA benefits to which [s]he was entitled."68 The Ninth Circuit requires an employee to prove this claim by using either direct or circumstantial evidence, or both.69
Claims under 29 U.S.C. § 2615(a)(2)—(b) are known as "anti-retaliation" or "anti-discrimination" claims.70 "To assert a 'discrimination' or 'retaliation' claim under the FMLA . . . a plaintiff must assert that he or she opposed a practice prohibited by the statute or participated in proceedings under the statute."71 "To establish a prima facie case of retaliation, [Plaintiff] must show that (1) she availed herself of a protected right under the FMLA; (2) she was adversely affected by an employment decision; and (3) there is a causal connection between the two actions."72 An adverse action in the context of a retaliation claim is "any action that is reasonably likely to deter employees from engaging in protected activity."73 Unlike in interference claims,
[o]nce a prima facie case of discrimination is established, the burden shifts to the defendant to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the plaintiff's termination. If [*13]  the defendant can express a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for the termination, the burden then shifts back to the plaintiff to produce evidence that the reason articulated by the employer is a pretext for the retaliatory reason.74

2. Alaska Human Rights Act
The Alaska Human Rights Act (AHRA), Alaska Stat. § 18.80.220(a)(1), states:
it is unlawful for an employer to refuse employment to a person, or to bar a person from employment, or to discriminate against a person in compensation or in a term, condition, or privilege of employment because of the person's . . . physical or mental disability . . . when the reasonable demands of the position do not require distinction on [that] basis[.]75
The Supreme Court of Alaska often looks to the federal Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) to inform its interpretation of the AHRA.76 "To establish a prima facie case of disability discrimination under the statute, a plaintiff must show that (1) she is a disabled person; (2) she is a qualified individual, meaning she can perform the essential functions of her job with or without a reasonable accommodation; and (3) she has suffered an adverse employment decision because of her disability."77 "If the employee can establish [*14]  a prima facie case, the burden then shifts to the employer to articulate legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for the employment action. If the employer meets this burden, the employee must then show that discriminatory reasons more likely motivated the employer."78
The AHRA also imposes a duty on the employer to reasonably accommodate a disabled employee.79 The prima facie case remains the same for a failure to accommodate claim; however, the adverse employment action at issue is an employer's failure to make reasonable accommodations for an employee's disability.80 An employer must "engage with the employee in an interactive process to determine the appropriate accommodation under the circumstances once it is aware of the employee's disability" and "is liable for failing to provide reasonable accommodation if it is responsible for the breakdown in the interactive process."81 The employer's duty to engage in the interactive process is ongoing and extends beyond the initial attempt at accommodation.82 However, liability is only appropriate where a reasonable accommodation would not present an undue hardship to the employer.83

B. Standard for Summary Judgment
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56(a) directs a court to grant summary [*15]  judgment if the movant "shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law."84 When considering a motion for summary judgment, "[t]he evidence of the nonmovant is to be believed, and all justifiable inferences are to be drawn in h[er] favor."85 To present a genuine dispute, the evidence must be such "that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party."86 "A fact is material if it could affect the outcome of the suit under the governing substantive law."87 If the evidence provided by the nonmoving party is "merely colorable" or "not significantly probative," summary judgment is appropriate.88 Once the moving party has met its initial burden, the nonmoving party "may not rest upon the mere allegations or denials of the adverse party's pleading," but must provide evidence that "set[s] forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial."89 Conclusory allegations will not suffice.90
In determining whether to grant or deny summary judgment, a court need not "scour the record in search of a genuine issue of triable fact."91 A court is entitled to "rely on the nonmoving party to identify with reasonable [*16]  particularity the evidence that precludes summary judgment."92

IV. DISCUSSION

A. Motion to Strike
The Court has reviewed the briefing on Alaska Airlines' Motion to Strike and will exercise its discretion to DENY the Motion to Strike at Docket 78.93 Although the Motion to Strike might have raised technically meritorious concerns, the Court does not find Alaska Airlines is prejudiced by the record remaining as it is.94 To sift through the numerous, perhaps legitimate, issues raised by Alaska Airlines with regard to documents filed and arguments raised by Plaintiff in the eleventh hour would not be a wise expenditure of resources by the Court, especially when the key facts this case turns on are undisputed.

B. Count I
Turning to the merits, Plaintiff alleges two different causes of action under the FMLA: interference and retaliation.95 Under the interference theory, Plaintiff's allegations are twofold: (1) Alaska Airlines unlawfully relied on FMLA protected leave as a negative factor in its decision to terminate her employment by citing to an absence on May 18, 2016, in addition to four other absences, in the Notice of Termination given to her; and (2) Alaska Airlines failed to properly inform [*17]  her why her FMLA leave requests were denied.96 Plaintiff contends the May 18, 2016, attendance occurrence "was a protected absence under FMLA as she was suffering from intermittent pain as a result of her endometriosis."97
Regarding the first theory, Alaska Airlines argues Plaintiff's May 18, 2016, absence was not entitled to protection under the FMLA because Plaintiff could not certify she meet the criteria for a "serious health condition," as defined by FMLA regulations, until October 2016.98 The Airline further contends it was within its rights to discharge an employee for attendance issues unrelated to the FMLA and appropriately discharged Plaintiff after extensive counseling and discipline.99 The Court does not reach the latter part of Alaska Airlines' argument because it finds that, as a matter of law, Plaintiff has not established the third prong of the prima facie case for interference, that she was entitled to benefits under the FMLA.

1. Interference
Regulations implementing the FMLA are crystal-clear that "employers cannot use the taking of FMLA leave as a negative factor in employment actions . . . such as . . . disciplinary actions; nor can FMLA leave be counted under no fault attendance [*18]  policies."100 The Ninth Circuit has recognized that this regulation, as it applies to interference claims, "plainly prohibits the use of FMLA-protected leave as a negative factor in an employment decision."101 The parties do not dispute that Plaintiff's May 18, 2016, absence was considered in Alaska Airlines' decision to terminate her employment because it was listed on her Notice of Termination, and thus negatively factored into that decision.
The parties do, however, dispute whether the May 18, 2016, absence was entitled to protection under the FMLA. At the heart of their disagreement is whether Plaintiff provided a certification showing she suffered from a "serious health condition," as defined by the FMLA, at the time she requested FMLA coverage. The FMLA defines a "serious health condition" as "an illness, injury, impairment, or physical or mental condition that involves—(A) inpatient care in a hospital, hospice, or residential medical care facility; or (B) continuing treatment by a health care provider."102 Title 29 Code of Federal Regulation, section 825.115, describes "continuing treatment," in relevant part, as one or more of the following:
(a) Incapacity and treatment. A period of incapacity of more than three consecutive, full [*19]  calendar days, and any subsequent treatment or period of incapacity relating to the same condition, that also involves:
(1) Treatment two or more times, within 30 days of the first day of incapacity, unless extenuating circumstances exist, by a health care provider, by a nurse under direct supervision of a health care provider, or by a provider of health care services . . . under orders of, or on referral by, a health care provider; or
(2) Treatment by a health care provider on at least one occasion, which results in a regimen of continuing treatment under the supervision of the health care provider.
. . . .
(c) Chronic conditions. Any period of incapacity or treatment for such incapacity due to a chronic serious health condition. A chronic serious health condition is one which:
(1) Requires periodic visits (defined as at least twice per year) for treatment by a health care provider, or by a nurse under direct supervision of a health care provider;
(2) Continues over an extended period of time (including recurring episodes of a single underlying condition); and
(3) May cause episodic rather than a continuing period of incapacity (e.g., asthma, diabetes, epilepsy, etc.).
(c) Permanent or long-term [*20]  conditions. A period of incapacity which is permanent or long-term due to a condition for which treatment may not be effective. The employee or family member must be under the continuing supervision of, but need not be receiving active treatment by, a health care provider. Examples include Alzheimer's, a severe stroke, or the terminal stages of a disease.103
Administrators, like Matrix, in charge of determining whether leave is protected under the FMLA, must adhere to the Act and its regulations.
The Court recognizes that Plaintiff suffered from endometriosis and experienced debilitating pain during flare-ups as a result of her medical condition.104 However, an employee has the burden of establishing that she suffers from a "serious health condition" as it is defined in the FMLA, usually by submitting a health certification to their employer.105
The health certification Matrix received on March 18, 2016, stated that Plaintiff would not require treatment visits at least twice a year or any follow-up treatment.106 When asked, "[i]s the employee unable to perform any of his/her job functions due to the condition," the doctor checked "no."107 When asked if the condition would cause "episodic flare-ups periodically [*21]  preventing the employee from performing his/her job functions," the medical provider checked "yes."108 The medical provider additionally certified that Plaintiff was not admitted for an overnight stay in a hospital.109 Based on the answers provided to Matrix by the medical provider in the health certification, the Court finds that Plaintiff did not establish her condition required "continuing treatment." Plaintiff's incapacity was not permanent, but rather episodic, as contemplated under subpart (c), "chronic conditions."110 A chronic condition under this subpart requires at least two visits per year for treatment by a medical provider.111 The record shows Plaintiff's medical provider certified she would not require two visits for treatment, nor had she seen her doctor for at least two visits during the relevant calendar year.
Plaintiff argues that her condition could fit the criteria under subpart (a), "[i]ncapacity and treatment" because Plaintiff had surgery in 2013 for endometriosis and the "procedure resulted in her missing more than a month of work and seeing her doctors more than once that month."112 She argues Alaska Airlines should have "related her need for intermittent leave back to [*22]  when she was first diagnosed with endometriosis and had surgery in 2013 removing her right female organs."113 This line of reasoning places the burden on the employer to draw conclusions about Plaintiff's health in a way that Congress intended to guard against in enacting the FMLA.114 Alaska Airlines, through Matrix, could not rely on anything other than the health certification that was submitted by Plaintiff's doctor in determining whether her absence was protected by the FMLA.115 It is unreasonable, and inappropriate, to suggest that Matrix should have reviewed a prior request for intermittent leave (which was granted from December 2012 to February 2013), and extrapolate the medical findings related to that request to a new request several years later. Additionally, the date on which a "serious health condition" commences is not the date on which the condition may have started or begins to bother an employee; "rather, it is the date on which the problem became incapacitating and required continuing treatment by a health care provider."116 In this case, Plaintiff's medical provider did not certify her condition required continuing treatment until October 2016. Matrix was not at liberty to contest [*23]  the findings of Plaintiff's medical provider. Alaska Airlines was, therefore, within its rights to deny FMLA coverage for the May 18, 2016, absence and did not violate the FMLA when it considered that absence in its decision to terminate Plaintiff's employment.
Turning to Plaintiff's second FMLA interference theory, that she was not afforded proper notice of her FMLA leave request denials, Alaska Airlines argues it complied with the FMLA's notice requirements and used the Department of Labor forms throughout its correspondence.117 Pursuant to regulations implementing the FMLA, "[i]f the employer determines that the leave will not be designated as FMLA-qualifying . . . the employer must notify the employee of that determination[,]"118 and employers must provide employees with "a simple written statement" upon denying FMLA leave.119 The employer also must "advise an employee whenever the employer finds a certification incomplete, and provide the employee a reasonable opportunity to cure any such deficiency."120
First, Plaintiff did not apply for FMLA-protected leave until July 7, 2016, over a month and a half after the May 18, 2016 absence, and Matrix did not receive a health certification [*24]  for this absence until as early as July 14, 2016.121 There exists a legitimate question as to whether Plaintiff herself provided adequate notice to Alaska Airlines of her intent to request FMLA protected leave.122 However, the Court need not determine whether Plaintiff's obligations were met, because it finds that Alaska Airlines provided Plaintiff with appropriate notice that her request for FMLA protected leave was denied, and gave her a reasonable opportunity to submit a new health certification.
Each time Plaintiff's requests for FMLA leave were denied, Alaska Airlines sent her a notice which stated, "Your leave request is NOT approved under FMLA because the health care provider completing your leave Certification form did not certify the leave as being related to a serious health condition," and encouraged Plaintiff to contact Matrix with further questions.123 This notification sufficiently informed Plaintiff of Alaska Airlines' determination to deny her leave requests and satisfies the requirements of the Act.
The Court notes that the issue in this case is not whether the health certification was "incomplete," but rather whether the completed certification showed that [*25]  the criteria for a "serious health condition" was met. This Court found, supra, that the health certification did not certify a "serious health condition" as mandated by 29 C.F.R. § 825.115(c). However, even if the Court were to construe the certification as incomplete, Alaska Airlines permitted Plaintiff a reasonable amount of time to cure its shortcomings. Although the FMLA's regulations (or case law in this Circuit, for that matter) do not specify what a "reasonable amount of time" is to allow an employee to cure deficiencies in a health certification, the Court finds Alaska Airlines was within its rights to find that four months exceeded this threshold.
In summary, this Court finds that Plaintiff did not submit certification of a "serious health condition" as defined under the FMLA regulations, until October 4, 2016, when her medical provider certified two treatment visits for that calendar year. Alaska Airlines was not obligated to retroactively apply the findings of this certification to an absence that occurred over four months prior. Accordingly, the Court finds as a matter of law that Alaska Airlines did not rely on a protected absence when it terminated Plaintiff for absenteeism, and there was [*26]  therefore no interference with Plaintiff's rights under the FMLA.

2. Retaliation
In her Complaint, Plaintiff alleges Alaska Airlines retaliated against her in violation of the FMLA by "terminating her employment for applying for, requesting, and/or taking leave under the FMLA."124 Plaintiff's arguments in her Motion for Partial Summary Judgment rely almost exclusively on the reasoning set forth by the Ninth Circuit in Bachelder v. America West Airlines.125 In that case, the Ninth Circuit pointed out that retaliation claims under the FMLA are frequently confused with interference claims in this Circuit.126 Similar to the Plaintiff in Bachelder, in the instant case, Plaintiff's arguments "actually pertain[] to the 'interference with the exercise of rights' section of the statute, § 2615(a)(1), not the anti-retaliation or anti-discrimination sections, §§ 2615(a)(2) and (b)."127 Alaska Airlines is correct that Plaintiff's anti-retaliation claims are actually interference claims, discussed infra in Subsection A of this Order. Furthermore, Plaintiff has not put forth any evidence that Alaska Airlines discriminated against her for instituting or participating in FMLA proceedings or inquiries.128 Plaintiff has not satisfied her burden [*27]  of establishing a prima facie case for retaliation in violation of the FMLA. Accordingly, the Court GRANTS Alaska Airlines' Motion for Summary Judgment with regard to Count I.

C. Count III
Alaska Airlines argues it is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's state law disability discrimination claim. In her Complaint, Plaintiff alleges she was terminated from her employment with Alaska Airlines "on the basis of her disability, in violation of Alaska Stat. § 18.80.220(a)(1)."129
The parties do not dispute Plaintiff suffered from a disability within the meaning of Alaska Stat. § 18.80.220, or that Plaintiff suffered an adverse employment action.130 However, Alaska Airlines contends Plaintiff could not meet the Airlines' legitimate employment expectations, with or without a reasonable accommodation, because Plaintiff frequently had attendance issues unrelated to her medical condition.131 "An individual is qualified if with or without reasonable accommodation, [she] can perform the essential functions of the employment position[.]"132 Although Plaintiff retains the burden of proof in making her prima facie case, Alaska Airlines has the burden of production in establishing "that compliance with the attendance policy is an essential [*28]  function of the job."133
Alaska Airlines "believed Plaintiff was a good employee when she was actually at work," and Plaintiff received positive feedback in regard to her performance while she was working.134 However, the record shows that Plaintiff was counseled by her supervisors for absenteeism numerous times, even years before, her ultimate discharge from her position as a Customer Service Representative. The Final Warning Plaintiff received for attendance issues in February listed eight separate absences, dating back to 2015, that were unrelated to the absences listed on her final termination notice.135 Plaintiff testified during deposition that she received performance counseling for attendance issues over the entire course of her 10-year tenure with Alaska Airlines and that she previously had received oral, written, and final warnings.136 Despite these undisputed attendance issues, Plaintiff argues that she was qualified to perform her job with the reasonable accommodation of unscheduled, indefinite leave.
The Ninth Circuit has held that "a leave of absence for medical treatment may be a reasonable accommodation under the ADA,"137 but only where it does not pose an undue hardship to the employer. [*29] 138 However, a majority of Circuits, including the Ninth, "have endorsed the proposition that in those jobs where performance requires attendance at the job, irregular attendance compromises essential job functions."139
Alaska Airlines has shown that adherence to the attendance policy was an essential aspect of the Customer Service Agent position. Alaska Airlines' attendance reliability policy, contained in the system regulations Plaintiff agreed to upon accepting employment, states,
We are committed to providing the best customer service possible. To fulfill this commitment, and not cause a hardship to co-workers, we rely on each employee coming to work at his or her scheduled time . . . . All employees are expected to strive for the goal of perfect attendance . . . . a supervisor will consider termination of any employee who has failed to correct his or her record after progressive discipline.140
Indeed, the Ninth Circuit has recognized that, for positions like airline customer service agents, face-to-face interaction with clients and other employees necessitates on-site, regular attendance.141 Plaintiff was thus put on notice, at the time she accepted her position, and at [*30]  the numerous times she was counseled for unscheduled absences, that attendance was an essential function of her job.142
The Court finds that intermittent, unscheduled medical leave would not have rendered Plaintiff qualified to perform the essential functions of job, which included regular, punctual attendance. Alaska Airlines has presented uncontroverted evidence that Plaintiff frequently had attendance issues, unrelated to her medical condition, that persisted even after she was granted intermittent leave under the FMLA. Because summary judgment is proper where a Plaintiff fails to establish any element of her prima facie case, the Court GRANTS Alaska Airlines' Motion for Summary Judgment on Count III.

D. Count V
Plaintiff and Alaska Airlines move for summary judgment on Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim under Alaska Stat. § 18.80.220. Specifically, Plaintiff alleges that Alaska Airlines violated Alaska Stat. § 18.80.220 by advising her to contact Matrix rather than assisting her directly in applying for leave, and by not allowing her to take intermittent leave when she experienced flare-ups as a result of her endometriosis.143 Plaintiff argues medical leave is an appropriate and reasonable accommodation.144 Alaska Airlines [*31]  argues Plaintiff did not take any steps beyond requesting FMLA leave to request an accommodation and attendance is an essential function of Plaintiff's employment, so there was no duty to accommodate her absences.145
"Federal courts have held that the ADA requires an employer to engage with the employee in an interactive process to determine the appropriate accommodation under the circumstances once it is aware of the employee's disability."146 If an employer is "responsible for the breakdown in the interactive process," it is liable for failing to provide a reasonable accommodation.147 However, the employer bears no liability if the employee ultimately is responsible for the breakdown.148
Plaintiff's claim that Alaska Airlines failed to reasonably accommodate her also must fail because, as discussed infra in Section III of this Order, the undisputed facts establish she was not qualified for her position with or without a reasonable accommodation.149 In this case, Plaintiff "essentially asks for a reasonable accommodation that exempts her from an essential function, causing the essential functions and reasonable accommodation analyses to run together."150 Alaska Airlines cannot be liable for failing [*32]  to grant an accommodation that undercuts the essential duties of Plaintiff's position.
Further, even if this Court could find Plaintiff qualified for her position for the purposes of establishing a prima facie case, Plaintiff has not shown that Alaska Airlines is responsible for the breakdown of the interactive process. It appears Alaska Airlines initiated the reasonable accommodation interactive process by counseling Plaintiff numerous times throughout her employment, and after she received attendance occurrences. By Plaintiff's own admissions, she consistently was encouraged to seek out protected leave and resources through her employer's benefits providers.151 It is unclear what more Alaska Airlines could have done, absent prying into Plaintiff's personal medical affairs or granting her an exception from the essential functions of her position. The Court therefore finds Alaska Airlines was not responsible for the breakdown of the interactive process and did not fail to reasonably accommodate Plaintiff. As such, the Court GRANTS Alaska Airlines' Motion for Summary Judgment on Count V.

E. Implied Covenant of Good Faith and Fair Dealing
Alaska Airlines argues it should be granted summary [*33]  judgment on Plaintiff's claim that the Airline breached its duty of good faith and fair dealing. Plaintiff summarily alleges "Defendant breached its duty of good faith and fair dealing as to how it violated state statute under AS 18.80.220," without alleging further evidence showing questions of material fact exist.152
"Every contract in Alaska includes an implied covenant of good faith and faith dealing," which includes both subjective and objective components.153 "An employer violates the subjective component of the covenant when it acts with an improper motive," and to prevail on this claim, an employee must "present proof that the employer's decision to terminate him or her was actually made in bad faith."154 "The objective component of the covenant prohibits the employer from dealing with the employee in a manner that a reasonable person would regard as unfair."155 "An employer also breaches the objective component of the covenant by terminating an employee on unconstitutional grounds or for reasons that violate public policy."156
The Court finds that none of the evidence put forward, when viewed in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, suggests that Alaska Airlines acted in bad faith [*34]  when it terminated Plaintiff for attendance issues. As discussed infra in Section III of this Order, it appears from the record Plaintiff was counseled extensively and informed of the resources available to her, while given numerous chances to correct her attendance issues. As such, Alaska Airlines has established it terminated Plaintiff for legitimate reasons unrelated to her disability.
Regarding the objective component of the covenant, Plaintiff also has failed to present evidence raising a genuine issue of material fact. "Although the question of what a reasonable person would find to be unfair is usually a question for the trier of fact, this does not relieve [Plaintiff] of the burden of presenting admissible evidence to successfully oppose a motion for summary judgment."157 Plaintiff has not alleged Alaska Airlines violated her constitutional rights or public policy by terminating her for poor attendance.158 It appears from the record, and Plaintiff has stated, she was treated fairly throughout the disciplinary process.159 This Court can find no breach of the covenant on subjective or objective grounds and GRANTS Summary Judgment to Alaska Airlines on Count VI.

V. CONCLUSION
In light of [*35]  the foregoing, Plaintiff Ka West's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment at Docket 48 is DENIED.
Defendant Alaska Airlines' Motion for Summary Judgment at Docket 51 is GRANTED.
Defendant Alaska Airlines' Motion to Strike at Docket 78 is DENIED.
IT IS SO ORDERED this 19th day of November, 2020, at Anchorage, Alaska.
/s/ Joshua M. Kindred
JOSHUA M. KINDRED
United States District Judge


End of Document

