Koltys v. Berryhill
United States District Court for the Central District of California
January 9, 2019, Decided; January 9, 2019, Filed
Case No. 2:17-cv-07078-AB (JPRx)

Reporter
2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 248444 *
HENRY KOLTYS, Plaintiff, v. NANCY BERRYHILL, ACTING COMMISSIONER, SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For NANCY A BERRYHILL, Acting Commissioner Social Security Administration, Defendant: Karen Yumi Paik, Office of US Attorney, Los Angeles, CA.
For Henry Koltys, an individual, Plaintiff: Carol L Gillam, Sara Heum, The Gillam Law Firm, Los Angeles, CA.
Judges: HONORABLE ANDRÉ BIROTTE JR., UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: ANDRÉ BIROTTE JR.
Opinion



ORDER GRANTING MOTION TO DISMISS SECOND AMENDED COMPLAINT
Before the Court is Defendant Nancy A. Berryhill, Acting Commissioner of the Social Security Administration's ("Defendant") Motion to Dismiss Second Amended Complaint. ("Motion," Dkt. No. 29.) Plaintiff Henry Koltys ("Plaintiff") filed an opposition and the Agency filed a reply.1 The Court heard oral argument on November 30, 2018. The Motion is GRANTED.

I. PLAINTIFF'S SECOND AMENDED COMPLAINT
Plaintiff, an Administrative Law Judge ("ALJ"), alleges that his employer, the Social Security Administration ("the Agency"), violated the Rehabilitation Act, 29 U.S.C. § 701, et seq. ("RA"), in connection with Plaintiff's requests for accommodation for his disability. The Court granted in part and denied in part Defendant's Motion to Dismiss the First Amended Complaint, and dismissed some claims with leave to amend. See Order (Dkt. No. 25.) In his Second Amended Complaint [*2]  ("SAC," Dkt. No. 28), Plaintiff re-asserts four of the five claims from his prior complaint: for discrimination, failure to accommodate, failure to engage in the interactive process, and retaliation.
Plaintiff alleges that he is disabled because he has musculoskeletal impairments including a spine facture that was treated with rods, and that as a result he has chronic and significant pain that makes it difficult to sit or stand for any length of time and that this interferes with his ability to work. SAC ¶ 6. Plaintiff alleges that this disability can be accommodated by "telework allowing Plaintiff to work while lying down and decompressing his spine, and by limiting his time in a seated position to one hour at a time." Id. Plaintiff also alleges that he has two blood clotting disorders that put him at risk of a pulmonary embolism, and hemorrhaging, and that these conditions impair his ability to sit, stand, lie down, and work. Id. ¶ 6A. Plaintiff contends that this disability can also be reasonably accommodated by "being in a position where his legs and spine are decompressed," id. ¶ 6A, and by a transfer to San Francisco where he can obtain emotional support. Id. ¶ 8.
Plaintiff contends [*3]  that the Agency violated the RA by denying his request to be transferred to the San Francisco Bay Area and by denying his request to telework on hearing days when hearings are over. Plaintiff also asserts that the Agency violated the RA by not providing certain equipment accommodations "in a timely fashion." See SAC ¶29.
Defendant moves to dismiss the action in its entirety. First, Defendant argues that the claims arising from Plaintiff's request to transfer are time-barred and that the Court lacks jurisdiction over these claims because Plaintiff failed to exhaust his administrative remedies. As to all claims—those based on the denied transfer, the denied telework request, and the untimely equipment accommodations—Defendant argues that the SAC fails to state a claim.
Defendant's untimeliness argument was not previously ruled upon, and the jurisdictional argument is slightly different from how Defendant previously presented it. However, Defendant's remaining arguments—that none of Plaintiff's claims are adequately pled—were adjudicated before in Defendant's favor, so these grounds will be resolved primarily by determining whether Plaintiff cured the previously-identified defects.

II. LEGAL [*4]  STANDARD
Fed. R. Civ. Proc. 8 requires a plaintiff to present a "short and plain statement of the claim showing that the pleader is entitled to relief." Fed. R. Civ. P. 8(a)(2). Under Fed. R. Civ. Proc. 12(b)(6), a defendant may move to dismiss a pleading for "failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted." Fed. R. Civ. Proc. 12(b)(6).
To defeat a Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss, the complaint must provide enough factual detail to "give the defendant fair notice of what the . . . claim is and the grounds upon which it rests." Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 555 (2007). The complaint must also be "plausible on its face," that is, the "complaint must contain sufficient factual matter, accepted as true, to 'state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face.'" Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678 (2009) (quoting Twombly, 550 U.S. at 570). A plaintiff's "factual allegations must be enough to raise a right to relief above the speculative level." Twombly, 550 U.S. at 555. "The plausibility standard is not akin to a 'probability requirement,' but it asks for more than a sheer possibility that a defendant has acted unlawfully." Id. Labels, conclusions, and "a formulaic recitation of the elements of a cause of action will not do." Twombly, 550 U.S. at 555.
A court may dismiss a complaint under Rule 12(b)(6) based on the lack of a cognizable legal theory or the absence of sufficient facts alleged under a cognizable legal theory. Balistreri v. Pacifica Police Dep't, 901 F.2d 696, 699 (9th Cir. 1988). When ruling on a Rule 12(b)(6) motion, [*5]  "a judge must accept as true all of the factual allegations contained in the complaint." Erickson v. Pardus, 551 U.S. 89, 94 (2007). But a court is "not bound to accept as true a legal conclusion couched as a factual allegation." Iqbal, 556 U.S. at 678 (internal quotation marks omitted).
The court generally may not consider materials other than facts alleged in the complaint and documents that are made a part of the complaint. Anderson v. Angelone, 86 F.3d 932, 934 (9th Cir. 1996). However, a court may consider other materials if (1) the authenticity of the materials is not disputed and (2) the plaintiff has alleged the existence of the materials in the complaint or the complaint "necessarily relies" on the materials. Lee v. City of Los Angeles, 250 F.3d 668, 688 (9th Cir. 2001) (citation omitted). The court may also take judicial notice of undisputed facts that are contained in extrinsic materials. Mir v. Little Co. of Mary Hosp., 844 F.2d 646, 649 (9th Cir. 1988); Lee, 250 F.3d at 689-90.

III. DISCUSSION

A. Plaintiff Fails to State Any Claim Based on the Transfer Denial.

1. Plaintiff's Transfer-Based Claims are Time-Barred.
Federal employees complaining of discrimination by a governmental agency "must consult a[n EEO] Counselor prior to filing a complaint in order to try to informally resolve the matter," 29 C.F.R. § 1614.105(a), and "must initiate contact with a Counselor within 45 days of the date of the matter alleged to be discriminatory." 29 C.F.R. § 1614.105(a)(1). "Failure to comply with [*6]  this regulation [requiring employee to initiate contact with Counselor within 45 days] is fatal to a federal employee's discrimination claim." Cherosky v. Henderson, 330 F.3d 1243, 1245 (9th Cir. 2003) (quotations omitted).
Here, the Agency's denial of Plaintiff's request to transfer from West Des Moines to San Francisco was a discrete act that "occurred" on the day the denial "happened." See Nat'l R.R. Passenger Corp. v. Morgan, 536 U.S. 101, 111, 114 (2002) (unlawful practices include "[d]iscrete acts such as termination, failure to promote, denial of transfer, or refusal to hire"). That discrete act occurred when Plaintiff's transfer request was "denied on or about June 16, 2015." SAC ¶ 13. Plaintiff first saw an EEO Counselor on November 10, 2015. See Paik Decl. Ex. 1 (EEO Counselor's report indicating "Date of Initial Contact" as November 10, 2015). This was far beyond the 45 days required by the regulation.
Plaintiff does not dispute that his consultation was beyond the 45 day deadline or argue that the transfer denial was part of a "continuing violation" such that the consultation might be timely as to the transfer denial. Instead, Plaintiff simply argues that he substantially complied with the requirement that he exhaust his administrative remedies because the transfer denial was reasonably related [*7]  to other discriminatory acts for which his consultation was timely. But the Supreme Court has squarely rejected this argument, holding that "discrete discriminatory acts are not actionable if time barred, even when they are related to acts alleged in timely filed charges." Morgan, 536 U.S. at 113. Because Plaintiff did not timely initiate a consultation about the transfer denial with an EEO Counselor, his claims based on the transfer denial are time-barred and are DISMISSED.

2. The Transfer Request Is Not a "Reasonable Accommodation" Within the Meaning of the RA.
The EEOC has defined "reasonable accommodation" to include "[m]odifications or adjustments to the work environment, or to the manner or circumstances under which the position held or desired is customarily performed, that enable an individual with a disability who is qualified to perform the essential functions of that position." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(1)(ii). Here, Plaintiff seeks a transfer to the San Francisco Bay Area to obtain emotional support for his health conditions. SAC ¶ 8. At oral argument, counsel explained that Plaintiff has friends and/or relatives in the Bay Area who could assist him in getting emergency medical care if needed. The Court does not discount the [*8]  seriousness of Plaintiff's condition or the value of the peace of mind that nearby friends or family could bring. However, the transfer is not a reasonable accommodation within the meaning of the RA because it is not a modification to the work environment or to how Plaintiff's work is performed, that can enable him to perform the essential functions of his job. Also, the SAC lacks any allegations showing that Plaintiff cannot perform his job unless he is transferred to the Bay Area. In short, there is no nexus between the requested accommodation (transfer to the Bay Area) and Plaintiff's ability to perform his job, so the transfer request is not a reasonable accommodation under the RA. For this additional reason, Plaintiff's transfer-based claims fail to state a claim and are DISMISSED.

B. Plaintiff Fails to State Claims for Discrimination and Failure to Accommodate.
To state a claim for disability discrimination under the Rehabilitation Act, a plaintiff must allege that (1) he is a person with a disability, (2) who is otherwise qualified for employment, and (3) suffered discrimination because of his disability. See Walton v. U.S. Marshals Service, 492 F.3d 998, 1005 (9th Cir. 2007) (citing Wong v. Regents of the Univ. of Cal., 410 F.3d 1052, 1058 (9th Cir. 2005)). Discrimination includes "not making reasonable accommodations to the known [*9]  physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability. . . unless such covered entity can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A); accord Morton v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 272 F.3d 1249, 1252 (9th Cir. 2001); 29 C.F.R. § 1614.203(b) (applying ADA standards to Rehabilitation Act). And as stated above, "reasonable accommodation" means "[m]odifications or adjustments to the work environment, or to the manner or circumstances under which the position held or desired is customarily performed, that enable an individual with a disability who is qualified to perform the essential functions of that position." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(1)(ii); see also Humphrey v. Mem'l Hosps. Ass'n, 239 F.3d 1128, 1137 (9th Cir. 2001) (a "reasonable accommodation must be effective, in enabling the employee to perform the duties of [his] position."). "An employer is not obligated to provide an employee the accommodation he requests or prefers[;] the employer need only provide some reasonable accommodation." Zivkovic v. Southern California Edison Co., 302 F.3d 1080, 1089 (9th Cir. 2002).

1. Plaintiff Fails to State Claims for Discrimination and Failure to Accommodate Based on Telework Denial.
Plaintiff alleges that the Agency violate the RA by denying his request to telework on hearing days once his hearings are completed.2 However, the SAC fails to allege facts sufficient to show that he needs to telework. [*10] 
Plaintiff has not pled facts establishing how teleworking on partial days would enable him to perform the fundamental job duties of his position. Insofar as Plaintiff's disabilities require him to work while lying down and decompressing his spine, and to be in a seated position for no more than one hour at a time, the SAC pleads facts establishing that the Agency has already accommodated these needs. In particular, the Agency furnished Plaintiff's Santa Barbara office with special equipment he requested for that very purpose, including a special sofa with appropriate back and lateral support (SAC ¶ 15) and certain equipment (touchpad mouse and keyboard, glass floor mat, computer monitor arms, footstool, laptop holder) that enables Plaintiff to use a zero-gravy chair and a zero-gravity desk. Id. ¶¶ 9-12. The Agency also granted Plaintiff's request to telework on non-hearing days. Id. ¶ 20. Plaintiff pleads no facts showing that these accommodations were not reasonable or that they were ineffective. Indeed, Plaintiff alleges that he exceeds the productivity requirements applicable to his position, id. ¶ 20, which tends to show that he can perform his job functions without additional accommodations. [*11] 
In sum, the law does not entitle Plaintiff to the specific accommodations of his choice; it entitles him only to reasonable accommodations. The SAC alleges facts showing that the Agency already accommodated Plaintiff's needs by fully satisfying all of the equipment requests he made, and the SAC is devoid of any facts plausibly showing that these accommodations were insufficient. Plaintiff's claims for disability discrimination based on the Agency's denial of his request to telework on partial-days are therefore DISMISSED.

2. Plaintiff Fails to State Claims for Discrimination and Failure to Accommodate Based on the Agency's Delays in Providing Equipment.
Plaintiff also asserts that although he ultimately received all of the equipment he requested, there were delays in getting it, and that these delays constitute disability discrimination and failure to accommodate under the RA. The Court previously dismissed these claims, finding that the FAC was devoid of factual allegations establishing either that any equipment was delayed any significant amount of time, or that any delay was unlawful.
The SAC has added some allegations quantifying the delay for certain pieces of equipment, but the allegations [*12]  still fall short of alleging any plausible claim. As to the touchpad mouse and keyboard, Plaintiff alleged only an indeterminate delay of "months" and that the wrong keyboard was initially provided, and as to the floor mat, Plaintiff alleges only that the Agency first provided insufficient floor mats but does not assert that there was any delay. SAC ¶¶ 9, 13. These allegations cannot plausibly establish discriminatory delay.
As to the other accommodations, Plaintiff alleges delays of 2 months, 4 months, 5 1/2 months, and less than a year. See SAC ¶¶ 12, 11, 15-19, 9. "An employer's delay in providing reasonable accommodation may violate the ADA." Selenke v. Medical Imaging of Colorado, 248 F.3d 1249, 1262 (10th Cir. 2001). However, delays resulting from internal bureaucracy or engaging in the interactive process are generally insufficient to establish discriminatory delay. See, e.g., Okello v. Dominguez, 2006 WL 3065573, at *5 (N.D. Cal. 2006) (13-month delay in processing reasonable accommodation request, attributable to internal bureaucracy, insufficient to show adverse employment action).
Plaintiff makes repeated conclusory allegations that such delays were not the result of internal bureaucracy, but, as before, pleads facts showing that they arose from internal bureaucracy and the interactive process. For example, [*13]  as before, the SAC alleges facts tending to show that any delays were caused by bureaucratic processes such as obtaining medical paperwork or referring the request to another department (SAC ¶¶ 15, 19), by funding problems (SAC ¶ 11), by trying equipment already on hand (SAC ¶ 16), and by engaging in the interactive process to find accommodations that would work, a process that involved some trial and error. (SAC ¶¶ 9, 10.) Delays caused by such circumstances are not actionable as disability discrimination or failure to accommodate under the ADA because Plaintiff did not suffer those delays because of his disability. The claims for discrimination and failure to accommodate based on delays in providing Plaintiff's requested accommodations are therefore DISMISSED.

C. Plaintiff Fails to State a Claim for Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process.
District courts in the Ninth Circuit have recognized that there is no "stand-alone claim for failure to engage in the interactive process." Yonemoto v. McDonald, 114 F.Supp.3d 1067, 1114 (D. Haw. 2015) (citing Barnett v. U.S. Air, Inc., 228 F.3d 1105, 1115 (9th Cir. 2000)). Instead, the claims for failure to provide a reasonable accommodation and failure to engage in the interactive process are intertwined: a failure to engage in the interactive process is cognizable [*14]  only if "a reasonable accommodation would have been possible." See Yonemoto, 114 F.Supp.3d at 1114-15 (citation omitted); see also id. at n.21 (collecting cases from other Courts of Appeal so holding). Thus, a failure to engage claim presumes an accommodation would have been available but was not provided, in part because the employer did not engage in the interactive process. See, e.g., Minnihan v. Mediacom Commc'ns Corp., 779 F.3d 803, 813 (8th Cir. 2015) (where an employer fails to engage in the interactive process, a plaintiff must still establish that "the employee could have been reasonably accommodated but for the employer's lack of good faith").
Because none of Plaintiff's claims for discrimination or failure to accommodate are adequately pled, his claims for failure to engage in the interactive process are likewise deficient and are DISMISSED.

D. Plaintiff Fails to Plead Any Claim for Retaliation
To plead a claim for retaliation under the Rehabilitation Act, a plaintiff must plead "'(1) involvement in a protected activity, (2) an adverse employment action and (3) a causal link between the two.'" Coons, 383 F.3d at 887 (quoting Brown v. City of Tucson, 336 F.3d 1181, 1187 (9th Cir. 2003). The causal element requires a plaintiff to establish that the unlawful retaliation would not have occurred "but-for" his engagement in protected activity. Univ. of Texas Southwestern Med. Ctr. v. Nassar, 570 U.S. 338, 360 (2013).
The Court previously dismissed this [*15]  claim on the ground that Plaintiff failed to plead any facts to support the inference of a causal link between his claimed protected activities and the alleged adverse employment actions. In its motion, the Agency argues that the SAC does not overcome this problem as to any of the alleged adverse actions. In his opposition to the motion, Plaintiff appears to focus this claim on the Agency's requests for additional medical documentation, arguing that seeking it was retaliatory because the Agency already had detailed documentation. See Opp'n 6:10-23 (citing SAC ¶ 22).
But this paragraph is simply conclusory. For example, it suggests that the Agency continues to demand more documentation, but Plaintiff makes no allegation as to what the Agency demanded and when, or what he already provided. Thus, there are no facts from which one can infer that the Agency requested additional medical documentation simply to retaliate. As Plaintiff acknowledges, an employer may seek additional medical evidence to determine whether a reasonable accommodation is needed, and what kind. See Allen v. Pac. Bell, 348 F.3d 1113, 1115 (9th Cir. 2003) (employer can seek additional medical documentation in considering an accommodation request). Indeed, after Plaintiff [*16]  submitted his medical documentation, he received the kind of sofa he required, and likewise received in part his telework request. Again, taken as a whole, Plaintiff's allegations do not lead to a plausible inference of retaliation, and instead undermine such an inference.
Plaintiff has therefore not adequately pled a claim for retaliation, so this claim is DISMISSED.

E. Plaintiff Has Not Pled Facts Showing Discriminatory Intent as Required for His Claims for Damages.
Plaintiff seeks both injunctive relief and monetary damages. "[C]ompensatory damages are not available under Title II or § 504 absent a showing of discriminatory intent." Ferguson v. City of Phoenix, 157 F.3d 668, 674 (9th Cir. 1998), as amended (Oct. 8, 1998). Here, Plaintiff has pled not fact showing discriminatory intent, or facts from which such intent can be plausibly inferred. As noted above, the facts Plaintiff pleads show that although it took time for the Agency to provide Plaintiff the accommodations he requested, it was responsive to his requests and provided reasonable accommodations.
Plaintiff does not argue that he has pled discriminatory intent, in effect conceding this point. He does argue, however, that he is not required to plead discriminatory intent to secure damages. [*17]  But Plaintiff relies on ADA cases against private employers, not RA cases against public entities. As such, Plaintiff's authority is not o point.
Under Ferguson, Plaintiff must plead discriminatory intent to obtain monetary damages. The SAC pleads no facts giving rise to such an inference, so insofar as Plaintiff's claims seek damages, they are DISMISSED.

IV. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, Defendant's Motion to Dismiss Plaintiff's Second Amended Complaint is GRANTED in its entirety. This is Plaintiff's third attempt to plead his claims, and based on the foregoing analysis, further amendment would be futile. The Second Amended Complaint is therefore DISMISSED WITHOUT LEAVE TO AMEND and this action is DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE.
Defendant is ORDERED to file a Proposed Judgment within 7 days of the issuance of this Order.
The March 29, 2019, Scheduling Conference is vacated.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
Dated: January 09, 2019
/s/ André Birotte Jr.
HONORABLE ANDRÉ BIROTTE JR.
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT JUDGE


End of Document

