Koltys v. Berryhill
United States District Court for the Central District of California
June 29, 2018, Decided; June 29, 2018, Filed
Case No. 2:17-cv-07078-AB (JPRx)

Reporter
2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 248778 *
HENRY KOLTYS, Plaintiff, v. NANCY BERRYHILL, ACTING COMMISSIONER, SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINITRATION, Defendants.
Counsel:  [*1] For NANCY A BERRYHILL, Acting Commissioner Social Security Administration, Defendant: Karen Yumi Paik, Office of US Attorney, Los Angeles, CA.
For Henry Koltys, an individual, Plaintiff: Carol L Gillam, The Gillam Law Firm, Los Angeles, CA; Sara Heum, The Gillam Law Firm, Los Angeles, CA.
Judges: HONORABLE ANDRÉ BIROTTE JR., UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: ANDRÉ BIROTTE JR.
Opinion



ORDER GRANTING IN PART AND DENYING IN PART MOTION TO DISMISS
Before the Court is Defendant Nancy A. Berryhill, Acting Commissioner of the Social Security Administration's (the "Agency") Motion to Dismiss First Amended Complaint. ("Motion," Dkt. No. 16.) Plaintiff Henry Koltys ("Plaintiff") filed an opposition and the Agency filed a reply. The Motion is GRANTED in part and DENIED in part with leave to amend.

I. PLAINTIFF'S FIRST AMENDED COMPLAINT
In his First Amended Complaint ("FAC," Dkt. No. 14), Plaintiff, an Administrative Law Judge ("ALJ") with the Social Security Administration (the "Agency") asserts five claims under the Rehabilitation Act, 29 U.S.C. § 701 et seq., arising from the Agency's responses to his requests for reasonable accommodations. The salient allegations are as follows.
Plaintiff has "severe musculoskeletal impairment and blood clotting disorders which [*2]  put him at risk of a pulmonary embolism." FAC ¶ 6. After Plaintiff was selected as an ALJ but before starting his employment (the FAC does not allege when he started), he told the Agency he was disabled. Id. ¶ 8. Plaintiff submitted to the Agency doctors' notes saying he needed accommodations including permission to telework while not in hearings; a special sofa and chair providing back and lateral support; and a transfer to San Francisco where he can obtain emotional support. Id. ¶ 9. The FAC does not allege when Plaintiff provided the Agency these doctors' notes.
The FAC alleges as follows regarding certain accommodation requests.
On April 17, 2015, Plaintiff requested to be transferred from West Des Moines to San Francisco based upon his blood clotting disorder; on June 16, 2015, this request was denied. Id. ¶ 14.
On July 30, 2015, after Plaintiff learned he would be transferred to Santa Barbara, he requested that he be permitted to telework, and a sofa with appropriate back and lateral support, as accommodations. Id. ¶ 16. Plaintiff was permitted to telework on days he did not have hearings. As to the sofa request, the Agency initially offered Plaintiff one of two surplus sofas from [*3]  its inventory, but Plaintiff rejected them because they did not provide sufficient support. Instead, Plaintiff told the Agency the exact sofa he needed and where to purchase it at a 50% discount. Id. ¶ 17.
Beginning in September 2015, Plaintiff requested certain equipment: a touchpad mouse and keyboard; a glass or thick plexiglass chair mat to accommodate the weight of himself and his heavy zero-gravity chair; monitor arms to hold computer monitors with this zero gravity desk; and a footstool and laptop holder for his courtroom. Id. ¶¶ 10-13. The Agency initially provided equipment that Plaintiff claims was inadequate, such as the wrong kind of keyboard; a thin plastic chair mat and then a glass mat that was smaller than he requested; and a laptop holder that was not compatible with his courtroom chair. Id. The Agency also asked for additional medical documentation. Id. ¶ 18. However, "[e]ventually the proper equipment was furnished." Id. ¶ 13. Plaintiff was also authorized to telework on non-hearing days. Id. ¶ 23.
The only accommodations that Plaintiff claims remain outstanding are his request to "telework on hearing days once the hearing are concluded," id. ¶ 23, and a transfer to [*4]  San Francisco. Id. ¶ 24.
Plaintiff claims he was injured and experienced pain and suffering from the Agency's delays. Plaintiff also seeks injunctive relief.
Based on these factual allegations, Plaintiff asserts five claims under the Rehabilitation Act: (1) disability discrimination; (2) failure to accommodate; (3) failure to engage in the interactive process; (4) retaliation/reprisal; and (5) hostile work environment. The Agency moves to dismiss the FAC on several bases, or alternatively for a more definite statement.1

II. LEGAL STANDARD
Fed. R. Civ. Proc. 8 requires a plaintiff to present a "short and plain statement of the claim showing that the pleader is entitled to relief." Fed. R. Civ. P. 8(a)(2). Under Fed. R. Civ. Proc. 12(b)(6), a defendant may move to dismiss a pleading for "failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted." Fed. R. Civ. Proc. 12(b)(6).
To defeat a Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss, the complaint must provide enough detail to "give the defendant fair notice of what the . . . claim is and the grounds upon which it rests." Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 555 (2007). The complaint must also be "plausible on its face," allowing the court to "draw the reasonable inference that the defendant is liable for the misconduct alleged." Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678 (2009). "The plausibility standard is not akin to a 'probability requirement,' but it asks for more than [*5]  a sheer possibility that a defendant has acted unlawfully." Id. Labels, conclusions, and "a formulaic recitation of the elements of a cause of action will not do." Twombly, 550 U.S. at 555.
When ruling on a Rule 12(b)(6) motion, "a judge must accept as true all of the factual allegations contained in the complaint." Erickson v. Pardus, 551 U.S. 89, 94 (2007). But a court is "not bound to accept as true a legal conclusion couched as a factual allegation." Iqbal, 556 U.S. at 678 (2009) (internal quotation marks omitted).

III. DISCUSSION

A. Plaintiff Has Exhausted His Administrative Remedies.
The Agency argues that Plaintiff failed to exhaust administrative remedies for his claims based on his request for a transfer to San Francisco and his request to telework after hearings are concluded. As to the latter, the Agency argues that Plaintiff only sought to telework on non-hearing days, not to telework on hearing days after hearings are concluded.
"To establish federal subject matter jurisdiction, [a plaintiff is] required to exhaust [his] administrative remedies before seeking federal adjudication of [his] claims." EEOC v. Farmer Bros. Co., 31 F.3d 891, 899 (9th Cir. 1994). To satisfy administrative exhaustion for claims under the Rehabilitation Act, a plaintiff must present those specific claims to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC"). See Leong v. Potter, 347 F.3d 1117, 1121-22 (9th Cir. 2003). "The jurisdictional [*6]  scope of the plaintiff's court action depends on the scope of the EEO[] charge and investigation." Id. at 1122. "[T]he inquiry into whether a claim has been sufficiently exhausted must focus on the factual allegations made in the charge itself, describing the discriminatory conduct about which a plaintiff is grieving." Freeman v. Oakland Unified Sch. Dist., 291 F.3d 632, 637 (9th Cir. 2002). "However, the district court has jurisdiction over any charges of discrimination that are 'like or reasonably related to' the allegations made before the EEOC, as well as charges that are within the scope of an EEOC investigation that reasonably could be expected to grow out of the allegations." Leong, 347 F.3d at 1122. "[T], the court should consider plaintiff's civil claims to be reasonably related to allegations in the charge to the extent that those claims are consistent with the plaintiff's original theory of the case." B.K.B. v. Maui Police Dep't, 276 F.3d 1091, 1100 (9th Cir. 2002), as amended (Feb. 20, 2002).
The Court has read Plaintiff's EEOC complaint. See Paik Decl. (Dkt. No. 16-1) Ex. 1. The EEOC complaint does not mention Plaintiff's request for transfer to San Francisco, but the Court finds that the complaint is sufficient to exhaust his current claims. The transfer request could reasonably be expected to grow out of Plaintiff's other allegations [*7]  because they took place only months apart and they all concern discrimination based on the Agency's alleged failures to provide reasonable accommodations. Similarly, Plaintiff's claim based on his request to transfer to San Francisco is consistent with the original theory of the case: disability discrimination based on the Agency's failure to provide reasonable accommodations.
Plaintiff's telework request was stated as "to telework for every day when not in hearings." Ex. 1. The parties present different interpretations of this request: The Agency argues that this meant to telework only on non-hearing days, while Plaintiff says he was asking to telework when he was not in hearings, including on hearing days once the hearings were concluded. Even under the Agency's narrow interpretation, however, Plaintiff exhausted his current claim: a request to telework on hearing days after hearings is "like or reasonably related to" a request to telework on non-hearing days. And again, the theories underlying each are the same.
The Court therefore concludes that Plaintiff exhausted his administrative remedies.

B. Plaintiff Has Not Pled a Claim for Disability Discrimination or Failure to Accommodate [*8]  Under the Rehabilitation Act.
To state a claim for disability discrimination under the Rehabilitation, a plaintiff must allege that (1) he is a person with a disability, (2) who is otherwise qualified for employment, and (3) suffered discrimination because of his disability. See Walton v. U.S. Marshals Service, 492 F.3d 998, 1005 (9th Cir. 2007) (citing Wong v. Regents of the Univ. of Cal., 410 F.3d 1052, 1058 (9th Cir. 2005)).

1. Plaintiff Has Not Pled Facts Establishing that He Is A Person With A Disability.
To determine whether a federal agency has violated the Rehabilitation Act, the standards established by Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") apply. McLean v. Runyon, 222 F.3d 1150, 1153 (9th Cir. 2000). The ADA defines "disability" as: "(A) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such individual, (B) a record of such an impairment, or (C) being regarded as having such an impairment." 42 U.S.C. § 12102(2) (emphasis added); 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(g). "Major life activities" include, among other things, tasks such as "standing," "sitting," and "lifting," 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2.
Here, Plaintiff alleges only that he suffers from a "severe musculoskeletal impairment" and "blood clotting disorders which put him at risk of a pulmonary embolism," but he alleges no facts showing how these impairments substantially limit any of his major life activities. FAC ¶ 6. Nor is it self-evident that a "musculoskeletal impairment" or "blood clotting [*9]  disorders" would necessarily limit Plaintiff. Without allegations showing how Plaintiff's conditions limit any major life activity, Plaintiff cannot establish that he is a "disabled person" within the meaning of the Rehabilitation Act. See Coons v. Sec'y of U.S. Dep't of Treasury, 383 F.3d 879, 886 (9th Cir. 2004) (letter from doctor stating that plaintiff had "various physical and mental impairment," did not establish that plaintiff was disabled as there was no "allegation that any of the treated impairments substantially limited any major life activity"). In his opposition, Plaintiff states that his conditions affect his ability to work, but this allegation does not appear in the FAC and is too vague and conclusory to establish that Plaintiff is substantially impaired in a major life activity. See Sutton v. UAL, 527 U.S. 471, 491 (1999), partially superseded by statute, ADAAA, Pub.L. No. 110-325, 122 Stat. 3553 (2008) ("at a minimum," plaintiffs must "allege they are unable to work in a broad class of jobs").

2. Plaintiff's Allegations of Discrimination and Failure to Accommodate are Adequately Alleged In Part.
Plaintiff points to numerous requests for accommodation that he asserts were provided only after a delay, or not provided at all. The same allegations underlie both his claim for disability discrimination and failure to accommodate.

A. Plaintiff Has Not [*10]  Adequately Pled a Discrimination or Failure to Accommodate Based on Accommodations That Were Delayed But Ultimately Provided.
The accommodations that were granted after an alleged delay include a special sofa and chair; a touchpad mouse and keyboard; a glass or thick plexiglass chair mat to accommodate the weight of Plaintiff and his heavy zero-gravity chair; monitor arms to hold computer monitors with this zero gravity desk; a footstool and laptop holder for his courtroom; and a part of Plaintiff's telework request. Plaintiff asserts that the Agency initially offered or supplied equipment that Plaintiff deemed inadequate—like a surplus sofa from storage instead of the specific type he requested, or an ineffective floor mat—but that "[e]ventually the proper equipment was furnished." Id. ¶ 13. Because this equipment was ultimately provided, Plaintiff's claim is that the delay in receiving it constitutes disability discrimination and failure to accommodate under the Rehabilitation Act. And, because these accommodations have been provided, injunctive relief is not available so presumably Plaintiff seeks damages.
In some circumstances, "an employer's delay in providing reasonable accommodation may violate [*11]  the ADA." Selenke v. Medical Imaging of Colorado, 248 F.3d 1249, 1262 (10th Cir. 2001). However, delays resulting from internal bureaucracy or engaging in the interactive process are generally insufficient to establish discriminatory delay. See, e.g., Okello v. Dominguez, 2006 WL 3065573, at *5 (N.D. Cal. 2006) (13-month delay in processing reasonable accommodation request, attributable to internal bureaucracy, insufficient to show adverse employment action).
Here, the FAC is devoid of factual allegations establishing either that any accommodation was in fact delayed any significant amount of time, or that the delay was unlawful. See, e.g., Beck v. University of Wisconsin Bd. of Regents, 75 F.3d 1130, 1135 (7th Cir. 1996) (in evaluating whether a request for a reasonable accommodation was denied, a court should determine whether a party delayed the process in bad faith). To the contrary, the FAC alleges facts tending to show that any delays were caused by bureaucratic processes such as obtaining medical paperwork (FAC ¶ 18), by funding problems (FAC ¶ 12), by trying equipment already on hand (FAC ¶ 17), and by engaging in the interactive process to find accommodations that would work, a process that involved some trial and error. (FAC ¶¶ 13, 17, 21.) Delays caused by such circumstances are not actionable as disability discrimination or failure to accommodate under the ADA because Plaintiff did not [*12]  suffer those delays because of his disability.

B. Plaintiff Has Adequately Pled His Claims As To His Denied or Still-Pending Requests.
The denied or still-pending requests for accommodation are the request to telework after hearings, and for a transfer to San Francisco. The Court finds that the allegations pled suffice to state a claim. The Agency's main argument is that Plaintiff has not alleged that his physical presence is non-essential to his position, or why he is otherwise entitled to that request. But Plaintiff does allege such facts, specifically stating he does not need to interface with other employees on non-hearing days or when hearings are concluded. See FAC ¶ 23. Furthermore, it can be inferred that Plaintiff's presence is non-essential because the Agency does permit him to telework sometimes. The Agency does not separately challenge the request to transfer to San Francisco, and upon review of the FAC, the Court finds this aspect of the claim adequately pled.

C. Plaintiff Has Adequately Pled that the Agency Failed to Engage in the Interactive Process In Part.
District courts in the Ninth Circuit have recognized that there is no "stand-alone claim for failure to engage in [*13]  the interactive process." Yonemoto v. McDonald, 114 F.Supp.3d 1067, 1114 (D. Haw. 2015) (citing Barnett v. U.S. Air, Inc., 228 F.3d 1105, 1115 (9th Cir. 2000)). Instead, the claims for failure to provide a reasonable accommodation and failure to engage in the interactive process are intertwined: a failure to engage in the interactive process is cognizable only if "a reasonable accommodation would have been possible." See Yonemoto, 114 F.Supp.3d at 1114-15 (citation omitted); see also id. at n.21 (collecting cases from other Courts of Appeal so holding). Thus, a failure to engage claim presumes an accommodation would have been available but was not provided, in part because the employer did not engage in the interactive process. See, e.g., Minnihan v. Mediacom Commc'ns Corp., 779 F.3d 803, 813 (8th Cir. 2015) (where an employer fails to engage in the interactive process, a plaintiff must still establish that "the employee could have been reasonably accommodated but for the employer's lack of good faith").
Based on the above, the accommodations that were allegedly delayed but ultimately provided cannot give rise to a claim for failure to engage. Furthermore, as noted, the FAC includes allegations that during the alleged delay, the Agency was taking steps that amount to engaging in the interactive process. As to the denied or still-pending requests for accommodation (telework on hearing days and transfer to [*14]  San Francisco), however, the Agency makes no separate argument that they cannot support a claim for failure to engage, so the Court finds that aspect of the claim adequately pled.

D. Plaintiff Has Not Pled A Claim for Retaliation
To plead a claim for retaliation under the Rehabilitation Act, a plaintiff must plead "'(1) involvement in a protected activity, (2) an adverse employment action and (3) a causal link between the two.'" Coons, 383 F.3d at 887 (quoting Brown v. City of Tucson, 336 F.3d 1181, 1187 (9th Cir. 2003). The causal element requires a plaintiff to establish that the unlawful retaliation would not have occurred "but-for" his engagement in protected activity. Univ. of Texas Southwestern Med. Ctr. v. Nassar, 570 U.S. 338, 360 (2013).
Here, Plaintiff alleges that his repeated requests for accommodations and his December 2015 EEO Complaint are protected activities. Plaintiff says that the adverse actions were delays in receiving adequate accommodations, being asked for medical documentation beyond what he had already provided (FAC ¶¶ 18, 25), and requests that were ignored or denied. The Agency does not dispute that requesting accommodations and filing an EEO complaint could be protected activities, but contends that Plaintiff has not pled facts showing that it took any adverse action against him because of his protected activities.
Plaintiff has [*15]  not pled any facts to support the inference of a causal link between his claimed protected activities and the alleged adverse employment actions. As to the delays, whether they were "adverse employment actions" cannot be inferred without some allegations establishing the length of those delays. And as noted above, Plaintiff pleads facts tending to show that delays were caused by the normal bureaucratic processes required to obtain or purchase equipment, and not in response to Plaintiff's protected activities. The FAC also shows that as a result of the interactive process, Plaintiff's equipment request were all granted to his satisfaction. These allegations do not give rise to a plausible inference of retaliation.
As to the medical documentation, an employer may seek additional medical evidence to determine whether a reasonable accommodation is needed, and what kind. See Allen v. Pac. Bell, 348 F.3d 1113, 1115 (9th Cir. 2003) (employer can seek additional medical documentation in considering an accommodation request).Plaintiff alleges no facts that would tend to establish that the Agency's request for additional medical documentation was retaliatory. To the contrary, after Plaintiff submitted his medical documentation, he received the kind [*16]  of sofa he required, and likewise received in part his telework request. Again, these allegations do not lead to a plausible inference of retaliation, and instead undermine such an inference.
As to the denied and outstanding requests, there are simply no facts alleged tending to show any causal link between the Agency's conduct and Plaintiff's protected activities. Plaintiff urges the Court to consider the entire course of his dealing with the Agency instead of looking at each request in isolation, but this approach does not aide Plaintiff; instead, it shows that the Agency considered Plaintiff's accommodation requests, ultimately granted all of his equipment requests, granted in part and denied in part his telework request, and denied his request to transfer to San Francisco. The FAC is simply devoid of any facts that would tend to establish that the Agency delayed or denied any of these requests because of Plaintiff's protected activities.

E. Plaintiff Has Not Pled Hostile Work Environment.
In its reply, the Agency argues that Plaintiff failed to exhaust his remedies as to this claim because it is not specifically referenced in Plaintiff's EEOC complaint. The Court rejects this argument [*17]  because the Agency raises it for the first time in reply. However, it also fails on the merits. Plaintiff's hostile work environment claim is that all of the allegedly discriminatory conduct he experienced—and that he alleged in his EEO complaint—was sufficiently severe or pervasive to amount to harassment. Thus, this claim derives from the same facts and type of conduct that gave rise to his exhausted claims. Therefore, and because Plaintiff has not had an opportunity to respond to this argument, the Court rejects the Agency's exhaustion argument.
However, the claim is nevertheless inadequately pled. The Court assumes, without deciding, that a claim for hostile work environment under the ADA exists in the Ninth Circuit and that it would be analyzed under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. To state such a claim, Plaintiff would have to allege that (1) he was subject to verbal or physical conduct of a nature involving his disability status, (2) the conduct was unwelcome, and (3) the conduct was so severe or pervasive that it altered his terms of employment. See Manatt v. Bank of Am., NA, 339 F.3d 792, 798 (9th Cir. 2003). The Supreme Court has also emphasized that conduct does not amount to actionable harassment unless it is both "objectively and subjectively offensive, one [*18]  that a reasonable person would find hostile or abusive" and that "conduct must be extreme to amount to a change in the terms and conditions of employment." Faragher v. City of Boca Raton, 524 U.S. 775, 787 (1998) (discussing standard in context of sexual harassment).
Here, Plaintiff alleges no conduct of a harassing nature. The FAC is devoid of allegations that could establish that the Agency's conduct in responding to Plaintiff's accommodation requests was offensive, hostile, or abusive. Plaintiff faults the Agency for seeking additional medical documentation, giving him inadequate equipment (before giving him adequate equipment), and ignoring or rebuffing certain of his attempts to engage the Agency. But again, there are simply no allegations plausibly establishing that any of these responses were anything but a bureaucratic agency attempting to respond to Plaintiff's many requests.

F. Plaintiff Has Not Pled Facts Establishing Deliberate Indifference as Required for His Claim for Damages.
To recover monetary damages under the Rehabilitation Act, "a plaintiff must prove intentional discrimination on the part of the defendant." Duvall v. County of Kitsap, 260 F.3d 1124, 1138 (9th Cir. 2001). "Intentional discrimination" means "deliberate indifference." "Deliberate indifference requires both knowledge that a harm to a federally [*19]  protected right is substantially likely, and a failure to act upon that the likelihood." Id. at 1139.
The facts alleged do not establish that the Agency failed to act in response to Plaintiff's requests for reasonable accommodations. To the contrary, the FAC alleges that the Agency did respond, ultimately granted all of Plaintiff's specific equipment request, and granted and denied in part his remaining requests. Therefore, Plaintiff has not pled that the Agency failed to act and therefore cannot seek damages. Plaintiff's claim for damages is therefore STRICKEN.
The Court rejects the Agency's argument that Plaintiff's request for injunctive relief is too vague.

IV. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, Defendant's Motion to Dismiss Plaintiff's First Amended Complaint is GRANTED in part and DENIED in part as discussed above.
Plaintiff may file a Second Amended Complaint within 21 days of the issuance of this Order.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
Dated: June 29, 2018
/s/ André Birotte Jr.
HONORABLE ANDRÉ BIROTTE JR.
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT JUDGE


End of Document

