Lee v. Yellowpages.Com LLC
United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division
January 25, 2019, Decided
CIVIL ACTION FILE NO. 1:17-cv-397-ELR-JKL

Reporter
2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 250502 *; 2019 WL 13292976
ROBIN LEE - LEAH DAVIS, Plaintiff, v. YELLOWPAGES.COM LLC and YP HOLDINGS, LLC, Defendants.
Counsel:  [*1] For Robin Lee - Leah Davis, Plaintiff: Brian J. Sutherland, Thomas Joseph Mew IV, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Buckley Beal LLP, Atlanta, GA.
For Yellowpages.com LLC, YP HOLDINGS LLC, Defendants: Ashley D. Brightwell, Alston & Bird LLP-GA, Atlanta, GA; Anna Beth Saraie, Alston & Bird LLP - Atl, Atlanta, GA.
Judges: JOHN K. LARKINS III, United States Magistrate Judge.
Opinion by: JOHN K. LARKINS III
Opinion



ORDER AND FINAL REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION
This is an employment discrimination case arising under the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq., the Family and Medical Leave Act ("FMLA"), 29 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq., Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., and the Equal Pay Act, 29 U.S.C. § 206(d). Defendants Yellowpages.com LLC and YP Holdings, LLC (collectively, "YP") have filed a motion for summary judgment. [Doc. 62.] The Court heard oral argument on that motion on January 15, 2019. Plaintiff Robin Lee "Leah" Davis also has filed a motion for leave to file a sur-reply brief. [Doc. 72.] For the following reasons, the motion for leave to file sur-reply is DENIED [Doc. 72], and it is RECOMMENDED that the motion for summary judgment [Doc. 62] be GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART.

I. SUMMARY JUDGMENT STANDARD
A court should grant summary judgment when there are no genuine issues of material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). The movant bears the initial burden of showing [*2]  that it is entitled to summary judgment. Id. ("The court shall grant summary judgment if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law."); Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323 (1986) ("Of course, a party seeking summary judgment always bears the initial responsibility of informing the district court of the basis for its motion, and identifying those portions of [the record] which it believes demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact."); Clark v. Coats & Clark, Inc., 929 F.2d 604, 608 (11th Cir. 1991) (holding that Celotex did not change the rule that the movant bore the initial burden, and stating, "Even after Celotex it is never enough simply to state that the non-moving party cannot meet its burden at trial"). The movant may carry its burden by showing the court that there is "an absence of evidence to support the nonmoving party's case." Celotex, 477 U.S. at 325.
"Only when that burden has been met does the burden shift to the nonmoving party to demonstrate that there is indeed a material issue of fact that precludes summary judgment." Clark, 929 F.2d at 608. The nonmovant is then required "to go beyond the pleadings" and to present competent evidence in the form of affidavits, answers to interrogatories, depositions, admissions and the like, [*3]  designating "specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." Celotex, 477 U.S. at 324 (quotation omitted); see Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). "[M]ere conclusions and unsupported factual allegations are legally insufficient to defeat a summary judgment motion." Ellis v. England, 432 F.3d 1321, 1326 (11th Cir. 2005). Resolving all doubts in favor of the nonmoving party, the court must determine "whether a fair-minded jury could return a verdict for the plaintiff on the evidence presented." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 252 (1986). In evaluating a summary judgment motion, "[t]he evidence of the non-movant is to be believed, and all justifiable inferences are to be drawn in [the non-movant's] favor. Id. at 255.

II. FACTS
In setting out the facts of this case, where possible, the Court relies on Defendants' Statement of Material Facts ("DSMF" [Doc. 62-5]), Plaintiff's Statement of Material Facts ("PSMF" [Doc. 68-7]), and the responses thereto ("RDSMF" [Doc. 68-6] and "R-PSMF" [Doc. 71]). The Court also has conducted its own review of the record. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(3). Taking the facts in the light most favorable to Davis as the non-moving party, the relevant facts are as follows:

A. Davis's Medical Condition and Her Daughter's Condition
Davis suffers from fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue syndrome, and migraine headaches. (DSMF ¶ 7; PSMF ¶ 12.) At [*4]  the time relevant to this case, her conditions manifested as recurring episodes or flare-ups, and she suffered fatigue, sleeplessness, severe pain and difficulty with walking, severe neck pain that radiated through her upper back and arms, depression, anxiety, and joint pain. (PSMF ¶¶ 14, 16.) As a result of those symptoms, during a flare-up, Davis had difficulty sitting at a desk all day and carrying her laptop computer. (Id. ¶ 17). She found it useful to "take a nap during the day or at least close [her] eyes and rest [her] head." (Dep. of Robin Lee "Leah" Davis [Doc. 63] at 51.) Sometimes, she needed only a 15-minute break, but sometimes she needed an hour. (Id.) Moreover, when Davis was suffering a migraine, she could not drive, and there were other times when she felt too weak to drive. (PSMF ¶¶ 19-20.)
Davis's daughter also suffers from a medical condition characterized by flare-ups, in which she is unable to care for her own medical, hygienic, or nutritional needs or her safety. (DSMF ¶ 3; PSMF ¶¶ 21-23.) During those flareups, Davis has to stay home to care for her daughter and transport her daughter to medical appointments. (PSMF ¶ 23.)

B. YP's Hiring of Davis
Davis was recommended [*5]  and recruited for a human resources position with YP by Steve Flagler, who was a human resources worker for YP and was Davis's former colleague. (PSMF ¶ 6; Davis Dep. at 12.) Davis was interested in the position and interviewed. (Davis Dep. at 12.) Davis believes that, at the time of her interview, Flagler's salary was about $120,000 with 15% bonus potential. (Id. at 11.) She testified that Flagler told her husband (who used to be Flagler's supervisor at another business) how much YP was going to pay him when he resigned. (Id. at 11-12.) Davis recalled that YP offered to hire her at a salary of about $108,000 to $110,000. (Id. at 12.) According to Davis, Flagler recruited her for the job after he was asked to look for his own "clone," and he told Davis that her job would be "the same job as his and that in fact [they] would be sitting right alongside one another [and] reporting to the same manager." (Id. at 13.) Davis tried to negotiate for pay parity with Flagler. (Id.) Davis negotiated her salary with Keith Halpern, who was to be her direct supervisor, through a YP internal recruiter acting as an intermediary. (Id. at 13-14.) After "some back and forth," the recruiter told Davis [*6]  that the difference between Davis's job and Flagler's that she was not going to be "working with labor." (Id. at 14.) Flagler's position required him to work with a unionized workforce, which YP considered a more valuable skill. (Id. at 14-15.) Davis's position would require her to work with a nonunionized workforce. (Id. at 15.)

C. Davis's Employment with YP
Davis was hired by YP in May 2013 as a Labor and Employment Relations Manager, which was a combination of a human resources and employee relations position. (DSMF ¶ 1.) She initially reported to Halpern. (Id.; PSMF ¶ 11.) Early in her employment with YP, Davis told Halpern about her daughter's condition so that he would know she took her job seriously but had frequent medical emergencies. (Davis Dep. at 85-86.) In June 2014, Davis applied and was approved for intermittent FMLA leave to care for her daughter. (DSMF ¶ 4.) Davis often worked from home so that she could care for her daughter and manage her own condition. (See DMSF ¶ 5; R-DSMF ¶ 5; Davis Dep. at 131.) Her requests to work from home were never denied, except on one occasion when she asked to work from home because her daughter had a fever.1 (DSMF ¶ 6; R-DSMF ¶ 6; Davis [*7]  Dep. at 131-32.) Another manager was out, so Halpern asked whether she had any alternative, and Davis made arrangements to come into the office in the afternoon. (Davis Dep. at 131-32.)
Shortly after her employment with YP began, Davis was given responsibility over YP's "Southeast" region. (PSMF ¶ 25.) Flagler previously had been responsible for the Southeast region but had taken over a region in the north mid-Atlantic part of the country. (Id.; Davis Dep. at 33.) Taking over the Southeast region required Davis to work with a unionized workforce and "more than doubled" her job duties. (PSMF ¶¶ 26-29; Davis Dep. at 39-40.) YP had used a consultant, Dennis Morgan,2 to handle many (but not all) of the union matters within that region, but "very shortly" after Davis took over the Southeast region, Morgan left YP. (Davis Dep. at 34-35, 38-39.)
Davis asked her supervisor Halpern for a salary adjustment because a unionized workforce had been added to her job duties. (PSMF ¶ 29.) She believed that she and Flagler were doing the same work, but she was not being paid as well. (PSMF ¶ 33.) He denied her request and "raised his voice." (PSMF ¶ 31; Davis Dep. at 94.) He also told Davis that Flagler's [*8]  salary was none of her business.3 (PSMF ¶ 32; Davis Dep. at 115.)
Sometime in 2014, Halpern told Davis that she would be promoted to Senior Manager. (PSMF ¶ 34.) On November 17, 2014, she sent Halpern an email asking, "Any word on my job grade and bonus level? And when is it retroactive to?" (Davis Dep., Ex. 10.) It was Davis's understanding that senior managers received 15% bonuses as well as additional compensation. (PSMF ¶ 35.) Halpern responded, "Have not heard back from Keith Brown [a YP employee in charge of compensation] yet." (Davis Dep., Ex. 10.)
On November 21, 2014, Davis requested a continuous leave of absence from December 3, 2014, to January 5, 2015, because of flaring fibromyalgia symptoms, which later turned out to be shingles. (PSMF ¶¶ 37-38; Davis Dep. at 75-76, 100.) On November 22, 2014, Davis emailed Halpern, stating "One thing I wanted to discuss is whether Keith Brown had gotten an answer about the date for my promotion to senior manager, the full bonus and at what rate, and ensuring equitable pay for equitable work among our team mates." (Davis Dep., Ex. 11.)
Halpern discovered Davis's leave request and "yelled at her" on the phone for putting in her request [*9]  because he had not been able to plan for it. (PSMF ¶ 39; Davis Dep. at 99-100.) Davis unavailingly tried to explain that she had requested the leave as a prophylactic measure in case she became too sick to work. (Davis Dep. at 100.) On November 25, 2014, "almost immediately" after Halpern yelled at her for putting in a leave request, Halpern responded to her November 22 email:
Leah, as I reflect back on this I recall the discussions we had about your title and the fact that you were managing Kim and thought it appropriate to have the Sr. Manager title. I did agree to the title change but I did not agree or indicate that there would be a comp/bonus increase. I may have stated that I would consider it at the end of the comp/performance management year[] but did not promise anything. I will certainly consider this for the upcoming review period.
I don't understand what you mean regarding "equitable pay" with respect to team mates. Focus on excelling at your job, doing it to the best of your ability, and you will be rewarded for your efforts. That is all any of us can do. Thanks.
(Davis Dep., Ex. 11.) Brown, the YP employee in charge of compensation, told Davis that Halpern had asked him [*10]  not to look into her salary anymore. (Davis Dep. at 116.) YP investigated Davis's complaints about compensation parity and Halpern's alleged retaliation against her for requesting pay parity in late 2014.4 (PSMF ¶¶ 46-47.)
Effective January 4, 2015, YP changed the titles of Davis and another female employee from "Manager, Labor and Employee Relations" to "Senior Manager, Field Human Resources."5 (Dep. of Karen Bennett, Ex. 4.) With the title change, Davis was given a raise from $108,150 with a 10% bonus to $110,000 with a 15% bonus. The other manager, Debi Kristiansen, also was given a raise from $116,521 with a "12G" bonus to $120,000 with a 15% bonus. YP gave Shirley Glynn, "Senior Manager, Labor and Employee Relations," a raise from $105,000 with a 15% bonus to $120,000 with a 15% bonus and also changed her title to "Senior Manager, Field Human Resources." All three employees were reassigned from Halpern's team to YP Director Kristin Crossman's team. (Id.; DSMF ¶ 2.) As relevant to this case, Crossman's supervisor was Karen Bennett, the chief human resources officer for YP. (PSMF ¶ 109.)
Davis told her new supervisor Crossman she had been diagnosed with fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue [*11]  syndrome, and migraines and that she would sometimes need to work from home. (PSMF ¶¶ 61-63.) Davis also told Crossman about her daughter's specific medical condition and that she had set up FMLA leave to care for her daughter and take her to medical appointments.6 (PSMF ¶ 64.)
Meanwhile, Halpern had prepared Davis's end-of-year performance evaluation while she was out on leave. (PSMF ¶ 52.) He rated Davis as "successful," which was a middle-tier rating and the lowest rating he could give without providing documentation to support a lower performance review. (PSMF ¶ 54; Davis Dep., Ex. 13.) Halpern's review of Davis was praised her for her effectiveness with speaking to groups of managers and employees, for her investigative skills, and for improving some aspects of her labor-relations work. (Davis Dep., Ex. 13.) He criticized her, however, for giving labor-relations tasks to other human resources employees. Crossman also contributed to the narrative portion of the review in order allow Davis to submit positive "self-review" comments, as she had missed the opportunity to submit such comments while she was out on FMLA leave. (Id.)
Halpern personally delivered his performance review to [*12]  Davis in March 2015. (PSMF ¶ 53.) Crossman was also in attendance. (Id.) Davis was upset by the review and went into the hall, followed by Crossman. (Id. ¶ 56.) Davis asked Crossman whether she had ever seen someone deliver a performance review like Halpern had done, and Crossman replied, "No." (Id. ¶ 58.)
At some point while Crossman was her supervisor, Davis asked Crossman for a rolling briefcase to use to transport her laptop computer, explaining that she had difficulty carrying her laptop due to her fibromyalgia. (PSMF ¶¶ 70-71.) Davis repeated her request on two or three occasions. (Id. ¶ 73.) Crossman either forgot about her request or did not "follow[] up" (although Crossman did eventually submit a request for one), so Davis purchased the rolling briefcase herself. (Id. ¶¶ 70, 72; R-PSMF ¶ 70.) Davis was sometimes required to bring her laptop home from work, but sometimes she would just use her phone when she worked from home, depending on the type of work she was doing. (Davis Dep. at 124-25.)
On April 3, 2015, Davis asked Crossman to "formalize [their] practice where [she] was able to work from home on an as-needed basis through the ADA." (DSMF ¶ 11; PSMF ¶ 79.) In an email, [*13]  Davis told Crossman that she would "like to formalize working from home except as needed for meetings," and asked whether Crossman wanted to go through the "formal[]" process with "ADA paperwork." (Davis Dep., Ex. 15.) In Davis's opinion, about 90% of her duties could be accomplished remotely. (PSMF ¶ 82.) Crossman responded to Davis's email that if she was "asking to work from home on a full time basis, [they] would need to go through the ADA process." (Davis Dep., Ex. 15.) At some point, Crossman told Davis that she would handle the request informally and that there was no need to go to human resources with her request. (DSMF ¶ 12; PSMF ¶ 83.) The next week, Crossman called Davis into her office and told her that her request was denied and that she could not work from home all the time. (DSMF ¶ 14; PSMF ¶¶ 85-87.)
On April 8, 2015, Davis had to cancel a scheduled visit to YP's Miami office because of a migraine. (PSMF ¶ 92; Davis Dep., Ex. 15.) Crossman became visibly annoyed and very curt with Davis after she had to reschedule that meeting. (PSMF ¶¶ 93-95.) In late April 2015, Crossman told Kristiansen, who worked from home about half the time, that she could work from home only [*14]  one day a week and that trips to branch offices were mandatory. (PSMF ¶¶ 88-91; Kristiansen Dep. at 62; Kristiansen Dep, Ex. 3.)
On April 21, 2015, Davis applied and was approved for intermittent FMLA leave for her own medical condition through October 19, 2015. (PSMF ¶ 96.) She also was approved for intermittent FMLA leave to care for her daughter from April 17, 2015, to October 16, 2015. (Id. ¶ 100.) She took intermittent FMLA leave on April 20, May 21, May 22, June 15, June 16, and July 6, 2015. (Id. ¶ 97.) Davis took FMLA instead of working from home, at least on some of those occasions, because she did not believe she was allowed to work from home more than one day a week. (See id. ¶¶ 98, 99.)

D. YP's Reduction in Force
In June 2015, YP engaged in its "6+6 process," a financial forecast performed six months into the year to project revenues for the remaining six months. (DSMF ¶ 17.) The forecast projected a decrease in revenues and, as a result, YP assessed all of its administrative, non-revenue-producing roles to determine how to reduce expenses. (Id. ¶ 18.) Based on that assessment, Crossman was instructed to reduce her department's headcount by one employee. (Id. ¶ 19.) Other [*15]  YP employees in administrative roles were terminated during the reduction in force as well. (See Davis Dep. at 204-05.)
Crossman decided that the role to eliminate was a Senior Field Human Resources Manager position. (Dep. of Kristin Crossman [Doc. 65] at 128-31.) The two employees on her team who were not Senior Field Human Resources Managers were an employee with "analytical skills" and "unique knowledge of [YP's] sales compensation and personnel processes" and an employee who was responsible for YP's call centers. (Id. at 128.) YP's call centers had recently been "restructured . . . together under one leader, so [YP] needed one person to work with one leader." (Id. at 129.) At the time, four Senior Managers supporting different geographic regions reported to Crossman. (DSMF ¶ 20.) Crossman testified that she eliminated two Senior Managers from consideration for the reduction in force because they lived in the geographical regions they supported and had specific knowledge of collective bargaining agreements in those regions. (Id. ¶ 21; RDSMF ¶ 21; PSMF ¶ 114; Crossman Dep. at 132-33.) The remaining two employees, Davis and Shirley Glynn, both lived in and supported employees in the [*16]  "East" region. (DSMF ¶ 22; PSMF ¶ 115.)
Crossman testified that she went through YP's "Rate and Rank" process to determine whether to eliminate Glynn's or Davis's position. (DSMF ¶ 23; R-DSMF ¶ 23.) Crossman reduced her "Rate and Rank" evaluation to writing in a document dated July 1, 2015, and entitled "Sr. Field HR Manager Selection." (PSMF ¶ 108; Crossman Dep. at 116-17; Crossman Dep., Ex. 21.) She further testified that the key things for her to consider were the skill sets that YP needed in the future, "aligned with [employee] performance and key components of the job." (DSMF ¶ 24; R-DSMF ¶ 24.) Based on those considerations, she testified, she identified six factors in making the reduction in force determination: (1) knowledge of YP's "Digital Region" practices; (2) knowledge of various collective bargaining agreements with the unions in the East region; (3) employee relations capabilities; (4) job performance; (5) proximity to growing sales teams; and (6) tenure. (DSMF ¶ 25; R-DSMF ¶ 25; PSMF ¶ 117; Crossman Dep., Ex. 21.) According to Crossman, the most important factors were the employee's knowledge of YP's Digital Region practices and collective bargaining agreements in the [*17]  East region and proximity to growing sales teams, and the least important was tenure. (Crossman Dep. at 202-03.)
Regarding the first factor, the "Digital Region" was YP's sales division for digital advertising. (DSMF ¶ 26.) Its employees were spread throughout the country and were covered by their own collective bargaining agreement. (Id.) Crossman and her supervisor, Bennett, testified that YP considered the Digital Region "the future direction of the company," and the plan was to expand the Digital Region. (Id. ¶ 27; R-DSMF ¶ 27.) Regarding the "Knowledge of Digital Region Practices" factor, Crossman found:
[T]he digital region practices will expand over the next year into all of our offices and how all markets will be modeled in the future. This specifically includes organizational structure, training practices, selling practices, and performance management. As this happens, knowledge of these practices and how they relate to people will be very important. Shirley is the only Senior Field HR manager who has this knowledge. Leah has not worked within the digital region and is primarily knowledgeable of the practices in the Southeast. To lose the knowledge of digital region practices [*18]  in the middle of this expansion would be very difficult whereas others possess knowledge of the "in region" practices.
(Crossman Dep., Ex. 21.)
Regarding the second factor, knowledge of collective bargaining agreements in the East region, Crossman indicated on the Rank and Rate form that Glynn was primarily knowledgeable on the Connecticut and Digital Region collective bargaining agreements, but Davis was more knowledgeable about the Southeast region agreements. (Crossman Dep., Ex. 21.) Crossman noted, however, that two other employees in the human resources department also had knowledge of the Southeast collective bargaining agreement, but no other employees had knowledge of the Connecticut collective bargaining agreement or the Digital Region collective bargaining agreement. (Id.) Davis testified that both she and Flagler were familiar with "parts of" the Digital Region's collective bargaining agreement because they had been "selected to go to various offices within the digital region to assess them for union vulnerability." (Davis Dep. at 269.) She did not recall "the particulars" of how that experience gave her knowledge of the collective bargaining experience. (Id. at 270.) Moreover, [*19]  one of the other human resources employees who was familiar with the Southeast region collective bargaining agreement was in a different division, and Crossman did not know whether that other employee had handled grievance matters with respect to the Southeast region collective bargaining agreement. (R-DSMF ¶ 31; Crossman Dep. at 150-51.)
As to the employee relations factor, Crossman found that both Glynn and Davis had handled difficult employee relations situations and ethics complaints in a reasonable time frame. (Crossman Dep., Ex. 21.) In the performance category, Glynn previously had been rated "highly successful" and Davis had been rated "successful." Crossman thought that both Glynn and Davis would be rated "successful" at their mid-year evaluations. (Id.) Crossman testified that Davis's 2014 evaluation of Davis had "very little" effect on the overall decision, however. (Crossman Dep. at 201.) Regarding the employee's physical proximity to growing sales teams, Crossman noted that YP had concrete plans to enlarge all the sales teams in the Northeast region, and Glynn was the only human resources employee for sales in that region. (Crossman Dep., Ex. 21.) Finally, as to tenure, [*20]  Davis was a two-year employee, while Glynn had worked over 25 years at YP. (Id.)
In the Rate and Rank document, Crossman concluded:
Given the above Shirley Glynn will be retained whereas the role that Leah Davis holds will be eliminated. Shirley is based in the same region and will be able to pick up the responsibilities that Leah has and the work supporting the digital region will be spread between all of the remaining Sr. Regional Field HR Managers. While Shirley's knowledge of the SEA collective bargaining agreement is not as deep as Leah's, there are other individuals who have significant knowledge of the SEA agreement that can provide additional support.
(Crossman Dep., Ex. 21.)
Bennett approved Crossman's decision. (PSMF ¶ 39.) Crossman also testified that she "validated" the decision with Bill Ridgeway, who apparently was a high-level YP employee with whom Davis had a good working relationship. (PSMF ¶ 138; Crossman Dep. at 152-53; see Davis Dep. at 40-41, 207.) Davis was told her position had been eliminated on July 9, 2015. (DSMF ¶ 39; PSMF ¶ 106.) When Crossman told Davis about her decision, Davis asked whether Ridgeway knew, and Crossman told her Ridgeway had not been told because [*21]  she "did not want to put him in that situation." (PSMF ¶ 139.)
After her termination, Davis's position was not replaced. (DSMF ¶ 43.) Crossman intended to have Glynn teach the other Regional Field Human Resources Managers about YP's practices for the Digital Region and its collective bargaining agreement. (PSMF ¶ 128.) Some of Glynn's assignments in the Digital Region were reassigned to Kristiansen. (Dep. of Debi Kristiansen [Doc. 67] at 93-94.) Kristiansen did not have to undergo any training to take over those responsibilities, although there was "an awful lot to understand that was different than the rest of the business." (PSMF ¶ 130; Kristiansen Dep. at 42-43.) YP also had Morgan, its former consultant, return to provide Glynn with training on the Southeast collective bargaining agreement and to assist with a backlog of grievances in that region. (Crossman Dep. at 154-55.)

E. YP's Hiring of a New Director
Davis believed that YP's practice was to encourage employees who had been laid off to apply for job openings and to hold open job openings to allow employees who were going to be laid off to apply. (PSMF ¶ 134.) Around the time of Davis's termination, YP had an opening for a Director [*22]  of Human Resources position. (Id. ¶ 135.) On June 29, 2015, Davis emailed Bennett to express her interest in the position. (Id. ¶ 136.) Bennett told her that she had posted the job opening on June 15 and already had completed interviews for candidates and chosen her final candidates. (Id. ¶ 137; Bennett Dep., Ex. 5.) Davis responded to ask, "In the spirit of soliciting open and honest feedback, can you tell me had I applied timely, would you have considered me a viable candidate for the HRBP role?" (Bennett Dep., Ex. 5.) Bennett responded, "In the spirit of complete candor, without a resume and more discussion (just as we do with any candidate in the screening process), it is uncertain for me to respond one way or the other." (Id.)

III. DAVIS'S CLAIMS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
In her amended complaint [Doc. 14], Davis alleges that YP: violated the ADA by terminating her on the basis of her disability (Count 1), terminating her on the basis of her daughter's disability (Count 2), failing to accommodate her disability (Count 3), and retaliating against her for requesting an accommodation for her disability (Count 4). She further alleges that YP interfered with her rights under the FMLA by [*23]  terminating her (Count 5) and retaliated against her for taking FMLA leave by terminating her (Count 6). She also alleges that YP unlawfully discriminated against her on the basis of sex in violation of Title VII by paying her less than similarly situated male employees (Count 7) and unlawfully retaliated against her, in violation of Title VII's antiretaliation provision, for engaging in protected activity (Count 8). Finally, she alleges, YP violated the Equal Pay Act by paying her less than a male employee with the same or a substantially similar job (Count 9) and retaliated against her for engaging in protected activity under the Equal Pay Act (Count 10).
After discovery, YP filed a motion for summary judgment as to each of Davis's claims. [Doc. 62.] Davis filed a response [Doc. 68], and YP filed a reply [Doc. 70]. Davis also has filed a motion for leave to file a sur-reply. [Doc. 72.] YP opposes the motion, [Doc. 77], and Davis has filed a reply in support of her motion [Doc. 79].

IV. DAVIS'S MOTION FOR LEAVE TO FILE SUR-REPLY
When Davis responded to the motion for summary judgment, she submitted a declaration providing additional detail about the hours she worked with YP, her FMLA leave, her medical condition, and her [*24]  daughter's medical condition. (Davis Decl.) She also attached to her declaration a memorandum about YP's investigation into her compensation-discrimination claims that YP produced to her in discovery. (Davis Decl., Ex. 1.)
In her motion for leave to file a sur-reply brief, Davis argues that she should be allowed to respond to arguments YP raised arguments in its reply concerning a statement in her declaration and the authenticity and reliability of the YP investigation memorandum she attached to her declaration. [Doc. 72-1 at 2-3.] YP also raised an argument in its reply that neither Crossman nor Bennett knew about her compensation discrimination complaints, and Davis wishes to address that argument, which she contends is belied by the record as supplemented by a corrected version of Exhibit 1 to the Bennett deposition. [Id. at 3-4.] Davis also seeks leave to respond to an argument YP raised that there was no "causal connection" between her FMLA leave and her termination. [Id. at 3.]
Sur-replies are disfavored in this Court, and, although the Court has discretion to allow a sur-reply, it should exercise that decision only where a valid reason for additional briefing exists. See Fedrick v. Mercedes-Benz USA, LLC, 366 F. Supp. 2d 1190, 1197 (N.D. Ga. 2005). Davis [*25]  has not offered a valid reason here. For starters, Davis's argument that she should be allowed to respond to YP's contention that she did not establish a causal connection between her protected activity under the FMLA and her termination is merely an attempt to have the last word. That is not an appropriate reason to file a sur-reply.
Nor does Davis not need to file a sur-reply brief to correct an exhibit to Bennett's deposition. Davis already addressed the YP argument that Crossman and Bennett did not know about her compensation discrimination claims. (R-DSMF ¶ 58.) To correct the record, she needed to supplement the record when she filed her response brief or to seek leave to do so later, as it appears she did not notice that Exhibit 1 was incomplete until later. That said, even though the Court will not consider the sur-reply brief, the Court does consider the record supplemented to reflect the correct version of Exhibit 1 to Bennett's deposition [Doc. 72-3].
The Court also does not find that YP's arguments about Davis's declaration and the memorandum about its investigation warrant additional briefing. Above, the Court addressed and rejected YP's arguments that Davis's statement [*26]  that she told Crossman about her disability should be disregarded and that the investigation memorandum is unauthenticated. For the reasons discussed below, with respect to Davis's compensation claim, the Court also concludes that YP's argument—that Davis has not offered admissible, reliable evidence of Flagler's salary for purposes of proving her compensation discrimination claims—is without merit. The motion for leave to file a sur-reply brief is therefore DENIED. [Doc. 72.]

V. YP'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
In considering YP's motion for summary judgment, the Court begins with the claims arising under the ADA, then turns to the claims arising under the FMLA, and finally considers the claims arising under Title VII and the Equal Pay Act.

A. ADA Claims

1. Failure to Accommodate
Davis contends that YP failed to accommodate her disability by formalizing her work-from-home arrangement and providing her with a rolling briefcase at her request. In its motion for summary judgment, YP argues that Davis's failure-to-accommodate claim should be dismissed because YP never denied her an accommodation. [Doc. 62-1 at 9-11.] YP never denied Davis's requests to work from home, even if Crossman did [*27]  not "formalize" the accommodation. [Id.] Moreover, Davis cannot state a claim based on YP's alleged failure to engage in the interactive process by not reducing Davis's accommodation to writing because the mere failure to engage in the interactive process does not violate the ADA. [Id. at 10.] Finally, as to Davis's contention that YP failed to provide her a rolling briefcase, YP argues that taking her laptop home at night was not an essential function of her job. [Id. at 10-11.] YP point out that Davis only wanted to take the laptop home for security purposes, but she could have opted to secure her laptop in her desk as well. [Id.]
Davis responds that YP denied her request for a rolling briefcase or laptop bag by failing to arrange for one to be provided, even though she needed the laptop to work from home. [Doc. 68 at 11-12.] She also argues that Crossman denied her request to work from home as needed by not letting her formalize her work-fromhome policy, thereby forcing her to take FMLA for her own medical condition. [Id. at 12-13.] YP also terminated her, rather than accommodating her, even though she could have performed the vast majority of her duties at home. [Id. at 13-14.]
 [*28] YP replies that Davis was not entitled to "formalize" her arrangement with YP to let her work from home and, contrary to Davis's assertions about being forced to use FMLA leave, she used FMLA to attend doctors' appointments. [Doc. 70 at 1-3.] YP also argues that it did not terminate Davis rather than accommodating her because it accommodated her work-from-home schedule, and her disability had no bearing on the reduction in force. [Id. at 3-4.] Finally, YP argues that Davis was not required to bring her laptop home as an essential function of her job. [Id. at 4-5.]
The ADA prohibits discrimination "against a qualified individual on the basis of disability." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). To prevail on a disability discrimination claim, the plaintiff must show that he is disabled, he was a "qualified individual" at the time he was discharged, and that he was discriminated against on the basis of his disability. Frazier-White v. Gee, 818 F.3d 1249, 1255 (11th Cir. 2016). Discrimination includes the failure to provide "reasonable accommodations" for the employee's disability, "unless doing so would impose undue hardship on the employer." Lucas v. W.W. Grainger, Inc., 257 F.3d 1249, 1255 (11th Cir. 2001). The ADA regulations contemplate that an employer and employee may need to engage in an "interactive process" to determine the appropriate reasonable accommodation. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3). It is the plaintiff's burden to identify a reasonable accommodation and demonstrate [*29]  that the accommodation allows him to perform the essential functions of her job. Lucas, 257 F.3d at 1255-56.
Beginning with Davis's request to formalize her work-from-home arrangement with YP, Davis has not pointed the Court to any authority suggesting that an employer must, in addition to providing an employee with a reasonable accommodation, commit to the accommodation by formal agreement or reduce the accommodation to writing. A plaintiff cannot show a violation of the ADA based on her employer's mere failure to engage in the interactive process; she also must show that the employer failed to provide her with a reasonable accommodation. See Sims v. Ala. Dep't of Human Res., No. 2:15-CV-421-TMP, 2017 WL 4611004, at *11 (N.D. Ala. Oct. 16, 2017) (holding that an employer's unwillingness to engage in the interactive process that leads to a failure to accommodate the employee violates the ADA); see also Williams v. Philadelphia Hous. Auth. Police Dep't, 380 F.3d 751, 772 (3d Cir. 2004) (holding that an employee can state a claim for failure to engage in the interactive process where the employer knew about the employee's disability, the employee requested accommodations or assistance for her disability, the employer did not make a good faith effort to assist her in seeking accommodations, and the employee could have been reasonably accommodated but for the employer's lack of good faith), superseded [*30]  by statute on other grounds as stated in McNelis v. Pa. Power Light, Susquehanna, LLC, No. 4:13-cv-2612, 2016 WL 5019199, at *26 n.14 (M.D. Pa. Mar. 23, 2016).
Here, assuming that working from home was a reasonable accommodation, there is no evidence that YP ever denied Davis leave to work from home while caring for her medical condition. On one occasion, a supervisor asked Davis whether she could make arrangements to come into the office when her daughter had a fever, and Davis agreed to come in during the afternoon when her husband was able to come home from work. (See Davis Dep. at 131-32.) On another occasion, Davis asked to postpone a trip to Pittsburgh because she thought she might get the flu, and her supervisor told her to make the trip but to come back early if she was not feeling well. (Id. at 125.) The Court does not find that these episodes constitute a denial of an accommodation to Davis, as they were unrelated to her disability, and her supervisor did not forbid her from working from home on either occasion. Davis also believes that she was "forced" to take FMLA or that she would have been denied leave to work from home if she had asked, but nobody at YP told Davis that she could not work from home.7 Davis points out that Kristiansen was told that she could work from home only one day [*31]  a week, rather than half the week, but Kristiansen did not have a "medical need or accommodation" requiring her to work from home. (Kristiansen Dep. at 62.) Davis therefore cannot state a claim for failure to accommodate based on her assumption that, if she had asked for leave to work from home, leave would have been denied. In short, on no occasion did YP's failure to formalize Davis's work-from-home arrangement result in Davis not being able to work from home to care for her disability.
As to Davis's claims about the rolling briefcase, the Court will assume arguendo that Davis needed her laptop to do her job, even if she could work from her phone some days. Thus, having a rolling briefcase would have allowed Davis to perform an "essential function" of her job while working from home, or at least the need for a rolling briefcase was part and parcel with her work-from-home accommodation. Davis made the request while Crossman was her supervisor, which means that she likely made the request in 2015. (Davis Dep. at 66.) She recalled making the request "two or three" times. (Id.) Crossman forgot about her request, and Davis procured a bag on her own. (Id. at 66-67.) Failure to act on a [*32]  request for an accommodation can constitute the denial of an accommodation, but that is a fact-specific inquiry. See Terrell v. USAir, 132 F.3d 621, 627-28 (11th Cir. 1998) (three month delay in providing employee with a specific type of keyboard was "reasonable" and not a denial of a reasonable accommodation where the plaintiff had "some access" to that type of keyboard and was not required to type when she had no access); Kintz v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 766 F. Supp. 2d 1245, 1256-57 (M.D. Ala. 2011) (15-day delay in providing employee with an automatic transmission package car was not unreasonable); Hartsfield v. Miami-Dade Cty., 90 F. Supp. 2d 1363, 1373 (S.D. Fla. 2000) (several-month delay in providing employee with a closed circuit television was reasonable, even where employee was in pain while working). Davis's assertion that she asked for the briefcase "two or three times"—without any further factual context for when those requests happened, how far apart the requests were, and how much time passed between Davis making the requests and procuring her own rolling briefcase—leaves the Court without a factual basis for concluding that YP denied her an accommodation.
Finally, Davis argues that YP terminated her in lieu of accommodating her disability, but, as explained above, there is no record evidence that YP failed to accommodate Davis. Moreover, for the reasons explained below [*33]  regarding Davis's discriminatory discharge claim, the Court cannot conclude that YP terminated Davis's employment so that it did not have to continue accommodating her disability.
For the foregoing reasons, YP is entitled to summary judgment on Davis's failure-to-accommodate claim.

2. Discrimination Based on Davis's Disabilities
Davis's next claim, that YP subjected her to disparate treatment on the basis of her disability, is a claim of discriminatory discharge. YP argues that Davis cannot establish a prima facie case that her disability played any role in her being chosen for the reduction-in-force. [Doc. 62-1 at 11-12.] Davis's position was eliminated, she was not replaced by anyone outside her protected class, and there is no record evidence that she was qualified for another position open at her termination. [Id. at 12.] Further, even if Davis could establish a prima facie case, YP offered a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for eliminating her position. Specifically, Crossman documented six factors that she considered in choosing to keep Glynn rather than Davis on staff. [Id.] Finally, YP argues, Davis cannot show that its legitimate nondiscriminatory reason was pretext for unlawful [*34]  discrimination because Crossman "knew nothing about [Davis's] medical condition other than that she had one that made it hard for her from time to time," and Bennett was not aware of her condition. [Id. at 12-13.] Also, Davis was not surprised to hear that YP's midyear revenues had decreased at the time of her firing, Davis's comparator had been in charge of the important Digital Region, and her position was not the only administrative role within the entire YP organization to be eliminated. [Id. at 13.]
Davis responds that she can establish a prima facie case of disability discrimination because she has a disability, is a "qualified individual" who can perform the essential functions of her job with or without a reasonable accommodation, and she was the target of an adverse employment action, namely, discharge. [Doc. 68 at 2-4.] She further contends that she can show that YP's reason for her termination is mere pretext for discrimination because Crossman bore her discriminatory animus and considered Halpern's retaliatory performance review in making the comparison between Glynn and Davis in the Rate and Rank process. [Id. at 4-5.] Davis also argues that Crossman's comparison of Glynn [*35]  and Davis was "manufactured," because she contrived reasons to eliminate recently-hired employees from consideration, eviscerating the "tenure" factor, and she eliminated an employee from consideration because she supervised call centers, even though senior managers previously had supervised the call centers in their own regions. [Id. at 5-6.] Crossman also did not consider a recently-hired senior manager for the reduction in force even though someone else could have been taught to handle his region. [Id. at 6.] Also, Davis was familiar with the Digital Region and its collective bargaining agreement, and the employees who took over Glynn's duties in the Digital Region after Davis's termination needed no training to work with that region. [Id.] Davis also points out that the employees whom Crossman cited as having knowledge of the Southeast region's collective bargaining agreement were not under Crossman's direct supervision, and Morgan had to return to train Glynn on the Southeast agreement after Davis's termination. [Id. at 6-7.]
Davis argues that she should have been given an opportunity to apply for the open director position at the time of her termination because it was YP's policy [*36]  to allow employees who had been laid off to apply for new jobs at YP and to hold open the application period for such jobs. [Doc. 68 at 7.] She argues that YP's failure to keep the job application period open for her is evidence of pretext. [Id. at 7-8.] She further argues that the conflict between Crossman's statement to Davis that she did not consult with Ridgeway and her testimony that she "validated" the decision to terminate Davis with Ridgeway is evidence of pretext, and Bennett's approval of the decision to fire Davis required no independent review of the information underpinning Crossman's' decision. [Id. at 8-9.]
YP argues in its reply that Davis has not shown that Crossman's narrowing of potential candidates for the Rank and Rate process or that her evaluation of Davis and Glynn was pretext for discrimination. [Doc. 70 at 5-7.] YP also argues that Davis has not shown she was qualified for the director job, that it was YP's policy to reopen application periods after closing to allow a laid-off employee to apply, or that Bennett, the decisionmaker for the director job, had any knowledge of her disability. [Id. at 7-8.] YP also argues that Crossman's statement that Ridgeway did [*37]  not know about Davis's termination is immaterial. [Id. at 8.]
A plaintiff who, relying on circumstantial evidence, asserts a claim of discriminatory discharge makes a prima facie case of disability discrimination by establishing that she had a disability, that she was otherwise qualified to perform her job, and that she was discriminated against on the basis of her disability, which here means that the plaintiff was discharged under circumstances raising a reasonable inference of discrimination. See Cleveland v. Home Shopping Network, Inc., 369 F.3d 1189, 1193 (11th Cir. 2004); Doe v. DeKalb Cty. Sch. Dist., 145 F.3d 1441, 1445 (11th Cir. 1998); Brandon v. Lockheed Martin Aeronautical Sys., 393 F. Supp. 2d 1341, 1345-46 (N.D. Ga. 2005). She also must show that the employer had actual knowledge of her disability. Scott v. Shoe Show, Inc., 38 F. Supp. 3d 1343, 1360 (N.D. Ga. 2014). After the plaintiff has established her prima facie case, under the familiar McDonnell Douglas8 burden-shifting framework, the burden then shifts to the employer to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the employee's termination. Cleveland, 369 F.3d at 1193. If the employer makes that showing, the burden then shifts back to the plaintiff to show that the employer discriminated against her on the basis of her disability. Id. The employee may carry that burden by showing that the employer's reason is unworthy of credence and a pretext for discrimination. Id.
Davis can establish a prima facie case of discriminatory discharge. [*38]  The Court readily concludes that Davis has a disability and was terminated. The Court also assumes for purposes of summary judgment that she was "qualified" under the ADA. Moreover, at least one of the employees who was not selected for the reduction in force, Kristiansen, did not have a disability causing the same need to work from home that Davis had. Otherwise, given that Davis frequently had to work from home and missed a work trip because of her condition, and given that Crossman was aware of at least some of Davis's diagnoses and physical limitations, the Court finds that there is a reasonable inference of discrimination in the circumstances of Crossman's selection of Davis for the reduction in force.
Under McDonnell Douglas, the burden then shifts to YP to offer a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for Davis's termination. YP has done so, pointing to the reduction-in-force and Crossman's Rate and Rank analysis. The burden therefore shifts back to Davis to show that YP selected her for the reduction in force based on her disability.
Davis argues that Crossman bore her discriminatory animus, but she points to no evidence of Crossman's discriminatory animus toward disabled persons generally or [*39]  Davis specifically. Davis also argues that Crossman's reasons for choosing her for the reduction in force are unworthy of credence. To that end, she disputes the reasons for which Crossman eliminated some recently-hired employees on her team from consideration, narrowing her Rate and Rank analysis to Davis and Glynn. Crossman spared from consideration an employee who worked with all of YP's call centers, and another employee, Robert Baker, who was the only senior manager living in his region. Davis disputes the wisdom of YP's decision, because senior managers previously had worked call centers in their regions and Baker's region easily could have been taught to another employee. YP, however, had restructured the way human resources interacted with call centers, requiring a single human resources manager to interact with the call center, and Crossman did not want to terminate the only senior human resources manager living in any particular region. Nothing in those reasons appears untrue or otherwise pretextual, and the Court cannot "act as a super personnel department that second-guesses employers' business judgments." See Wilson v. B/E Aerospace, Inc., 376 F.3d 1079, 1092 (11th Cir. 2004). Thus, Davis's attempts to show that Crossman rigged the Rate [*40]  and Rank analysis from the outset are unavailing, because they merely quibble with YP's business judgment.
Davis also argues that the Rate and Rank analysis between her and Glynn was pretextual because Crossman considered Halpern's end-of-year evaluation of Davis in making her decision. It is true that Crossman considered the performance evaluation, but it was a very small part of her decision, and no reasonable factfinder would conclude that it affected the outcome of the analysis. Davis also argues that anyone could have learned how to work with the Digital Region, the employees whom Crossman cited as experts in the Southeast region did not report to Crossman, and Morgan (the consultant and former director) ultimately had to be brought in to teach Glynn about the Southeast region. These objections the Rate and Rank analysis and the criteria Crossman considered are yet another attempt to have the Court second-guess YP's business judgment, which the Court cannot do. No evidence of record calls into question Crossman's belief that the Digital Region was the future of the company and other employees had knowledge of the Southeast region, even if Morgan ultimately had to assist Glynn with [*41]  the Southeast region. Davis also testified that she was "familiar" with the Digital Region (Davis Dep. at 269), but it is undisputed that she had less experience with that region than Glynn. Kristiansen, one of the employees who took on parts of the Digital Region, also indicated that learning about that region was not as effortless as Davis now argues. (See Kristiansen Dep. at 42-43.)
Davis contends that there is a genuine dispute about whether Crossman was untruthful with her in explaining whether Ridgeway knew about the decision to terminate her. Crossman told Davis at the time of her termination that Ridgeway had not been consulted, and Ridgeway apparently told Davis the same. Crossman later testified that she had told Ridgeway about the decision beforehand. Although the Court agrees it would be troubling if Crossman had been untruthful in stating that Ridgeway approved of the decision if he did not (or vice-versa), there is no dispute that Ridgeway was not a decisionmaker, notwithstanding the fact that he had a good working relationship with Davis. Whether Ridgeway knew about Davis's termination had no bearing on any conceivable reason for her termination and is therefore immaterial [*42]  here.
Finally, Davis's argument that she should have been allowed to apply for the director position is without merit. She has presented no evidence indicating that she was qualified for a director-level position, and Bennett had already conducted interviews and selected her final candidates for the job by the time Davis asked about the job. Davis also has not presented evidence, even in the form of an anecdote, suggesting she was warranted in her belief that it was YP's "practice" to hold open positions for employees who had been or were going to be laid off. (See Davis Dep. at 234-35.)
For the foregoing reasons, the Court cannot conclude that YP's elimination of Davis's position during its reduction in force was pretext for disability discrimination, and YP is entitled to summary judgment on that claim.

3. ADA Retaliation
Davis's next ADA claim is that YP terminated her in retaliation for requesting to formalize her work-from-home arrangement. YP argues that Davis cannot establish a retaliation claim because there is no evidence of any causal link between her protected activity and adverse actions. [Doc. 62-1 at 13-16.] As to the elimination of her position, Davis has pointed to record [*43]  evidence suggesting a connection between her working from home, which she had been doing throughout her two years at YP, and her termination. [Id. at 14.] YP also argues that the reduction in force severed any possible causal connection between Davis's protected activity and her termination. [Id.] There also was no record evidence that Davis was qualified for the director-level position, and all applicants already had been interviewed at the time she expressed interest. [Id. at 14-15.] Nor was there record evidence that Bennett knew about Davis's disability. [Id. at 15.] Finally, YP argues, Davis cannot show that its legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for eliminating her position was pretext for unlawful retaliation. [Id. at 15-16.]
Davis responds that she can show a causal connection between her request to formalize her work-from-home arrangement and her termination three months later because Crossman was dismissive of her request and took away Kristiansen's ability to work from home more than one day a week. [Doc. 68 at 14-15.] She also argues that the Rate and Rank analysis was pretext for unlawful retaliation. [Id. at 15.]
"[T]he same analytical framework applies to retaliation [*44]  claims as applies to other employment discrimination claims, including the availability of the McDonnell Douglas presumption." Wright v. Southland Corp., 187 F.3d 1287, 1305 (11th Cir. 1999) (applying the burden-shifting McDonnell Douglas approach to a Title VII retaliation claim); see also Stewart v. Happy Herman's Cheshire Bridge, Inc., 117 F.3d 1278, 1287 (11th Cir. 1997) (assessing ADA retaliation claim under same standards applied to Title VII retaliation claims). To establish a prima facie case of retaliation under the ADA, a plaintiff must show that she engaged in statutorily protected activity, such as requesting an accommodation, that she suffered an adverse employment action, and a causal connection between the protected activity and the adverse action. Standard v. A.B.E.L. Servs., Inc., 161 F.3d 1318, 1328 (11th Cir. 1998).
As to the first two prongs of the prima facie case, it is undisputed that Davis engaged in protected activity by requesting to formalize her work-from-home arrangement and that she suffered an adverse action when she was terminated. As to the third prong, Davis cannot rely on temporal proximity to establish a causal connection between her protected activity and her termination because the three-month period between her request to formalize her accommodation and the layoff is too remote to establish a causal connection. See Thomas v. Cooper Lighting, Inc., 506 F.3d 1361, 1364 (11th Cir. 2007) (holding, in a Title VII case, that a three-to four-month period between a plaintiff's [*45]  protected activity and the adverse employment action is not enough to demonstrate a causal relationship). Davis argues that she can establish a causal connection based on Crossman's "dismissive" response to her request to formalize the work-from-home relationship, but there is no indication that Crossman was dismissive merely because she wanted to handle Davis's work-from-home requests informally and later told Davis that she could not work from home all the time. Crossman became "curt" with Davis around that time, but Davis attributed her change in demeanor to the fact that Davis missed the Miami trip several days later. Crossman also limited Kristiansen's work-fromhome privileges limited to one day a week later in April, but as discussed above, no one at YP told Davis that she could not work from home. The Court is not convinced that these facts, taken in the light most favorable to Davis, establish a causal connection between Davis's request to formalize her work-from-home arrangement and her termination.
In any event, even if Davis could establish a prima facie case of retaliation, she cannot show that YP's reason for terminating her was pretext for unlawful retaliation for the [*46]  same reasons that she cannot show the layoff was pretext for unlawful disability discrimination. YP is therefore entitled to summary judgment on Davis's ADA retaliation claim.

4. Association Discrimination Based on Davis's Daughter's Disability
As to Davis's final ADA claim—that YP discriminated against her on the basis of her daughter's disability—YP argues that there is no evidence that Crossman or Bennett knew anything specific about Davis's daughter's medical condition. [Doc. 62-1 at 16.] Crossman only knew that Davis's daughter struggled at her school drop off time, and Bennett only knew that Davis was approved to work from home because of her daughter's condition. [Id.] YP also argues that Davis's association discrimination claim fails for the same reasons that her discrimination claim based on her own disabilities fails. [Id. at 16-17.]
Davis responds that she has made a prima facie case of association disability discrimination because, in addition to Davis being qualified for her position and suffering an adverse employment action, Crossman knew the nature of Davis's daughter's medical condition. [Doc. 68 at 9-10.] Davis also was fired within less than two months after she was [*47]  notified in May 2015 that she had been approved for intermittent FMLA to care for her daughter. [Id. at 10-11.]
Under the ADA, an employer may not "exclude[] or otherwise den[y] equal jobs or benefits to a qualified individual because of the known disability of an individual with whom the qualified individual is known to have a relationship or association." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(4). A plaintiff may prove a claim of association discrimination with circumstantial evidence using the McDonnell Douglas framework. Wascura v. City of S. Miami, 257 F.3d 1238, 1242 (11th Cir. 2001). To establish a prima facie case of association discrimination, a plaintiff must establish that she was subjected to an adverse employment action, that she was qualified for her job, that her employer knew that she had a relative with a disability, and that the adverse employment action occurred under circumstances which raised a reasonable inference that the relative's disability was a determining factor in the employer's decision. Id.
Here, it is not in dispute that Davis can establish the first two prongs of her claim, that she was subjected to an adverse employment action and that she was qualified for her job. Moreover, Davis has presented evidence that Crossman knew that her daughter had a disability, even if she [*48]  did not know the exact nature of her disability. The Court is not convinced, however, that the temporal proximity between the approval of Davis's intermittent FMLA leave to care for her daughter and her termination creates a reasonable inference of discrimination, as Crossman had known since at least January that Davis took FMLA leave to care for her daughter. (PSMF ¶ 64.) The record evidence also does not clearly indicate that Bennett knew about Davis's daughter's disability except that she had been told that Davis's daughter had "medical issues" in March or April 2015. (Bennett Dep. at 33-35.)
In any event, assuming that Davis can establish a prima facie case of association discrimination, she cannot show pretext, for the reasons discussed with respect to her discriminatory discharge claim about her own disability. YP is therefore entitled to summary judgment on Davis's association discrimination claim.

B. FMLA Claims

1. FMLA Interference
Turning to Davis's FMLA claims, Davis asserts that YP interfered with her planned FMLA leave by terminating her employment. YP argues that Davis cannot establish a claim of FMLA interference because she concedes that YP never denied her requests for [*49]  either continuous and intermittent FMLA leave. [Doc. 62-1 at 17-18.] Further, YP argues that Davis's firing was based solely on the reasons in Crossman's "Rate and Rank" analysis, not on any FMLA leave Davis had planned. [Id. at 18.]
Davis responds that YP interfered with her intermittent FMLA leave by terminating her, and YP has not carried its burden of showing that Davis's dismissal was wholly unrelated to her FMLA leave. [Doc. 68 at 16-19.] She also argues that YP also forced her to take intermittent FMLA leave by not allowing her to work from home, which depleted the amount of FMLA she could use in the future. [Id. at 17-18.]
Under the FMLA, an eligible employee is entitled to 12 workweeks of leave during any 12-month period to care for her child with a serious health condition or because of a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform the functions of her position, among other reasons. 29 U.S.C. § 2612(a)(1). Such leave may be taken continuously or "intermittently." Id. § 2612(b)(1). An employee has the right to commence FMLA leave. Krutzig v. Pulte Home Corp., 602 F.3d 1231, 1236 (11th Cir. 2010). To prevail on a claim of FMLA interference, an employee must show, by preponderance of the evidence, that he was denied a benefit to which she was entitled [*50]  under the FMLA. Martin v. Brevard Cty. Pub. Schs., 543 F.3d 1261, 1266-67 (11th Cir. 2008). The employee need not show that the employer intended to the deny the benefit or had discriminatory intent. Krutzig, 602 F.3d at 1235; Strickland v. Water Works & Sewer Bd., 239 F.3d 1199, 1208 (11th Cir. 2001).
The employer is not liable for interference with the right to commence FMLA leave, however, if it shows that the employee dismissed before taking leave would have been dismissed regardless of any request for leave, meaning that the dismissal was "wholly unrelated" to the FMLA leave. Krutzig, 602 F.3d at 1236; Martin, 543 F.3d at 1267; Strickland, 239 F.3d at 1208. A court must determine whether the FMLA leave (or upcoming FMLA leave) was the proximate cause of the employee's discharge. Schaaf v. Smithkline Beecham Corp., 602 F.3d 1236, 1242 (11th Cir. 2010).
Davis has made the requisite showing that she was denied a benefit to which she was entitled under the FMLA, namely, the right to commence her intermittent FMLA leave. Nevertheless, YP has shown that Davis's dismissal was wholly unrelated to her FMLA leave because Crossman had to reduce her team by one employee, and Davis was chosen in the Rate and Rank process. Davis contests the wisdom of various aspects of the Rate and Rank process, but as explained above with respect to Davis's argument that the Rate and Rank process was pretext for disability discrimination, the Court cannot second-guess YP's business judgment in choosing to eliminate a senior [*51]  manager and in choosing to keep Glynn on staff rather than Davis.
As to Davis's argument that she was forced to take FMLA leave instead of working from home, she has not pointed the Court to any Eleventh Circuit authority recognizing an FMLA interference claim based on a theory that an employer forced its employee to use FMLA leave unnecessarily. The Sixth Circuit, however, has recognized such interference claim. See Wysong v.Dow Chem. Co., 503 F.3d 441, 448-49 (6th Cir. 2007). Assuming Davis's claim about being forced to use FMLA leave is legally cognizable, her claim fails as a factual matter. It does not appear that Davis was ever in a position where she exhausted her FMLA leave for purposes of YP interfering with her. See id. at 449 ("[T]he employee's claim ripens only when and if the employee seeks FMLA leave at a later date, and such leave is not available because the employee was wrongfully forced to use FMLA leave in the past."). More importantly, there is no evidence that YP ever denied Davis leave to work from home while caring for her medical condition, forcing her to take FMLA leave.
For the foregoing reasons, YP is entitled to summary judgment on Davis's FMLA interference claim.

2. FMLA Retaliation
YP next argues that Davis is unable to show [*52]  any connection between her request to take FMLA leave and the elimination of her position, as she had been using FMLA leave for more than a year before her termination. [Doc. 62-1 at 18-19.] It further argues that, even if she could establish a causal connection, she cannot show that its legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for her termination was pretext for FMLA retaliation. [Id. at 19.]
Davis contends that she engaged in protected activity by taking FMLA leave as recently as July 6, 2015, only a few days before her termination, and therefore can show a causal connection between her protected activity and her termination.9 [Doc. 68 at 19-20.] She also argues that she need only establish that her FMLA leave was a "motivating factor" in the decision to terminate her, and she has shown that YP's reasons for her termination were pretextual for the same reasons as she argues in her ADA claims. [Id. at 20 n.6.]
The FMLA provides that it is "unlawful for any employer to interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of or the attempt to exercise, any right provided under this subchapter of the FMLA." 29 U.S.C. § 2615(a)(1). It further provides, that it is "unlawful for any employer to discharge or in any other manner [*53]  discriminate against any individual for opposing any practice made unlawful by this subchapter." Id. § 2615(a)(2). The Eleventh Circuit has recognized that, even though the FMLA does not explicitly prohibit retaliation, "the substance of the FMLA provisions . . . is that an employer may not do bad things to an employee who has exercised or attempted to exercise any rights under the statute." Brungart v. BellSouth Telecomms., Inc., 231 F.3d 791, 798 n.5 (11th Cir. 2000).
In evaluating an FMLA retaliation claim, in the absence of direct evidence of discrimination, courts use the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework. Jones v. Gulf Coast Health Care of Del., LLC, 854 F.3d 1261, 1271 (11th Cir. 2017). A prima facie case of retaliation requires a showing that the employee engaged in statutorily protected conduct, the employee suffered an adverse employment action, and there is a causal connection between the two. Id. A plaintiff can show a causal connection for purposes of a McDonnell Douglas prima facie case by showing that the decision maker was aware of the protected conduct and that the protected activity and adverse employment action were not wholly unrelated. Kidd v. Mando Am. Corp., 731 F.3d 1196, 1211 (11th Cir. 2013). Moreover, close temporal proximity between the employee's protected conduct and the adverse action is generally sufficient circumstantial evidence for purposes of the prima facie case. Jones, 865 F.3d at 1271; see also Farley v. Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co., 197 F.3d 1322, 1337 (11th Cir. 1999) (holding, in a Title VII [*54]  case, that a seven-week gap between a plaintiff's protected expression and his termination was sufficient to show causation).
Here, Davis has made a sufficient showing of an FMLA retaliation prima facie case under McDonnell Douglas. She engaged in protected activity by taking intermittent FMLA leave, and she took leave in very close proximity to the decision to terminate her. Nevertheless, her claim fails because YP has offered a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for her termination, and she has not shown that that reasons was pretext for unlawful retaliation.
Davis argues, albeit briefly, that she need not prove pretext because she can prevail under a "motivating factor" theory. [Doc. 68 at 20 n.6.] "Motivating factor" refers to a provision in Title VII that allows an employee to succeed on a substantive discrimination claim by showing that bias based on an unlawful classification was a motivating factor for an adverse action, even if other factors also motivated the action. 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(m).; Quigg v. Thomas Cty. Sch. Dist., 814 F.3d 1227, 1235 (11th Cir. 2016). In the Title VII context, the McDonnell Douglas framework is inconsistent with cases relying on a motivating factor theory, also called "mixed-motive cases," because McDonnell Douglas requires the plaintiff to prove that discrimination was the "true reason" [*55]  for the adverse action, not one of several factors. Quigg, 814 F.3d at 1237-39. Thus, in this Circuit the appropriate framework for Title VII mixed-motive claims is to consider whether the defendant took an adverse employment action against the plaintiff, and a protected characteristic was a motivating factor for the defendant's employment action. Id. at 1239. More simply, the plaintiff must present sufficient circumstantial evidence to allow the jury to conclude, by preponderance of the evidence, that her protected characteristic was a motivating factor for an adverse action. Id.
The instant claim is an FMLA retaliation claim, though, not a substantive Title VII claim. In University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center v. Nassar, the Supreme Court held that "Title VII retaliation claims must be proved according to traditional principles of but-for causation, not the lessened [motivating factor] causation test." 570 U.S. 338, 360 (2013). Since Nassar was decided, courts have been divided on the question of whether an FMLA retaliation claim, which is otherwise similar to a Title VII retaliation claim, is susceptible to a "motivating factor" inquiry. This inquiry is made more complicated by a provision in the FMLA's implementing regulations, 29 C.F.R. § 825.220(c), [*56]  which prohibits employers from using the taking of FMLA leave as a negative factor in employment actions. Compare Jones v. Allstate Ins. Co., 281 F. Supp. 3d 1211 (N.D. Ala. 2016) (declining to defer to agency interpretation of statute and applying Nassar's but-for causation standard), with Egan v. Del. River Port Auth., 851 F.3d 263, 273-74 (3d Cir. 2017) (deferring to agency interpretation of statute), and Chase v. United States, 149 F. Supp. 3d 195 (D. Mass. 2016) (same). The Eleventh Circuit has not addressed that issue since Nassar was decided. See Hein v. IMS Gear Hldg., Inc., 2:16-cv-81-RWS-JCF, 2018 WL 1833254, at *18 (N.D. Ga. Jan 31, 2018).
The Court need not weigh in on that issue here. Assuming without deciding that a plaintiff can prevail on an FMLA retaliation claim by relying on a mixed-motive theory, Davis has not made a sufficient case of FMLA retaliation under such a theory. Crossman knew about Davis's FMLA leave for six months before Davis was fired. Davis has not pointed the Court to anything that suggests Crossman harbored retaliatory animus about her use of FMLA leave. Given the specific facts of this case, temporal proximity is enough to establish a McDonnell Douglas prima facie case of retaliation, but it does not constitute sufficient circumstantial evidence to show a genuine issue of retaliatory intent. Indisputably, Davis took FMLA leave close in time to her termination; but she also took FMLA leave for a year before then, and Crossman had known about her [*57]  intermittent FMLA leave since January 2015, five or six months before Davis's termination. Davis has pointed the Court to no evidence that Crossman made comments about her FMLA leave or otherwise reacted negatively to her FMLA leave. It is also difficult to square Davis's belief that, toward the end of her time with YP, Crossman would have required her to take FMLA leave if she had asked to work from home (which the Court has rejected for being without evidentiary support) with her argument that her use of FMLA leave kindled a retaliatory motive in Crossman. Under those circumstances, no reasonable factfinder could make an inference that Crossman had a retaliatory motive from temporal proximity alone. Thus, Davis has not put forth sufficient evidence of Crossman's retaliatory motive to survive even a motivating factor inquiry.
In sum, YP is entitled to summary judgment on Davis's FMLA retaliation claim, regardless of whether McDonnell Douglas or the motivating factor framework applies.

C. Equal Pay Act and Title VII Claims

1. Compensation Discrimination Claims
Davis also raises substantive claims under the Equal Pay Act and Title VII, arguing that she was paid less than Flagler, a male comparator. YP argues that she cannot make [*58]  out a prima facie case under the Equal Pay Act because she cannot adduce evidence of Flagler's salary, showing he was paid more than her.10 [Doc. 62-1 at 19-21.] YP also argues that she cannot show that her job was substantially equal to Flagler's, because Flagler was working with a unionized workforce, a "valued" skill at YP. [Id. at 21.] YP also argues that, even though Flagler and Davis both worked with a unionized workforce at some point during their time with YP, they worked "independent[ly]" supported different regions of the country, and Flagler was a "senior manager," but Davis was only a manager. [Id. at 22.] YP argues that Davis's Title VII claim fails for the same reason as her Equal Pay Act claim. [Id. at 25.]
Davis responds that the memorandum about YP's investigation of her compensation discrimination complaints indicates that she was paid less than Flagler, even after her salary was adjusted in January 2015. [Doc. 68 at 22.] When Davis was negotiating her salary, YP told her that Flagler was paid more because he worked with a unionized workforce. Davis argues that any distinction between her job and Flagler's was eroded when she took responsibility for a unionized workforce, and thus, she has shown [*59]  that their jobs were substantially equal for purposes of the Equal Pay Act. [Id. at 22-23.] Based on that same fact, she argues that she has met the lesser burden of showing that their jobs were substantially similar for purposes of her Title VII claim. [Id. at 23-24.] She also notes that Halpern's reaction to her request for equal pay to Flagler is probative of YP's discriminatory motive for purposes of Title VII. [Id. at 24.]
The Equal Pay Act prohibits gender-based discrimination in rates of pay to employees. 29 U.S.C. § 206(d); Miranda v. B & B Cash Grocery Store, Inc., 975 F.2d 1518, 1526 (11th Cir. 1992). Specifically, the Equal Pay Act provides:
No employer . . . shall discriminate, within any establishment in which such employees are employed, between employees on the basis of sex by paying wages to employees in such establishment at a rate less than the rate at which he pays wages to employees of the opposite sex in such establishment for equal work on jobs the performance of which requires equal skill, effort, and responsibility, and which are performed under similar working conditions, except where such payment is made pursuant to (i) a seniority system; (ii) a merit system; (iii) a system which measures earnings by quantity or quality of production; or (iv) a differential based on any other factor [*60]  other than sex . . . ."
29 U.S.C. § 206(d)(1). Thus, to prove an Equal Pay Act claim, a plaintiff must show, inter alia, that she was paid less than a male employee "for equal work on jobs the performance of which requires equal skill, effort, and responsibility." Mulhall v. Advance Sec., Inc., 19 F.3d 586, 590 (11th Cir. 1994). In other words, the jobs must be "substantially equal." Edwards v. Fulton County, Ga., 509 F. App'x 882, 886 (11th Cir. 2013) (citing Arrington v. Cobb Cty., 139 F.3d 865, 876 (11th Cir. 1998)). When a plaintiff makes a prima facie case under the Equal Pay Act, the burden shifts to the defendant to prove one of the affirmative defenses, such as seniority or merit. Meeks v. Computer Assocs. Int'l., 15 F.3d 1013, 1018 (11th Cir. 1994).
Title VII also prohibits gender-based wage discrimination. See Miranda, 975 F.2d at 1527-31. A plaintiff establishes a prima facie case of gender-based wage discrimination "by showing that she occupies a job similar to that of higher paid males." Meeks , 15 F.3d at 1019. Title VII's comparator standard is somewhat more "relaxed," and a plaintiff need only show that her job was "substantially similar" to her higher-paid comparator's. Teal v. City of Dahlonega, No. 2:09-cv-187-RWS-SSC, 2011 WL 7006248, at *10 (N.D. Ga. Aug. 24, 2011), report and recommendation adopted, 2012 WL 95555 (N.D. Ga. Jan. 12, 2012).
Here, Davis testified that her salary was $108,000 or $110,000, (Davis Dep. at 12), and YP's own records confirm that her salary was $108,000 before it was increased to $110,000 in January 2015. (Bennet Dep., Ex. 4.) Davis believed Flagler was paid "something like 120" with a potential 15% bonus because Flagler told [*61]  her husband that YP was going to pay him that much. (Davis Dep. at 11-12.) While that statement is inadmissible double hearsay,11 and Davis has not established her personal knowledge of Flagler's salary, there are other indications in the record that Flagler was paid more than Davis. Davis was told during salary negotiations with YP that she would not be paid as much as Flagler because he was working with a unionized workforce, and she was not. (Davis Dep. at 14-15.) In a memorandum authored by defense counsel in December 2015, Flagler's salary was listed as $120,000.12 (Pl. Decl., Ex. 1.) Moreover, after Davis made her payparity complaints to Halpern, and YP conducted an investigation into those complaints, the salaries of three female employees on Halpern's team in the same or similar position as Davis were raised to $120,000, which suggests that YP was putting their salaries on equal footing with Flagler's. (Bennett Dep., Ex. 4.) Davis's salary, however, was raised from $108,000 to only $110,000. (Id.) From those facts, the Court concludes that Davis has offered evidence reducible to an admissible form at trial that Flagler was paid more than her.
The next question is whether there [*62]  is a genuine issue of fact as to whether Davis has shown that Flagler had a substantially equal or similar job. Ideally, this issue would have more factual development at this stage in the proceedings, so that the Court could discern for itself whether Davis's and Flagler's jobs were the same. Nevertheless, there is evidence tending to suggest that Davis and Flagler had substantially equal or substantially similar jobs. When Flagler was encouraging Davis to join YP, he told her that her job would be the same as his. (Davis Dep. at 13.) When Davis was in salary negotiations with YP, she was told that Flagler's salary was higher than what YP was offering her because Flagler worked with a unionized workforce. (Id. at 14-15.)
There is also evidence that Davis essentially took over Flagler's job when she was assigned to work with a unionized workforce. See Pearce v. Wichita Cty., City of Wichita Falls, Tex., Hosp. Bd., 590 F.2d 128, 133 (5th Cir. 1979) ("The employees whose pay is the subject of comparison may hold jobs in succession as well as simultaneously."). Davis took over the unionized Southeast region, Flagler's old territory. (Davis Dep. at 33; see also id. at 245.) YP also later promoted Davis to "Senior Manager," which was Flagler's title, but still did not increase her pay [*63]  to match his. (See Davis Dep. at 104.) From these facts, the Court concludes that Davis has presented evidence that would allow a reasonable factfinder to conclude that she occupied Flagler's old job when she was assigned to the unionized Southeast, but she was paid less than he had been in the same position.
For Davis's Equal Pay Act claim, she has made a sufficient case by showing that she was paid less than Flagler, even she after took over his old job. An Equal Pay Act claim requires no proof of intent to discriminate. YP also has offered no explanation at all for the difference in Davis's and Flagler's pay.
For Davis's Title VII claim, she must show that YP intentionally discriminated against her. Davis proceeds under two theories in her Title VII claim: single-motive and mixed-motive. Under a single-motive theory of discrimination—for which the Court applies the McDonnell Douglas framework—Davis has made a sufficient showing of a prima facie case of intentional compensation discrimination by showing that Flagler, a similarly situated male employee, was paid more than her. See Meeks, 15 F.3d at 1019. At summary judgment, YP has offered no legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for paying Davis less than Flagler. She has [*64]  therefore made a sufficient showing based on that theory.
Davis also has offered sufficient evidence under a mixed-motive by presenting sufficient circumstantial evidence to allow the jury to conclude, by preponderance of the evidence, that gender was a motivating factor in the decision to pay her less than Flagler. See Quigg, 814 F.3d 1239. Davis has presented evidence that she took over Flagler's previous job, and there is a plausible inference of gender discrimination in the fact that she was paid less than Flagler. What's more, three female employees who appear to be similarly situated to Davis and Flagler were paid less than Flagler until January 2015, after Davis made her pay parity complaint. Halpern's reaction to Davis's complaint also suggests an intent to discriminate, taking the facts in the light most favorable to Davis, as the Court must. Halpern became angry and told Davis that Flagler's salary was "none of [her] business." (Davis Dep. at 245.) He also emailed Davis about her request, stating, "I don't understand what you mean regarding 'equitable pay' with respect to team mates. Focus on excelling at your job, doing it to the best of your ability, and you will be rewarded for your efforts. [*65]  That is all any of us can do." (Davis Dep., Ex. 11.)
For the foregoing reasons, the Court concludes that a genuine issue of material fact precludes summary judgment on Davis's substantive Equal Pay Act and Title VII claims.

2. Equal Pay Act and Title VII Retaliation
Davis's final claims are that YP violated the Equal Pay Act's and Title VII's antiretaliation provisions by retaliating against her for complaining about her pay disparity with Flagler. YP argues that Davis cannot establish a retaliation claim under the Equal Pay Act because her performance evaluation was not an actionable employment action that impacted the terms, conditions, or privileges of her employment in a real and demonstrable way. [Doc. 62-1 at 22-24.] Halpern's satisfactory evaluation had "no impact," YP argues, on the Rate and Rank process. [Id. at 24.] Moreover, there was no evidence that Davis's termination was connected to the issues she raised about compensation, which occurred at least 7 months before her termination. [Id. at 24-25.] YP also argues that Davis's Title VII retaliation claim fails for the same reason as her Equal Pay Act retaliation claim. [Id. at 25.]
Davis argues that she engaged in protected activity for purposes of the Equal Pay Act and Title VII by complaining about [*66]  wage disparity, and she was subjected to retaliatory action through Halpern's performance review and her subsequent termination.13 [Doc. 68 at 24-25.] In its reply, YP additionally argues that neither Crossman nor Bennett knew about Davis's pay parity complaints. [Doc. 70 at 15.]
Title VII prohibits retaliation against an employee "because [s]he has opposed any practice made an unlawful employment practice by [Title VII], or because [s]he has made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under [Title VII]." 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-3(a). When an employee relies on circumstantial evidence to show retaliation under Title VII, she first establishes a prima facie case of retaliation by showing that (1) she engaged in statutorily protected activity, (2) she suffered an adverse employment action, and (3) there is some causal connection between the two events. Pennington v. City of Huntsville, 261 F.3d 1262, 1266 (11th Cir. 2001). The complained-of employment action must be "materially adverse," such that the action would "dissuade[] a reasonable worker from making or supporting a charge of discrimination." Burlington N. & Santa Fe Ry. Co. v. White, 548 U.S. 53, 68 (2006) (quotation omitted). "[T]rivial harms" do not constitute adverse employment actions, but a Title VII's antiretaliation [*67]  provision prohibits a wider range of employer conduct than Title VII's substantive antidiscrimination provision. Id.; Crawford v. Carroll, 529 F.3d 961, 973-74 (11th Cir. 2008). As part of the plaintiff's ultimate burden of proof, she also must show that her protected activity was the "but-for" cause of the adverse employment action. Nassar, 570 U.S. at 360.
The antiretaliation provision applicable to Equal Pay Act claims provides that it is unlawful "to discharge or in any other manner discriminate against an employee because such employee has filed any complaint or instituted or caused to be instituted any proceeding under or related to this chapter." 29 U.S.C. § 215(a)(3). The McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting analysis applies to Equal Pay Act retaliation claims where, as here, the plaintiff relies on circumstantial evidence. See Raspanti v. Four Amigos Travel, Inc., 266 F. App'x 820, 822 (11th Cir. 2008) (applying McDonnell Douglas to a Fair Labor Standards Act retaliation claim under § 215(a)(3)); Teal, 2011 WL 7006248, at *22 (noting that Title VII and the Equal Pay Act require the same elements to prove a prima facie case); Wildi v. Alle-Kiski Med. Ctr., 659 F. Supp. 2d 640, 664 (W.D. Pa. 2009).
Beginning with Davis's contentions about the performance review, in the context of a retaliation claim, a negative performance review may constitute a materially adverse action, particularly where it affects the employee's entitlement to a pay increase. Crawford, 529 F.3d at 971-74. Nevertheless, the review must be more than a trivial harm, and in that respect, [*68]  Davis's performance review is not material adverse. For starters, Davis's performance rating was "successful." (PSMF ¶ 54; Davis Dep., Ex. 13.) Davis has not pointed to record evidence indicating that the "successful" review represented a decline in performance for her or that the rating actually had a negative impact on her salary or overall career at YP. Davis even testified that she did not consider the performance evaluation to be "negative," although it was below what she would have liked. (Davis Dep. at 113.) The review was the lowest rating that Halpern could give Davis without having to justify her performance review with documentation, but Davis considered the review "average." (Id. at 113-14.) Even Glynn, whom Davis described as an "amazing HR person," was expected to receive a "successful" rating from Crossman in 2015, at the time Crossman completed her Rank and Rate analysis. (Davis Dep. at 208; Crossman Dep., Ex. 21.)
Moreover, Davis's main argument about the performance review is about the impact that it had on the Rank and Rate analysis. But, as the Court already has concluded, the review had very little impact on the analysis, and no reasonable factfinder could conclude [*69]  that it affected the outcome. Thus, Davis has not shown that Halpern's review—even if somewhat critical and motivated by retaliatory intent—would dissuade a reasonable worker from making a charge of discrimination.
From those facts, the Court cannot conclude that Davis can establish a prima facie case of retaliation under Title VII or the Equal Pay Act, and YP is entitled to summary judgment on those claims.

VI. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, the motion for leave to file a sur-reply brief is DENIED. [Doc. 72.] It is further RECOMMENDED that the motion for summary judgment be DENIED IN PART, as to Davis's substantive Equal Pay Act and Title VII compensation claims, and GRANTED IN PART, as to her remaining claims. [Doc. 62.]
IT IS SO ORDERED AND RECOMMENDED this 25th day of January, 2019.
/s/ John K. Larkins III
JOHN K. LARKINS III
United States Magistrate Judge


End of Document

