Lescoe v. Pa. Dep't of Corr.
United States District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania
March 4, 2011, Decided; March 5, 2011, Filed
CIVIL ACTION NO. 4:09-0839

Reporter
2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 39379 *; 2011 WL 1258334
CHARLES LESCOE, Plaintiff v. PENNSYLVANIA DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS - SCI-FRACKVILLE, Defendant
Subsequent History: Objection overruled by, Adopted by, Summary judgment granted by Lescoe v. Pa. Dep't of Corrections- Sci- Frackville, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 34325 (M.D. Pa., Mar. 30, 2011)
Counsel:  [*1] For Charles Lescoe, Plaintiff: Peter G. Loftus, LEAD ATTORNEY, Loftus Law Firm, P.C., Waverly, PA.
For Pennsylvania Department of Corrections-SCI Frackville, Defendant: Kenneth L. Joel, M. Abbegael Giunta, Office of Attorney General, Harrisburg, PA.
Judges: MALACHY E. MANNION, United States Magistrate Judge. JONES, D.J.
Opinion by: MALACHY E. MANNION
Opinion



REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION
Pending before the court is the defendant's motion for summary judgment. (Doc. No. 18). Based upon the court's review of the motion and related materials, it is recommended that the motion be granted.
By way of relevant background, the plaintiff filed the instant action on May 4, 2009, in which he alleges violations of the Americans with Disabilities Act, ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. §§10221, et seq., (Counts I & II), the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act, ("PHRA"), 43 P.S. §955(a), (Count III), as well as state law claims for intentional infliction of emotional distress, (Count IV), and constructive discharge, (Count V). (Doc. No. 1). On July 6, 2009, the defendant filed an answer to the complaint. (Doc. No. 8).
On April 1, 2010, the defendant filed the instant motion for summary judgment. (Doc. No. 18). This motion was referred to the undersigned  [*2] by order of court dated April 13, 2010. (Doc. No. 20). Subsequently, on April 15, 2010, the defendant filed a statement of facts with exhibits, (Doc. No. 21), along with a brief in support of the motion, (Doc. No. 22). After having been granted an extension of time to do so, (Doc. No. 24), on May 28, 2010, the plaintiff filed a brief in opposition to the defendant's motion for summary judgment, (Doc. No. 26), along with supporting exhibits, (Doc. No. 27). Again, after having been granted an extension of time to do so, (Doc. No. 29), on June 18, 2010, the defendant filed a reply brief.
Summary judgment is appropriate if the "pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed.R.Civ.P. 56(c).
The Supreme Court has stated that:
". . . [T]he plain language of Rule 56(c) mandates the entry of summary judgment, after adequate time for discovery and upon motion, against a party who fails to make a showing sufficient to establish the existence of an element essential to that party's case, and on which  [*3] that party will bear the burden of proof at trial. In such a situation, there can be 'no genuine issue as to any material fact,' since a complete failure of proof concerning an essential element of the nonmoving party's case necessarily renders all other facts immaterial. The moving party is 'entitled to judgment as a matter of law' because the nonmoving party has failed to make a sufficient showing on an essential element of her case with respect to which she has the burden of proof."
Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323-24, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986).
The moving party bears the initial responsibility of stating the basis for its motion and identifying those portions of the record which demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact. Id. The moving party can discharge that burden by "showing . . . that there is an absence of evidence to support the nonmoving party's case." Id. at 325.
Issues of fact are genuine "only if a reasonably jury, considering the evidence presented, could find for the nonmoving party." Childers v. Joseph, 842 F.2d 689, 693-94 (3d Cir. 1988)(citations omitted). Material facts are those which will effect the outcome of the trial under governing law. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986).  [*4] The court may not weigh the evidence nor make credibility determinations. Boyle v. County of Allegheny, 139 F.3d 386, 393 (3d Cir. 1998). In determining whether an issue of material fact exists, the court must consider all evidence and inferences drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Id. at 393.
If the moving party meets his initial burden, the opposing party must do more than raise some metaphysical doubt as to material facts, but must show sufficient evidence to support a jury verdict in its favor. Id.
In support of its motion for summary judgment, the defendant has produced a statement of material facts, the following of which are unopposed and/or supported by the record. The plaintiff became employed with the Department of Corrections, ("DOC"), in February of 2006 as a Corrections Officer Trainee, ("COT") 1. In order to gain employment, the plaintiff first successfully passed the medical examination and battery of tests required for conditional employment as a COT. The plaintiff underwent a five-week long training academy through the DOC to learn about policy and procedure, treatment of inmates, and use of weapons.
During the relevant period, the DOC had Policy Number 1.6.1 - Equal Employment Opportunity which established guidelines and procedures for nondiscrimination of all employees and a complaint process for employees who felt they were being discriminated against 2. Policy Number 1.6.1 provides, in relevant part:

VI. Procedures

A. Discrimination Complaint
1. Any employee or applicant who believes that he/she has been discriminated against because of membership in a protected class may file a discrimination complaint.
2. Discrimination complaints shall be filed with the Human Resources (HR) Director at the facility where the alleged act of discrimination occurred. If the employee/applicant is not comfortable with the investigation being conducted by the facility staff, the complaint may be filed directly with the Office of EEO.
3. Copies of the STD-486, Equal Employment Opportunity Discrimination Complaint form are available in the HR Offices at each facility, on the Department's intra-net, and by calling the Department's Office of the EEO toll-free number at 1-877-EEO-0846 3.
4. In accordance with Management Directive 410.10, as amended, "Guidelines for Investigating  [*6] and Resolving Internal Discrimination Complaints," all complaints must be investigated and treated seriously. There is no distinction between a formal or informal complaint. A complaint does not need to be in writing to warrant the need for an investigation. Once a verbal complaint is received, the complainant may be asked to put the complaint in writing.
(Doc. No. 21, Ex. C, Equal Opportunity Policy).
The plaintiff never made either a verbal or written complaint to HR or the EEO 4.
During his initial hiring process, DOC HR staff introduced the plaintiff to the DOC's policies and rules and explained the ADA, the Code of Ethics, EEO and Sexual Harassment among other things 5. Moreover, the plaintiff was given copies of the Employee Handbook, the Sexual Harassment Policy, and the Code of Ethics 6.
The plaintiff began working as a full-time COT in March 2006. At that time, the plaintiff weighed around 300 pounds and was sixty-seven (67) inches tall.
At his deposition related to this matter, as of March 2006 when he started full-time as a COT, the plaintiff testified that as a result of his weight he experienced mild lower back pain from standing or walking for too long and that his feet would hurt all the time from supporting his weight 7. In response to questioning as to whether he required any assistance or special exceptions during that time due to his weight, the plaintiff testified ". . . No . . . most of the positions out there had some kind  [*8] of seat to sit in and still maintain your job. So as long as I sat in one of them seats, there were never any problems. 8" (Doc. No. 21, Ex. A, p. 37). He further testified that no changes were made to the CO-1 job so that the plaintiff could rest his feet, as the job itself already had the ability for him to do so as he requested. (Doc. No. 21, Ex. A, p. 67). The plaintiff testified that when he first got the job, he was having problems standing because of his weight, so he mentioned to an unnamed individual that as long as he could rest his feet every so often, he'd be alright. (Doc. No. 21, Ex. A, pp. 66-67). He testified that he was told that a majority of the posts had seats where he could sit and that he would not be on his feet much other than when he was in the yard and monitoring the inmates, maybe two hours at the most. (Id.). Once he was in the position, however, the plaintiff testified that others would joke about how he was always leaning or sitting on something when the job let him sit, and that he was told that trainees were not allowed to use the chairs. (Doc. No. 21, Ex. A., pp. 34-35).
When the plaintiff went through the training process, he testified that there were physical requirements, but none of which were affected by his weight. (Doc. No. 21, Ex. A, pp. 36-37). He testified that he was able to do the physical lifting at training, as well as walk around the facility, run from one side of the yard to the other 9, and restrain and handcuff an inmate as necessary. (Doc. No. 21, Ex. A, pp. 36-39).
As of March 2006, the plaintiff had not seen a physician regarding his weight. After leaving the DOC, the plaintiff saw a doctor for problems related to his weight and his medical records state that he is morbidly obese.
While a COT, the plaintiff's immediate supervisor was his training lieutenant, Lt. Brian Avezzano. In addition to his training supervisor, the plaintiff had a supervisor that he reported to for each work shift that he was scheduled.
On May 14, 2006, the plaintiff went on C block to take  [*11] roll call. He testified that the inmates were sleepy and non-responsive. Since he didn't know faces with names because he was new, he told them "you have to say something when I call your name. I don't care if it's a hey, yo. I don't care if you raise your hand. I told them that I don't care if it's a fuck you. You need to respond so I know who you are." (Doc. No. 21, Ex. A, p. 23). Corrections Officer, ("CO"), David Carl reported the incident to Lt. Avezzano expressing concern for the plaintiff's unprofessional behavior and the possibility that it could cause a disturbance for other officers 10. (Doc. No. 21, Ex. E). At his Fact Finding relating to this incident, the plaintiff testified as follows:
Lt. Avezzano: On May 14, 2006, while working on C Block, while kitchen workers were going out, you were having trouble getting inmates to answer while you were calling names of kitchen workers before they left for the kitchen. Your solution was to tell the inmates, "You guys need to answer up when I call your name, whether it's a grunt or a fuck you." Is this correct?
COT Lescoe: Yes sir.
Lt. Avezzano: Do you believe you were acting properly and professionally during this instance?
COT Lescoe:  [*12] Is this where I can explain myself sir?
Lt. Avezzano: Answer the questions first. Do you believe you were acting properly and professionally during this instance?
COT Lescoe: Yes sir, I do believe I was.
Lt. Avezzano: You do believe that. Please explain.
COT Lescoe: I believe that I was sir because of the fact that I did not give them permission to say fuck you to staff. What I was trying to do was relate to them with rapport, trying to tell them that they need to respond to me because I do not know their faces. I don't know their names. It's the morning, everyone's tired, but they need to sound off.
Lt. Avezzano: I did not ask if you gave them permission to say fuck you to staff, I simply asked if you made the statement.
COT Lescoe: Yes I did sir.
Lt. Avezzano: And you still believe this statement is proper and professional?
COT Lescoe: Yes sir.
(Doc. No. 27, Ex. B).
On June 16, 2006, Sgt. Paulukonis sent a memo to Lt. Avezzano reporting that on June 14, and June 15, 2006, he observed the plaintiff committing  [*13] some actions that compromised the security of the housing unit 11. (Doc. No. 21, Ex. F). In the memo, Paulukonis indicated that the plaintiff had left his wing to obtain rolls of toilet paper when all inmates had not yet returned to the wing and half of the cell doors were open with inmates in the tiers 12. With respect to this incident, the plaintiff testified at his Fact Finding as follows:
Lt. Avezzano: On June 14, 2006, you were working on A Block while Mainline was returning. With approximately 1/2 of the cell doors still opened, you left the wing to get toilet paper from another wing. Is this correct?
COT Lescoe: Yes sir.
Lt. Avezzano: Had you been properly relieved or received authority from a supervisor to leave your post?
COT Lescoe: Sir I was told by another wing officer that I could come over and obtain the toilet paper.
Lt. Avezzano: Answer the question please. Had you been properly relieved or received authority from a supervisor?
COT Lescoe: Had I been properly relieved and had I been given authority from the Sgt., no sir.
Lt. Avezzano: Do you believe you conducted yourself properly and professionally by leaving your wing with approximately 1/2 of the doors still opened?
COT  [*14] Lescoe: No sir.
(Doc. No. 27, Ex. B, Fact Finding dated August 2, 2006).
At his deposition, the plaintiff testified with respect to the incident that he was doing a cell search and one of the inmates had too much toilet paper. (Doc. No. 21, Ex. A, p. 46). He testified that they were only allowed so much, and he'd left in the cell only what the inmate was allowed. (Id.). He testified that he took the extra toilet paper to put it away in storage in another wing and he believes this is why the cell doors were open. (Id.).
Sgt. Paulukonis also indicated in his memo of June 16, 2006, that the plaintiff had the inmate janitors out on the block cleaning but his inmates had not all returned to their cells and there were cell doors open 13. (Doc. No. 21, Ex. F). The plaintiff testified at the Fact Finding with respect to this incident as follows:
Lt. Avezzano: On June 15, 2006, again on A Block you had block janitors outworking before your wing and the other wings had been secured, despite being directed  [*15] by Sgt. Paulukonis not to get janitors out until the block was completely locked down, is this correct?
COT Lescoe: As far as Sgt. Paulukonis telling me to have all of the doors locked prior to having my janitors out, that is incorrect sir.
Lt. Avezzano: Sgt. Paulukonis never directed you to have your wing locked down before you got the janitors out?
COT Lescoe: No, he did not sir.
Lt. Avezzano: Your answer as to whether Sgt. Paulukonis directed you not to have the block janitors out while Mainline was coming back was no.
COT Lescoe: Yes sir, it was no.
Lt. Avezzano: Okay.
(Doc. No. 27, Ex. B). As a result of the Fact Finding, Lt. Avezzano indicated with respect to this incident that "Sergeant Paulukonis does not mention in his memo that he had directed COT Lescoe to completely lock down his wing before getting janitors out. The Committee feels that we should not assume that our Trainees are familiar with all of the rules unless they have been specifically explained to them." (Doc. No. 27, Ex. H).
In his memo of June 16, 2006, Sgt. Paulukonis reported a third incident in which he indicated that, if an inmate requested that his cell door be opened, the plaintiff would send another inmate to leave the wing and go to the control bubble to request that the cell door be opened for another inmate, rather than the plaintiff opening the doors himself. (Doc. No. 21, Ex. F). At the Fact Finding, the plaintiff testified as follows with respect to this incident:
Lt. Avezzano: On both June 14th and 15th while on A Block, you sent inmates to see Sgt. Paulukonis if they needed their door opened instead of keying the door, in one instance, you were four (4) cells away and still directed the inmate to walk to the control center, is this correct?
COT Lescoe: Not to the best of my knowledge, I can't recall if I was four (4) cells away sir, but did I have inmates go and request to have a cell opened that I could not get to at that time, yes I have.
Lt. Avezzano: When you say that you could not get to at that time, what would preclude  [*17] you from opening an inmates cell if it needed to be opened?
COT Lescoe: An example would be I am taking care of some business on say example two (2) cell and a guy is trying to get into forty-three (43) cell, his own cell. If I could not reach him at that time, I've had an inmate who was walking into the wing once say I will tell the Sgt. and I've said okay. I'd look up to verify that that is the persons cell, and then just tell them yes, you can tell the Sergeant. Without stepping out of the wing how can you open this cell 14 .
* * *
Lt. Avezzano: Do you dispute this statement?
COT Lescoe: I do not dispute this sir, I probably did that, but if I did do that sir, I was probably taking some kind of list or an out count or something sir. If I were right next to the cell, I would have opened it sir.
Lt. Avezzano: Do you believe that you acted properly and professionally when you directed inmates to have the Sgt. Open their cell?
COT Lescoe: No sir.
(Doc. No. 27, Ex. B). At his deposition, the plaintiff testified with respect to the incident as follows:
Q. Was there ever an occurrence where an inmate would ask to be let into their own cell and you would tell them to ask the sergeant rather than  [*18] go down and open it for them?
A. Well, they could do that because the sergeant in the bubble had access to a control panel that he could push a button and it would pop open the cell door. So he could open it from the bubble or you could go down and open it with a key. So most of the time, if you're in the actual wing and someone is coming in from outside from somewhere, he'll tell the sergeant his cell number and the cell — he'll pop open the cell and he'll go to his cell. So you didn't have to go to each individual cell and open them up as they came in.
(Doc. No. 21, Ex. A, pp. 48-49).
On July 12, 2006, acting Sgt. Hardy issued a memo to Sgt. Sorber and carbon copied Lt. Avezzano, in which he reported an incident in which the plaintiff did not report back to his assigned post forty minutes after he was relieved for lunch. Sgt. Hardy indicated that he had to call  [*19] and direct that the plaintiff report to his post, which the plaintiff did. (Doc. No. 21, Ex. G). With respect to this incident, the plaintiff testified at his Fact Finding as follows:
Lt. Avezzano: On July 7, 2006, you reportedly took forty (40) minutes for lunch and had to be called to return to Mainline, is this correct?
COT Lescoe: This is incorrect sir 15.
Lt. Avezzano: You are disputing what A/S Hardy says?
COT Lescoe: I am disputing the fact on what time. I actually left and was relieved by another CO in Mainline at that time. By the time, there might have been a difference between when Sgt. Hardy told a CO to go relieve Lescoe for chow, he might have told him 11:15, but I did not leave the Mainline until 11:35, at 11:55 a person did call and I answered the phone. They said get your ass back to Mainline, you've been here for forty (40) minutes. I hung up and I walked out the door. As soon as I walked out the door Mainline was complete.
Lt. Avezzano: You answered the phone in the ODR?
COT Lescoe: Yes, I did sir.
Lt. Avezzano: Okay because A/S Hardy is saying that whoever answered the phone, he directed that Officer to tell you to return to Mainline.
COT Lescoe: I answered the phone; I  [*20] was sitting next to it. I actually have witnesses that I did answer that phone. Officer Delaney, Officer McCormick, and I want to say Tunilla. All of the 0800-1600 guys who were there with me at that time witnessed it. I was sitting at the end of the table next to the phone, I answered it sir.
(Doc. No. 27, Ex. B). With respect to this incident, the Fact Finding results reflect that there was too much controversy surrounding this incident to hold the incident against the plaintiff. (Doc. No. 27, Ex. H).
Also on July 12, 2006, Sgt. Sorber e-mailed Lt. Avezzano a Correctional Officer Trainee Occurrence Report which indicated that it was reported to him that on July 10, 2006, the plaintiff did not report to his assigned housing unit, but instead went to the Restricted Housing Unit, ("RHU"). The report indicates that the plaintiff was told that he had no business  [*21] being there if he was not assigned to that area and the plaintiff was sent back to his assigned housing unit. (Doc. No. 21, Ex. H). Concerning this incident, the plaintiff testified at his Fact Finding as follows:
Lt. Avezzano: On July 10, 2006, at the conclusion of Mainline, you went to the RHU instead of your assigned downtime, is this correct?
COT Lescoe: This is correct sir.
Lt. Avezzano: Do you believe that it is good work habit to go where ever you choose instead of where you have been directed to go?
COT Lescoe: Before I answer that question sir I would like to explain.
Lt. Avezzano: How about you answer the question, and then explain.
COT Lescoe: As far as good work habits, I want to say that it is no. If you are not supposed to be there than you shouldn't be there. I will say that, yes sir. Now I would like to explain myself. I was assigned to do the count tickets and out count tickets up top. Upon turning in the out count tickets to Main Control between the time of waiting for the count tickets and actual count to commence, I did go to the RHU because Officer Braim and Officer Connolly are continuously telling me when you have time, you have a radio, you can be called, when you  [*22] have time come to the RHU and we will teach you things, we'll square you away, we'll educate you. Upon entering the RHU, Sgt. Verchimak told me I should not be here. I turned around and left.
Lt. Avezzano: Considering what you were assigned to do and based on what Officer Braim and Officer Connolly told you, you went down to see them.
COT Lescoe: Yes sir. They did not tell me that day; they have said when you just have time, like when you collect tickets or anything, between finishing your job.
Lt. Avezzano: Okay, so this day you determined you had time.
COT Lescoe: Since I was waiting for count to commence, as soon as count would have commenced I was going to leave. But as soon as Sgt. Verchimak told me to leave, I left and went right back up top.
Lt. Avezzano: Where was your assigned down time on that day?
COT Lescoe: C Block.
Lt. Avezzano: And you would have had to go back up on the hill to collect the count tickets anyway, correct?
COT Lescoe: Yes sir. Which was why I answer it is not good work habits.
Lt. Avezzano: So for that amount of time, if you had stayed down the RHU, the Yard Sgt. would have had no idea where you were.
COT Lescoe: No sir.
(Doc. No. 27, Ex. B). The Fact Finding results  [*23] indicate that it was confirmed by COI Connolly that the plaintiff had been told that he could stop in when he had time and they would help him out. (Doc. No. 27, Ex. H). The report concluded that the plaintiff used poor judgment in following the advise of more experienced COI's, but that he did not intentionally violate procedure or policy. (Id.).
On July 12, 2006, a Correctional Officer Trainee Occurrence Report was issued to Lt. Avezzano from COII Reed in which it was indicated that, on July 11, 2006, the plaintiff had been given permission to go to main control and review post order, but the plaintiff had left main control without permission and went to the dispensary to ask COT Sawicki questions. (Doc. No. 21, Ex. I). Concerning this incident, the plaintiff testified at the Fact Finding as follows:
Lt. Avezzano: On July 11, 2006, you asked Sgt. Reed if you could go to Main Control to read Post Orders; however, you were found in the Treatment Lobby talking to COT Sawicki, is this correct?
COT Lescoe: Yes sir.
Lt. Avezzano: Do you believe this conduct is proper and professional?
COT Lescoe: Proper and professional yes sir, with my explanation.
Lt. Avezzano: Go ahead.
COT Lescoe: Sgt. Reed  [*24] gave me permission to come to Main Control to read Post Orders and I specifically asked him on the Dispensary. He said yes, you can go.
Lt. Avezzano: Sgt. Reed told you you could go to the Dispensary?
COT Lescoe: No, I said I wanted to read Post Orders on the Dispensary.
Lt. Avezzano: Sgt. Reed told you to come to Main Control.
COT Lescoe: He said you can go.
Lt. Avezzano: To Main Control.
COT Lescoe: He didn't say to Main Control. I asked him if I could go read Post Orders on the Dispensary and he said yes you can go.
Lt. Avezzano: Where would he expect you to be reading Post Orders.
COT Lescoe: In Main Control, but sir, I came to Main Control, grabbed the Post Orders, the conference room was in use. I sat inside of Main Control and I was reading the Post Orders on the Dispensary. More people were coming in and out of Main Control and it just started to get really hectic in there. Upon finishing reading the Dispensary Post Orders, I put them away and on my down time I decided the Treatment Lobby is right here, I have my radio, I am going to go in and ask a few questions. Upon entering, I did not know it was COT Sawicki, it was Sawicki and I asked him just a few quick questions and that is  [*25] when Sgt. Sorber came in. Sgt. Sorber pulled Sawicki out to do his book, McCormick came in. I asked a few questions because Sawicki did not have time to answer and I still wanted to know. Upon him answering my questions, I left back to my down time.
Lt. Avezzano: Did it ever occur to you that when you were leaving Main Control to go over to the Dispensary/Treatment Area, that you should have checked with Sgt. Reed first?
COT Lescoe: Yes, I should have sir. It didn't occur to me at that time because I have my radio and if they need me they can call me, and also I was not planning on staying there, I was just planning on going in, asking a quick few questions and then leaving.
Lt. Avezzano: How long were you there?
COT Lescoe: I would say about ten (10) minutes total sir.
Lt. Avezzano: Do you believe this conduct is proper in exhibiting good work habits?
COT Lescoe: As far as obtaining knowledge for my workplace when I do not have much time to obtain it, yes; should I have called Sgt. Reed and asked him for permission does that display good work ethics, no it does not.
Lt. Avezzano: The conduct I was speaking of was again being in a place where you didn't belong, without permission.
COT Lescoe:  [*26] I will say no then sir.
(Doc. No. 27, Ex. B). At his deposition, the plaintiff further testified the respect to the incident as follows:
Q. Do you recall an incident on June 11th 16 2006, where you received permission to repost (sic) orders, but then went to the treatment lobby without informing or receiving permission to go there?
A. Well, the treatment lobby was right next to the MHU, and next to that was main control where post orders were read. And I went back and read all my post orders, and after I read my post orders, my job didn't call for me to actually go out until mainline started. So I went into the treatment and began to, I believe, went through a list of phone numbers and asked on of the other people who were working in treatment all the job specifics for that area because the following week, I believe, I was going to be assigned to that area of the prison. And, you know, I was still doing on the job stuff and I was honestly not told to be anywhere specific. I did what I asked, read my post orders, and then I just went for further training.
Q. So the post orders were at main control?
A. Yes, in a room in the back of main control.
Q. And main control is somewhere near the treatment  [*27] lobby?
A. Yes . . .
Q. Did you let anybody know that you were going into the treatment lobby?
A. I believe I had told one of the officers in the main control whether they had told Sergeant Reed or anything about it or not. I'm not sure. Most of the officers who were on yard, after yard and between yard, and mainline go to different parts of the prison and just relax until mainline starts until their job starts. Most of them go on the blocks and sit in the bubble with the sergeant and bullshit. Others go to the RHU and talk to some of their friends. Some, like me, I went and did post orders and then after post orders, I read through one of the post orders I was interested in. I went to the treatment and I was waiting for mainline to start.
Q. So you hadn't started your shift yet?
A. I was on my shift. I hadn't started my required job of where I had to be at the time.
(Doc. No. 21, Ex. A, pp. 51-54).
On July 26, 2006, Lt. Avezzano issued the plaintiff a notice of Fact-Finding session scheduled for August 2, 2006, concerning possible violations of the DOC Code of Ethics, Policies, Rules  [*28] and Regulations. (Doc. No. 21, Ex. J).
On Wednesday, August 2, 2006, the Fact-Finding session was held with the plaintiff, Union Representative Corrections Officer Sanzotto, Lieutenant Avezzano, Lieutenant Shade, and Susan Romano in attendance. The Fact Finding was recorded and a transcript was created of the testimony. Both Avezzano and the plaintiff signed the transcript on August 9, 2006.
By memorandum dated August 11, 2006, Lt. Avezzano provided the results of the Fact Finding to Major of the Guard, J.F. Miller 17. (Doc. No. 21, Ex.L). Lt. Avezzano indicated that the Committee recommended further review and administrative action concerning the following:
The Code of Ethics violation in which COT Lescoe left his assigned wing in Housing Unit A without being properly relieved or receiving authority from a Supervisor and the two (2) instances of poor job performance where 1) COT Lescoe was directing inmates on June 14th and 15th on Housing Unit A to ask Sergeant Paulukonis to open doors for other inmates and where 2) COT Lescoe took it upon himself to go to the Treatment Lobby on June 11, 2006, seeking additional knowledge, but failed to inform or receive permission from Sergeant Reed  [*29] to do so.
(Doc. No. 21, Ex. L).
On August 24, 2006, Major Miller issued a notification of written reprimand to the plaintiff for a violation of DOC Code of Ethics, Section B, #8 for leaving his assigned duty post without permission, and for overall poor job performance for the June 11, 14, and 15, 2006, incidents. (Doc. No. 21, Ex. A, Attached Ex. 1). The notice indicates that it was to be corrective in nature and that it remained imperative that the plaintiff evaluate his job performance to achieve acceptable performance standards. (Id.). The plaintiff was warned that failure to do so would result in further disciplinary action being taken. (Id.). The plaintiff testified at his deposition that when he was handed this written reprimand, he was told by Major Miller that if he received another Fact Finding, he would be fired. (Doc. No. 21, Ex. A, pp. 43, 54). The plaintiff believed that the result of the Fact-Finding was in his favor due to the fact that he was not fired at that time.
The plaintiff alleges that during his  [*30] employment at SCI-Frackville, he was the subject of jokes and comments about his weight, the size of his belly, and not being able to see his groin area.
In April 2006, the plaintiff reported to Sgt. Allen that another unnamed officer approached the plaintiff's wife at her place of work and made comments about the plaintiff. (Doc. No. 21, Ex. A., pp. 16-18). The plaintiff indicated that he didn't know the actual conversation, but indicated that it was about his weight and about how the officers were treating the plaintiff. (Id.). The plaintiff testified that Sgt. Allen indicated that he would look into it and the incident was not repeated while the plaintiff's wife continued at that place of employment 18. (Id.).
The plaintiff further testified that Sgt. Lucas would make him throw out his coffee prior to going through the metal detector while other officers could bring their coffee to the front and throw it away. Lucas told the plaintiff it was because he was a trainee and did not have the privilege of doing what other officers were  [*31] able to do.
The plaintiff testified that he tried on one occasion 19 to report his claims of harassment to Lt. Avezzano, to which Lt. Avezzano responded that the plaintiff should "just try and work on [himself] and that [Lt. Avezzano] would look into it." (Doc. No. 21, Ex. A, p. 22). After this instance, the plaintiff testified that Lt. Avezzano "became part of the problem." (Id. at pp. 20, 22).
Other than to the above individuals, (i.e., Allen, Lucas, and Avezzano), the plaintiff did not report any harassment or discrimination to anyone in his chain of command 20.
On one occasion, the plaintiff was assigned to walk around the yard to spot and respond to any incidents that may happen. He was told that Sergeant Budgeon was going to work him out. Upon approaching Budgeon, the plaintiff alleges that Sergeant Budgeon asked if he had been in the military and then told him he was a disrespect to the military being as big as he was and said if the plaintiff had been in Iraq with him, Budgeon would have killed him. The plaintiff testified that he did not recall whether he reported this incident to anyone in his chain of command 21. (Doc. No. 21, Ex. A, p. 29).
While sitting  [*33] in the yard, the plaintiff alleges that he overheard laughing between Sgt. Budgeon and CO Sanders. He alleges that Sgt. Budgeon commented "I bet you can't even see your dick" and took a meter stick and tried to measure the distance between the plaintiff's stomach and his groin. The plaintiff reported this incident to Sgt. Allen.
While working on Unit 15 on one occasion, the plaintiff's job was to run anything that needed to go from the blocks to the main control. The plaintiff felt that as soon as he finished one task, there was another task for him, and became suspicious because one of the envelopes didn't look just like paperwork. Upon opening the envelope, the plaintiff found that it contained a rubber glove with a message on it for another corrections officer. The plaintiff testified that he informed Sgt. Allen about the incident and was told that he would look into it.
The plaintiff received an employee performance review, ("EPR"), for the period April 1, 2006, through April 30, 2006. The EPR, conducted by Lt. Avezzano, was the plaintiff's first evaluation after the training academy and he received an overall satisfactory rating.
On the plaintiff's second EPR which covered the period  [*34] May 1 through May 31, 2006, he received an overall rating of "needs improvement. 22" (Doc. No. 21, Ex. A, pp. 57-58; Ex. A, Attached Ex. 3). This EPR, which was given by Lt. Avezzano, reflected "needs improvement" in the categories for work results, initiative problem solving, and work habits. (Id.). The EPR reflects that Major Miller reviewed and signed off on the EPR with a notation indicating "I concur, close monitoring required." (Id.).
The plaintiff received an EPR for the month of June which reflected an overall rating of "needs improvement. 23" (Doc. No. 21, Ex. A, p. 62; Ex. A, Attached Ex. 4). In this EPR, the plaintiff received only one satisfactory rating with all other categories indicating "needs improvement." (Id.).
The plaintiff received an EPR for the month of July, 2006, which indicated an overall rating of "unsatisfactory. 24" (Doc. No. 21, Ex. A, p. 63; Ex. A, Attached Ex. 5).
The plaintiff testified that he did not recall filing a grievance with his union regarding his unhappiness with his performance reviews 25. (Doc. No. 21, Ex. A, p. 65).
On August 25, 2006, Sgt. Allen issued a memo to Major Miller indicating that it was reported to him that the plaintiff had raised his fist above his head at a 45 degree angle and said "White Power!" while on the block. (Doc. No. 21, Exs. M, N). The same day, Major Miller issued a notice of a second Fact-Finding to the plaintiff for August 28, 2006, citing possible violations of the DOC Code of Ethics. (Doc. No. 21, Ex. O).
Following receipt of the second Fact-Finding Notice, the plaintiff resigned on August 26, 2006, by memo to Captain Lorady.
The plaintiff alleges that he has undergone emotional distress and anxiety due to he events at SCI-Frackville, but testified that he never sought treatment for his emotional distress or anxiety. (Doc. No. 21, Ex. A, pp. 76-77). The plaintiff now contends that he did not do so because he was unable to afford treatment due to his lack of medical insurance. (Doc. No. 27, Ex. J, ¶202).
In its motion for summary judgment, the defendant initially argues that it is entitled to state sovereign immunity on Counts IV and V of the plaintiff's  [*36] complaint, which set forth state law claims for relief. (Doc. No. 22, pp. 4-5). The plaintiff has failed to address this argument in his brief in opposition to the defendant's motion for summary judgment and is, therefore, deemed to not oppose the defendant's motion on this basis. Moreover, the court has reviewed the defendant's argument on this basis and finds it to be well-taken. Therefore, the defendant's motion for summary judgment should be granted with respect to Counts IV and V of the complaint.
The defendant further argues that it is entitled to summary judgment on the plaintiff's ADA and PHRA claims, (i.e., Counts I through III of the complaint), because the plaintiff has failed to establish that he is a disabled person within the meaning of the ADA 26. (Doc. No. 22, pp. 5-14).
The ADA provides, in part, that "[n]o covered entity shall discriminate against a qualified individual with a disability because of the disability of such individual in regard to job application procedures, the hiring,  [*37] advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." 27 42 U.S.C. §12112(a). In reviewing a motion for summary judgment to determine if there is a genuine issue of material fact concerning whether an employer illegally discriminated against an employee, the court applies the test articulated by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973) and refined in Texas Dep't of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 101 S. Ct. 1089, 67 L. Ed. 2d 207 (1981). Raytheon, 540 U.S. at 49 n.3; Shaner v. Synthes, 204 F.3d 494, 500 (3d Cir. 2000) (citing Walton v. Mental Health Ass'n. of Southeastern Pennsylvania, 168 F.3d 661, 667-68 (3d Cir. 1999)). The McDonnell Douglas test "establishe[s] an allocation of the burden of production and an order for the presentation of proof in . . . discriminatory-treatment cases." 28 Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 142, 120 S. Ct. 2097, 147 L. Ed. 2d 105 (2000) (quoting St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 506, 113 S. Ct. 2742, 125 L. Ed. 2d 407 (1993)) (internal omission in original). To succeed on an ADA disparate-treatment claim under the McDonnell Douglas test, the plaintiff must establish by a preponderance of the evidence  [*38] a prima facie case of discrimination. St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 506, 113 S. Ct. 2742, 125 L. Ed. 2d 407 (1993). A prima facie case requires the plaintiff to establish three (3) elements:
1. He is a disabled person within the meaning of the ADA;
2. He is otherwise qualified to perform the essential functions of the job, with or without reasonable accommodations by the employer; and,
3. He has suffered an otherwise adverse employment decision as a result of discrimination.
Gaul v. Lucent Technologies, Inc., 134 F.3d 576, 580 (3d Cir. 1998) citing Shiring v. Runyon, 90 F.3d 827, 831 (3d Cir. 1996).
If the plaintiff makes his prima facie showing, there is a presumption of discrimination. St. Mary's Honor Ctr., 509 U.S. at 506 (citing Burdine, 450 U.S. at 254). The burden then shifts to the defendant to rebut the presumption by "produc[ing] evidence that the plaintiff was rejected, or someone  [*39] else was preferred, for a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason." Reeves, 530 U.S. at 142 (citing Burdine, 450 U.S. at 254). The defendant's burden is "relatively light." Tomasso v. Boeing Co., 445 F.3d 702, 706 (2006) (citing Fuentes v. Perskie, 32 F.3d 759, 763 (3d Cir. 1994)). If the defendant produces evidence of a nondiscriminatory reason for the challenged conduct, the presumption "drops from the case." St. Mary's Honor Ctr., 509 U.S. at 507 (quoting Burdine, 450 U.S. at 255). "Once the employer answers its relatively light burden by articulating a legitimate reason for the unfavorable employment decision, the burden of production rebounds to the plaintiff, who must show by a preponderance of the evidence that the employer's explanation is pretextual. Fuentes, 32 F.3d at 763.
The ADA defines "disability" with regard to an individual as either: (i) "a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such [an] individual"; (ii) "a record of such an impairment"; or (iii) "being regarded as having such an impairment." 42 U.S.C. §12102(2).
In this case, the plaintiff does not allege that he was fired based upon a record of disability;  [*40] therefore, the court focuses on the first and third definitions of disability.
To establish a disability under the first definition above, a plaintiff first must show that he has a physical or mental impairment that "limits a major life activity." Toyota Motor Mfg., Ky., Inc. v. Williams, 534 U.S. 184, 122 S. Ct. 681, 151 L. Ed. 2d 615 (2002). Merely establishing that the plaintiff suffers from an impairment is insufficient. Id. Instead, a plaintiff must "demonstrate that the impairment limits a major life activity." Id. The phrase "major life activities" refers only "to those activities that are of central importance to daily life." Id. at 691. "Major life activities" may include such activities as caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working. 29 C.F.R. §1630.2(h)(1)(2006). A plaintiff "must further show that the limitation on the major life activity is 'substantia[l].' " Toyota Motor Mfg., 122 S.Ct. at 690 (quoting 42 U.S.C. §12102(2)(A)). To be substantially limited in a major life activity:
an individual must have an impairment that prevents or severely restricts the individual from doing activities that are of central importance to most people's  [*41] daily lives. The impairment's impact must also be permanent or long-term.
Id. (citing 29 C.F.R. §1630.2(j)(2)(ii)-(iii)).
Here, the plaintiff alleges that his physical impairment is his weight. It repeatedly has been held that excess weight or obesity, except in special instances where they relate to a physiological disorder, are not "physical impairments" within the meaning of the statutes. "Physical characteristics that are not the result of a physiological disorder are not considered impairments for the purposes of determining either actual or perceived disability." Francis v. City of Meriden, 129 F.3d 281, 286 (2d Cir.1997) (citing Andrews v. State of Ohio, 104 F.3d 803 (6th Cir.1997)). In the instant action, although the plaintiff has alleged that he is overweight, he has not alleged that his weight is the result of a physiological disorder; therefore, his being overweight would not bring him under the protection of the ADA.
In addition, even if the plaintiff's weight could qualify as an impairment under the statute, although he alleges that his weight places significant limitations upon his major life activities, he does not indicate what major life activities his weight limits.  [*42] At the time relevant to the instant action, the plaintiff weighed 300 pounds and was sixty-seven inches tall. The record indicates that he never saw a physician for his weight prior to resigning from his position at SCI-Frackville. While the plaintiff testified that he suffered mild lower back pain and pain in his feet from supporting his weight, he indicated that he was able to complete a medical examination, as well as the five-week training academy required to become a COT. The record indicates that he was physically capable of performing the duties required of him without requesting any special exceptions or accommodations because the position allowed him to sit as he needed. He testified in relation to the position that he was able to perform physical lifting, walk around the facility, run from one side of the yard to the other (although he would have a rapid heart beat and sweat), and was capable of restraining an inmate. The record does not support the plaintiff's contention that his weight limited any major life activity. Therefore, the court finds that he has not established a disability under the first definition above.
Under the third definition of disability above, a person  [*43] is "regarded as" having a disability if he:
(1) Has a physical or mental impairment that does not substantially limit major life activities but is treated by the covered entity as constituting such limitation;
(2) Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of others toward such impairment; or
(3) Has [no such impairment] but is treated by a covered entity as having a substantially limiting impairment.
Eshelman v. Agere Systems, Inc., 554 F.3d 426, 434 (3d Cir. 2009) (citing Taylor v. Pathmark Stores, Inc., 177 F.3d 180, 187 (3d Cir. 1999); see also 29 C.F.R. §1630.2(l)).
Initially, as discussed above, the plaintiff's weight does not constitute an "impairment" under the statute unless there is evidence that the defendant regarded him as suffering from a physiological weight-related disorder. There is no such evidence in the record before the court. Moreover, even if the plaintiff's weight could be considered an impairment under the statute, there is no evidence in the record before the court that the defendant believed that the plaintiff suffered from a disability as a result of his weight. While the plaintiff testified  [*44] that he was harassed based upon his weight, his testimony reflects, as discussed above, that he met all of the physical requirements to become a COT. The plaintiff argues in his opposing brief that he has shown that the defendant regarded him as being substantially limited in performing not only a class of jobs, but also a broad range of jobs in various classes, as evidenced by the defendant's refusal to transfer him to another position, sitting in a chair or reducing his work day. However, there is no such evidence in the record that this was the case, nor is there evidence in the record before the court that the plaintiff was treated any differently in relation to his job than any other COT due to an alleged perception of disability. Therefore, the plaintiff has failed to establish disability under the third definition set forth above as well.
In light of the above, the plaintiff has not established that he is a qualified individual with a disability which would entitled him to relief under either the ADA or PHRA. Therefore, the defendant's motion for summary judgment should be granted with respect to the plaintiff's ADA and PHRA claims in Count I through III of the complaint 29.
On the basis of the foregoing, IT IS RECOMMENDED THAT:
the defendant's motion for summary judgment, (Doc. No. 22), be GRANTED.
Date: March 4, 2011
/s/ Malachy E. Mannion
MALACHY E. MANNION
United States Magistrate Judge


End of Document

