Lezama v. Clark County
United States District Court for the District of Nevada
February 12, 2019, Decided; February 12, 2019, Filed
Case No.: 2:17-cv-00086-JAD-VCF

Reporter
2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 233466 *; 2019 WL 10372775
Rolando Lezama, Plaintiff v. Clark County, et al., Defendants
Subsequent History: Costs and fees proceeding at, Motion granted by, in part Lezama v. Clark County, 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 233462, 2019 WL 10372776 (D. Nev., May 6, 2019)
Affirmed by Lezama v. Clark Cty., 817 Fed. Appx. 341, 2020 U.S. App. LEXIS 17436, 2020 WL 2950670 (9th Cir. Nev., June 3, 2020)
Counsel:  [*1] For Clark County, a political subdivision and municipality, Clark County, on behalf of, Clark County, Clark County Department of Aviation, Defendants: Whitney J Selert, LEAD ATTORNEY, Fisher & Phillips LLP, Las Vegas NV; Holly Ester Walker, Fisher & Phillips LLP, Las Vegas NV; Mark J Ricciardi, Fisher & Phillips LLP, Las Vegas NV.
For Rolando Lezama, Plaintiff: Michael P. Balaban, LEAD ATTORNEY, Law Offices of Michael P. Balaban, Las Vegas NV.
Judges: Jennifer A. Dorsey, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Jennifer A. Dorsey
Opinion



Order Granting Summary Judgment and Closing Case
After injuring himself at work, plaintiff Rolando Lezama never returned to his full-time position with defendant Clark County's Department of Aviation. The County ultimately terminated Lezama after an unsuccessful attempt to find him a new position for which he was qualified. Lezama sued the County and the Department of Aviation, claiming that the County violated the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), terminated him against public policy in violation of Nevada state law, and discriminated against him based on his race. The defendants move for summary judgment, arguing that Lezama lacks evidence to support all three of his claims. [*2]  Lezama withdraws his claims for wrongful termination and racial discrimination in his response to the defendants' motion, so I grant summary judgment in the defendants' favor on those claims. And because Lezama has failed to demonstrate genuine disputes of material fact, I grant summary judgment on Lezama's ADA discrimination and retaliation claims, too.

Background

A. Lezama's injury and first termination
Lezama began working for the County in July 2007 as a Maintenance Worker I in the County's Department of Aviation.1 He was promoted to Maintenance Worker II in 2009.2 In May 2014, Lezama was pushing a garbage cart up a ramp—something he did daily in his job—and felt a pop in his lower back.3 He didn't think much of it, finished his shift, and went home.4 The next day, however, he awoke feeling stiff and reported the injury to his supervisor when he got to work.5 He returned to work with no restrictions several days later, but eventually ended up back at the hospital.6
Beginning in July 2014, Lezama returned to work on temporary light-duty assignments.7 But after he exhausted the maximum limit for light-duty work, he was put on unpaid leave starting in December 2014.8 Nearly a year later, in November [*3]  2015, the County sent a letter to Lezama to inform him that, because he had not been in his full-duty job for over one year, the County was preparing to initiate its medical separation process.9 The letter informed Lezama that he may be eligible for accommodation under the ADA and that he should contact the County's Office of Diversity (OOD) if he wanted to pursue one.10 The letter also stated that the OOD would provide an accommodation if one was available, but if the OOD determined that he couldn't perform the essential functions of his job with or without an accommodation, or perform other available work for which he qualified, the County would proceed with the medical separation process.11
Lezama immediately contacted the OOD and spoke with Sandra Swickward, who explained the contents of the letter and provided Lezama with an ADA Assessment for his doctor to complete to document his condition and describe potential accommodations.12 Lezama took the paperwork to Dr. Mark Kabins, who examined him and completed the assessment. Lezama returned the paperwork to the OOD without reviewing its contents.13 In that paperwork, Dr. Kabins indicated that Lezama did not have any physiological [*4]  disorder or mental impairment that required an accommodation.14
Letty Bonilla, a representative from the OOD, called Lezama and explained that, because Dr. Kabins concluded that he wasn't disabled, Lezama wasn't entitled to an accommodation.15 Bonilla asked Lezama if he had other information the OOD should consider and he responded that he didn't have anything else to say.16 The OOD sent Lezama a formal letter documenting this phone call two days later.17 Lezama didn't submit any additional information and was terminated on January 13, 2016.18

B. Lezama's reinstatement and second termination
Lezama filed a grievance through his union a week later, arguing that he should be given the opportunity to apply for retirement benefits before being terminated.19 Before the first formal hearing about his grievance, he submitted a letter from Dr. Kabins, in which Dr. Kabins stated that he made a mistake filling out Lezama's ADA Assessment paperwork, that Lezama couldn't return to his job as Maintenance Worker II, and that a Functional Capacity Evaluation (FCE) was necessary to determine whether Lezama had physical limitations affecting his ability to work in other positions.20
After receiving this letter, the [*5]  County reinstated Lezama and commissioned the FCE that Dr. Kabins recommended.21 The FCE concluded that Lezama could not perform the essential functions of the Maintenance Worker II job with or without an accommodation.22 Once the OOD received the FCE, it sent Lezama a letter notifying him that he was not a "qualified individual with a disability" because he could not perform the essential functions of his job with or without an accommodation.23 The letter explained that the OOD would, with Lezama's assistance, search for alternative work for which he qualified over a 30-day period.24 Lezama was instructed to contact Diane Koksha immediately to begin the job-search process.25
Lezama contacted Koksha, who interviewed him to learn about his work history, education, knowledge, skills, and experience.26 Koksha told Lezama that she would review job postings but that he was also responsible for checking the Clark County and McCarran Airport websites to identify available positions.27 She told him when new jobs were posted and that he should check both websites twice a week.28 Koksha and Lezama regularly checked the websites throughout the job-search period.29 Koksha didn't find any jobs for which Lezama [*6]  was qualified during that period,30 and Lezama identified only one available position he believed he could do: an Airport Escort.31 Koksha also saw that position was available, but based on the listed physical limitations specific to the position, she determined that Lezama wasn't qualified.32 But because Lezama told her he felt he could do the job, Koksha forwarded the position to the OOD for evaluation.33
The OOD reviewed the FCE and compared Lezama's physical limitations with the written description and the formal Job Functional Analysis for the positions.34 The OOD confirmed that the actual job duties were consistent with the job description and functional analysis,35 and based on the requirements of the job and Lezama's physical limitations, concluded that Lezama did not qualify for it.36 Because Lezama and the OOD couldn't identify a job for which he was qualified during the job-search period, Lezama was terminated.37
Lezama sued Clark County and its Aviation division, alleging ADA discrimination and retaliation, wrongful termination in violation of Nevada state law, and racial discrimination in violation of Title VII.38 The defendants move for summary judgment, arguing that there is no [*7]  evidence of ADA discrimination or retaliation and that Lezama's claims for wrongful termination and racial discrimination fail as a matter of law.39 In response, Lezama withdraws his wrongful termination and racial discrimination claims, leaving only his claims for ADA discrimination and retaliation to be resolved.40

Discussion

A. Summary-judgment standard
Summary judgment is appropriate when the pleadings and admissible evidence "show there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law."41 When considering summary judgment, the court views all facts and draws all inferences in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party.42 If reasonable minds could differ on material facts, summary judgment is inappropriate because its purpose is to avoid unnecessary trials when the facts are undisputed, and the case must then proceed to the trier of fact.43
If the moving party satisfies Rule 56 by demonstrating the absence of any genuine issue of material fact, the burden shifts to the party resisting summary judgment to "set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial."44 "To defeat summary judgment, the nonmoving [*8]  party must produce evidence of a genuine dispute of material fact that could satisfy its burden at trial."45

B. ADA discrimination claims
Lezama divides his ADA claims into two time periods: before his first termination and after his reinstatement. I address each time period separately.

1. The County did not discriminate against Lezama when it terminated him the first time.
Lezama alleges that the County's first discriminatory act was terminating him in January 2016.46 To establish a prima facie case of discrimination under the ADA, a plaintiff must demonstrate that: (1) he is disabled within the meaning of the ADA; (2) he is a qualified individual able to perform the essential functions of the job with reasonable accommodation; and (3) he suffered an adverse employment action because of his disability.47 The ADA defines a disability as "a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of an individual."48
The County argues that there is no evidence that Lezama was disabled or regarded as disabled at the time of his first termination.49 It asserts that Lezama doesn't dispute that the paperwork his doctor submitted stated that Lezama didn't have a [*9]  physiological or mental condition that would prevent him from working, so there was no reason for the County to believe that Lezama was entitled to ADA protections.50 Lezama responds that his doctor "mistakenly indicated that [he] did not have a physical or mental impairment and thus was not disabled."51 He asserts that the error was "obvious" and that that County should have known he was disabled under the ADA's definition because it knew about his injury and it knew that he hadn't worked his normal job in over a year.52 He argues that, regardless of his doctor's assessment, the County should have regarded him as disabled and begun attempts to accommodate him.53
It is undisputed that Dr. Kabins submitted, at the County's request, an ADA Accommodation Assessment that notes that Lezama did not have a "physiological disorder or condition" that qualified him for ADA accommodations.54 Once the County received that assessment, it gave Lezama the opportunity to submit further information before it closed his file. Only after Lezama declined to do so did the County terminate him. While Dr. Kabins eventually corrected that report after Lezama was terminated, the County had no reason to doubt Dr. Kabins—the [*10]  sole evidence Lezama provided regarding his purported disability—at the time of his first report and Lezama hasn't presented evidence outside of his own speculation to show that the County should have done so. Plus, the County reinstated Lezama immediately after he corrected his doctor's report.55 I therefore grant summary judgment in the County's favor on Lezama's ADA discrimination claim to the extent that it is based on his first termination.

2. The County did not fail to accommodate Lezama after reinstating him.
Lezama alleges that the County's second act of discrimination was failing to accommodate him once it knew that he had a disability. He claims that the County improperly refused to find him a new job and did not participate in the interactive process in good faith.56
"[T]he ADA says that 'discrimination' includes an employer's 'not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified . . . employee unless [the employer] can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of its business."57 "[O]nce the employee requests an accommodation . . . the employer must engage in an interactive process with [*11]  the employee to determine the appropriate reasonable accommodation."58 But "there exists no stand-alone claim for failing to engage in the interactive process. Rather, discrimination results from denying an available and reasonable accommodation."59
The parties agree that it was reasonable not to keep Lezama in his former position. But "[a] person can be a qualified individual under the ADA if 'he can perform the essential functions of a reassignment position, with or without reasonable accommodation, even if [he] cannot perform the essential functions of [his] current position.'"60 Reassignment to a vacant position may be a reasonable accommodation,61 but an employer is not required to reassign an employee to a vacant position unless he is qualified to hold it.62 The County argues that it couldn't find a suitable position for Lezama during the 30-day job search so it is not liable for failure to accommodate.63
It is undisputed that Lezama identified one available job he thought he could do (airport escort) and that he brought this job to the County's attention. It is also undisputed that the County evaluated him for that position and that he couldn't perform the job's essential functions with or [*12]  without an accommodation. But Lezama argues that, from his personal observation, he could have performed the essential functions of the airport escort job.64 Lezama presents no evidence to dispute the County's determination that he couldn't perform the job's essential functions with or without an accommodation, and his unsupported speculations about the job's essential functions do not create an issue of material fact suitable for trial.65
Lezama also lists several job titles that he thinks he could have been qualified for but admits that there weren't vacancies in any of those positions during the job-search period.66 But "the ADA does not impose a duty to create a new position to accommodate a disabled employee."67 "[F]or reassignment to a vacant position to be reasonable, an existing position must be vacant."68 In determining whether a position is vacant, "an employer must consider not only those contemporaneously available positions, but also those that will become available within a reasonable period."69 In Dark v. Curry County, the Ninth Circuit found that a genuine issue of material fact precluded summary judgment because Dark proffered evidence that certain positions had become available [*13]  in the two years after his termination.70 The court noted that Dark had not specified when the jobs became available, but his mere allegation that a position became available did not require any greater specificity.71 Lezama relies on Dark to argue that, even though the jobs he thought he could perform weren't available during the job search, the County should have kept looking for vacancies after he was terminated.
But the key to the Ninth Circuit's holding in Dark were the plaintiff's statements that specific jobs became available some time after he had been terminated. Lezama presents no similar toehold here. He offers no evidence that he brought specific jobs to the County's attention, that he could perform the essential functions of those jobs, or that they were ever available. Lezama doesn't claim that any job for which he was qualified became available after his termination; he simply lists job titles and speculates that those jobs would have become available eventually. This speculation does not satisfy Lezama's burden on summary judgment, and it materially distinguishes his case from Dark.
Finally, Lezama argues that the County could have granted him "six months or longer" [*14]  in medical leave as a reasonable accommodation.72 He opines that if he had been put on long-term medical leave, a position would have become available that he could do. The plaintiff in Dark similarly argued that the County could have accommodated his disability by granting his request to use his 89 days of accumulated sick leave to adjust his medication levels and return to his job, and the Ninth Circuit held that, under those circumstances, the County was "obligated to consider this option."73
Lezama's case is different for two reasons. First, unlike Dark, Lezama never requested medical leave as an accommodation. But most importantly Dark requested to use a specific amount of accumulated sick leave, while Lezama has not even shown that he requested any leave—let alone leave of a specific duration. As the Ninth Circuit explained in Dark, "recovery time of an unspecified duration" is not a reasonable accommodation—"primarily where the employee will not be able to return to his former position and cannot state when and under what conditions he could return to work at all."74 The law did not require the County to volunteer Lezama an indefinite medical leave, and his assertion that "there was [*15]  a good chance" the County would find him a job that met his medical restrictions if it had just kept looking does not satisfy his burden on summary judgment. Because the County has shown that there is no dispute of material fact as to the availability of a reasonable accommodation for Lezama, I grant summary judgment in its favor on Lezama's ADA discrimination claim.

C. Lezama's ADA Retaliation Claim
To succeed on an ADA retaliation claim, a plaintiff must prove that (1) he engaged in a protected activity, (2) he suffered an adverse employment action, and (3) there exists a causal connection between the protected activity and the adverse employment action.75 The dimensions of Lezama's retaliation claim are unclear, but he appears to allege that that the County fired him the second time in retaliation for some unspecified protected activity.76 The County argues that it was legally entitled to terminate Lezama because he could not perform the functions of his job or any other available position and that decision was not retaliatory as a matter of law.77 It asserts that Lezama therefore cannot show causation. Lezama does not address this argument—or offer any defense of his ADA retaliation [*16]  claim at all—in his response.
The failure to oppose a motion for summary judgment does not permit the court to enter summary judgment by default, but the lack of a response is not without consequences.78 As Rule 56(e) explains, "If a party fails . . . to properly address another party's assertion of fact . . . the court may . . . consider the fact undisputed for purposes of the motion" and "grant summary judgment if the motion and supporting materials—including the facts considered undisputed—show that the movant is entitled to it . . . ."79
The County has shown that Lezama cannot establish causation for this claim, shifting the burden to Lezama to come forward with evidence to support this element. Lezama's silence has left him unable to do so. Because the County satisfied its burden on summary judgment and Lezama has not, I grant the County's motion for summary judgment on Lezama's ADA retaliation claim.

Conclusion
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED that the defendants' motion for summary judgment [ECF No. 27] is GRANTED.
So, with cause appearing and no reason to delay, IT IS FURTHER FUTHER ORDERED, ADJUDGED, AND DECREED that the Clerk of Court is directed to ENTER JUDGMENT in favor of the defendants [*17]  and against the plaintiff and CLOSE THIS CASE.
Dated: February 12, 2019
/s/ Jennifer A. Dorsey
U.S. District Judge Jennifer A. Dorsey


End of Document

