Limon v. Am. Red. Cross
United States District Court for the Central District of California
October 6, 2010, Decided; October 6, 2010, Filed
NO. CV 09-07355 SJO (FMOx)

Reporter
2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 148304 *; 2010 WL 11507875
CYNTHIA LIMON, Plaintiff, v. AMERICAN RED CROSS, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Cynthia Limon, Plaintiff: Geoffrey C Lyon, LEAD ATTORNEY, Long Beach, CA USA.
For American Red Cross Erroneously Sued As American Red Cross of Greater Los Angeles, Defendant: Lawrence Jeffrey Gartner, LEAD ATTORNEY, Ballard Spahr LLP, Long Beach, CA USA; Naomi Young, LEAD ATTORNEY, Ballard Spahr Andrews & Ingersoll LLP, Long Beach, CA USA.
Judges: S. JAMES OTERO, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: S. JAMES OTERO
Opinion



ORDER GRANTING DEFENDANT THE RED CROSS' MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
[Docket No. 22]
This matter is before the Court on Defendant American Red Cross of Greater Los Angeles' ("Defendant" or the "Red Cross") Motion for Summary Judgment or, in the Alternative, for Partial Summary Judgment, filed on May 15, 2010.1 Plaintiff Cynthia Limon ("Plaintiff" or "Limon") filed an Opposition, to which Defendant replied.2 The Court found this matter suitable for disposition without oral argument and vacated the hearing set for July 6, 2010. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 78(b). For the following reasons, Defendant's Motion is GRANTED.
I. BACKGROUND
Plaintiff was employed by the Red Cross from about August 12, 1991 to April 24, 2009, when she was terminated. (Compl. ¶ 11; Def.'s Mot. 1.) At the time of her termination, "Plaintiff worked [*2]  at the . . . Red Cross facility located at 11355 Ohio Avenue, Los Angeles, [California] 90025" as an Account Representative.3 (Compl. ¶ 11.) "Plaintiff was part of the Health and Safety Department" and was supervised by the Sales and Account Team Supervisor, Liseth Alvarez ("Alvarez"), "who in turn, reported to" the Health and Safety Officer, Timothy Archuleta ("Archuleta"). (Compl. ¶ 11; Pl.'s SOF ¶¶ 60, 61.) In the Health and Safety Department, Andrea Jenkins ("Jenkins"), Christina Marron ("Marron"), and Liseth Alvarez ("Alvarez") had primary responsibility for full service clients and Plaintiff had primary responsibility for authorized providers. (Pl.'s Opp'n 13.)
A. Association Discrimination Allegations
Plaintiff alleges that from about April 2008 to September 2008, she "refused [the Red Cross'] demand that [she] participate in unlawful harassment and discrimination of co-worker Gabriela Valenzuela ["Valenzuela"], based on Valenzuela's sex/impending pregnancy and anticipated use of pregnancy disability and/or [California Family Rights Act ("CFRA")] leave."4 (Compl. ¶ 15; Decl. of Cynthia Limon in Opp'n to Mot. for Summ. J. or, in the Alternative, Partial Summ. J. of Def. ("Limon Decl.") [*3]  ¶ 8.) Plaintiff alleges:
At least twice in the summer of 2008, Alvarez pressed me to find out when Valenzuela was likely to become pregnant so the Red Cross could terminate Valenzuela. I opposed the discrimination by refusing to cooperate. Alvarez wrote a note to me saying, "I really need you to find out for me if in fact [Valenzuela] is pregnant. I need to accelerate the process before she tells us"5 . . . . The next day Alvarez asked me to destroy the note because Alvarez could be terminated for putting the employer's plan in writing. I instead kept the note. Alvarez also asked me to assign new tasks to Valenzuela without her so Valenzuela's consequent mistakes could be used as a pretext for terminating Valenzuela, a prospective surrogate mother.
(Opp'n to Def.'s Mot. for Partial/Summ. J. ("Pl.'s Opp'n") 5.) Plaintiff argues that she opposed Alvarez's behavior "by refusing to participate," and by "refusing to nitpick [Valenzuela's] performance as a pretext for termination." (Limon Decl. ¶ 8.) Further, when Alvarez asked Plaintiff to document when Valenzuela "doesn't do something for you," Plaintiff alleges that she responded: "[Valenzuela] does whatever we ask her to do." (Limon Decl. [*4]  ¶ 8.) Also, Plaintiff claims that when Alvarez wrote the above-mentioned note to her, she opposed that unlawful behavior by "looking at . . . Alvarez in cold silence." (Limon Decl. ¶ 9.)
Additionally, Plaintiff contends that Alvarez asked her to "keep close tabs on Valenzuela at work and [to] monitor everything [Valenzuela] did, such as what time [Valenzuela] came in to work or how many minutes her lunch break was." (Limon Decl. ¶ 10.) Plaintiff alleges:
Alvarez told me that I should stop doing sales agreements which were previously part of my job, [to] ask Valenzuela to do them for me, and then document any problems in her performance. Alvarez also repeatedly pressured me to agree that I had heard Valenzuela speaking to Alvarez in an inappropriate tone, even though I had heard nothing.
(Limon Decl. ¶ 10.) Plaintiff states that she opposed this discrimination by "telling Alvarez that [she] had not heard anything." (Limon Decl. ¶ 10.) Plaintiff does not allege that she affirmatively did anything else to oppose Alvarez's comments and/or conduct. Plaintiff has not produced the note Alvarez allegedly gave her, either. Pl.'s Opp'n 5 ("Limon instead kept the note.").
In any event, Plaintiff [*5]  contends that the pressure to "assist the Red Cross in terminating Valenzuela based on sex/pregnancy further aggravated [her] preexisting disorder and depression."6 (Pl.'s Opp'n 5; Limon Decl. ¶ 11.) Specifically, Plaintiff alleges that she "experienced severe anxiety at work, and at home particularly from approximately August through October 2008." (Limon Decl. ¶ 11.) In September 2008, Plaintiff argues that she "complained to . . . [Mary] Norvell ["Norvell"] and Archuleta about Alvarez's unethical conduct relating to Valenzuela."7 (Pl.'s Opp'n 5-6; Limon Decl. ¶ 11.) Plaintiff further notes that she "previously complained about Alvarez's oversupervision of [her] to Norvell in or after approximately April 2008." (Limon Decl. ¶ 12.)
Plaintiff alleges that after her September 2008 complaint, "Norvell and Archuleta retaliated [against her] by calling a meeting with her on or about October 2, 2008 [the "October 2, 2008 Meeting"]. At the meeting, [Plaintiff] understood Norvell and Archuleta to be threatening [her] job on grounds that [she] had told a co-worker the co-worker's job was in jeopardy. [Plaintiff] understood the co-worker to be Valenzuela." (Pl.'s Opp'n 5-6; Limon Decl. ¶ 12.) [*6]  Plaintiff also argues that Alvarez told Norvell that Plaintiff "planned to sue the Red Cross, in reference to [Plaintiff's] refusal to participate in the Red Cross' efforts to terminate Valenzuela . . . . Norvell confronted [Plaintiff] about this accusation during the October 2, 2008 [M]eeting." (Pl.'s Opp'n 6.) Plaintiff became so distressed by this alleged threat to her employment that she left work early and visited her doctor the next day. (Limon Decl. ¶ 13.) Plaintiff states that she subsequently went on medical/disability leave, "due to the aggravation of [her] underlying anxiety and depression [discussed below] caused by the threat to [her] employment unless [she] participated in helping Red Cross terminate co-worker Valenzuela based on her sex/pregnancy."8 (Limon Decl. ¶ 14.)
B. Disability Discrimination Allegations
1. Plaintiff's Disabilities
Plaintiff claims that she suffered or was perceived to suffer from disabilities "includ[ing] but not limited to depression, anxiety, and migraine headaches, and related symptoms, conditions, and limitations."9 (Compl. ¶ 12; Limon Decl. ¶ 2.) Plaintiff alleges that her:
disabilities interfered with major life activities, including work, and required reasonable [*7]  accommodations, including but not limited to the opportunity to work part-time or full-time at an office closer to her home, and periodic medical leave, disability leave and time off work for medical treatment and recuperation from flare up of symptoms.
(Compl. ¶ 12; Limon Decl. ¶ 2.) Plaintiff claims that she was at all times, qualified to perform all essential functions and fundamental duties of her job, either with or without reasonable accommodations, "without endangering [her] or anyone else's health and safety." (Compl. ¶ 13.) However, Plaintiff argues that the Red Cross "failed and refused to provide reasonable accommodations for [her] disabilities." (Compl. ¶ 12.)
2. History of Plaintiff's Disabilities
Plaintiff contends that "[f]rom 2004 to 2009, [she] occasionally needed to take brief periods of approximately one to two days off work for medical or disability leave or for doctor's appointments." (Compl. ¶ 14.) Plaintiff states that "[o]n or about November 17, 2004, Archuleta criticized [her] and wrote her up for leaving a meeting early when she became ill." (Compl. ¶ 14; Limon Decl. ¶ 4.) "The next day [Plaintiff] went to [her] doctor [and was given] approximately two weeks of medical [*8]  leave to recover from [her] aggravated disabilities." (Limon Decl. ¶ 4.)
Plaintiff states that when she returned to work she experienced a "pattern of excessive and unfair criticism in retaliation for exercising [her] right to medical leave, including [being written] up for leaving [a] meeting due to anxiety and a severe migraine, despite the fact that [she] had provided a doctor's note." (Limon Decl. ¶ 4.) Plaintiff alleges that when she complained to Archuleta on approximately November 30, 2004, he asked her: "Well what? What was wrong? Were you nauseous, or what?" (Compl. ¶ 14; Limon Decl. ¶ 4.) "Plaintiff understood Archuleta to be doubting her medical condition/disability, trivializing her need for medical leave, and thereby pressuring her to choose between exercising her rights to disability leave and medical care on the one hand and her job on the other." (Compl. ¶ 14.)
Plaintiff contends that she "complained about this incident to Human Resources and even [to] the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Operating Officers of Red Cross in December 2004." (Limon Decl. ¶ 4.) Plaintiff states that when she inquired into the status of her grievance, she "received a 'Final Written Warning' [*9]  listing 14 supposed problems with [her] performance, all of which were false." (Limon Decl. ¶ 4.) Plaintiff claims that she "had never received any written warning about any of these problems in the past," and "[w]hen she complained to Human Resources, they admitted that her performance had been good." (Limon Decl. ¶ 4.)
In February 2005, Plaintiff requested medical leave for breast reduction surgery. (Compl. ¶ 14; Limon Decl. ¶ 5.) Plaintiff alleges: "When I emailed Archuleta and . . . Arlene Ramos of Human Resources to request [Family and Medical Leave Act and California Family Rights Act] paperwork . . . Norvell inadvertently responded to me instead of Archuleta, stating that it was 'Interesting . . .' that I had asked for medical leave." (Limon Decl. ¶ 5.) Later in 2007, Plaintiff "took approximately two more months of medical leave . . ." (Limon Decl. ¶ 6.)
3. The October 2, 2008 Meeting
Plaintiff argues that her psychological problems worsened following the aforementioned October 2, 2008 Meeting. (Compl. ¶ 16; Limon Decl. ¶¶ 13-14.) Plaintiff maintains that after this meeting, she and her doctor "agree[d] that all [her disabilities] were severely aggravated and/or caused by unfair treatment [she] [*10]  experienced at work beginning in 2004. As the unfair treatment intensified, so [too] did her disabilities." (Limon Decl. ¶ 3.) Plaintiff alleges that the "threats" she experienced during the meeting "aggravated [her] psychological problems [so much] that she had to leave work . . . was unstable on her feet, was unable to drive herself home or be alone that night, and had to go to the doctor the next day." (Pl.'s Opp'n 6.)
Subsequently, Plaintiff "exercised her right to disability leave." (Compl. ¶ 14; Pl.'s Opp'n 6.) Plaintiff claims that her "doctor . . . authorized her to return to work with no restrictions on or about April 30, 2009," but that she was terminated "days before she was scheduled to return to work in April 2009."10 (Compl. ¶ 14; Pl.'s Opp'n 6.) Plaintiff now alleges that Defendant:
discriminated and retaliated against [her] based upon [her] disabilities, [her] exercise of [her] right to medical leave, and [her] refusal to participate in unlawful behavior, and also retaliated against [her] opposition to disability and medical leave discrimination. [Defendant's] adverse employment actions against [her] included excessive, false, and unfair criticism, removal of responsibilities, [*11]  demotion, less desirable schedule and pay, refusal to promote, and otherwise discriminating against [her] in the terms and conditions of [her] employment.
(Compl. ¶ 16; Limon Decl. ¶ 7.)
C. Plaintiff's Job Performance and Commute
1. Job Performance
As mentioned, Plaintiff's job responsibilities at the Red Cross included "both Authorized Provider ("AP") accounts and Full Service Client ("FSC") accounts."11 (Limon Decl. ¶ 17; Pl.'s Opp'n 13.) Indeed, Plaintiff worked on both AP and FSC accounts during her employment with the Red Cross. (Limon Decl. ¶ 17.) However, at the time she took disability leave in October 2008, "[Plaintiff] had primary responsibility for [AP accounts]." (Pl.'s Opp'n 13.) Plaintiff claims that as an Account Representative, "[she] generated substantial revenue for the Red Cross." (Pl.'s Opp'n 13.) In particular, Plaintiff contends that she sold approximately $60,000 worth of FSC courses in 2008.12 (Limon Decl. ¶ 18.) Even more, Plaintiff argues that "[t]he Red Cross' 2008 revenue goal for [AP accounts] was $325,000," and "as of April 2008, [she] had already met $295,000 of the goal." (Pl.'s Opp'n 13.) As such, "[Plaintiff] was given the goal of recruiting an additional 20 new [*12]  [AP accounts]," which she claims she exceeded "by recruiting 80 new [AP accounts]." (Pl.'s Opp'n 13.)
Plaintiff offers "she was so successful at generating revenue that among her group, she was chosen to do 'cold call' sales to new [FSC accounts]." (Pl.'s Opp'n 13.) Then, in October 2008, Plaintiff was given "primary responsibility for taking 'cold calls' from new prospective FSCs in [her] department," and that "it was not uncommon for [her] to persuade a client to purchase Red Cross services and then transfer the call to one of [her] co-workers, . . . Marron or . . . Jenkins, so that they could take down the client's information and schedule the class." (Limon Decl. ¶ 17; Pl.'s Opp'n 13.) Plaintiff contends that even "Archuleta admitted in his deposition that he could not identify anyone in [Plaintiff's] group with a higher client retention." (Pl.'s Opp'n 14.)
In any event, Plaintiff contests that she was the only Sales and Marketing Account Representative [to be] laid off," and that other employees who were laid off "had much less experience" than her, as she had worked for the Red Cross for almost 18 years. (Pl.'s Opp'n 14-15.) Plaintiff states that after Marron, who had less experience, [*13]  took over her AP responsibilities, "a new sales representative was needed to take over . . . Marron's Lifeline responsibilities, so Ms. Castleman was hired." (Pl.'s Opp'n 14.) Plaintiff asserts:
Red Cross would not have encountered any difficulty in moving Marron into selling Lifeline full-time and transferring Marron's [AP] responsibilities back to [Plaintiff] when she returned from medical leave. Alternatively, [Plaintiff] could have run the Lifeline program, which she had experience doing.
(Pl.'s Opp'n 14.)
Plaintiff admits that after she was terminated, she "was provided a list of open positions," but did not apply to those "because she had a reasonable belief that she would not be selected after years of discriminatory treatment." (Pl.'s Opp'n 15; Pl.'s SOF ¶¶ 99, 100, 108, 109.) Further, Plaintiff claims that she "was not encouraged to apply for specific positions as others had been in the past." (Pl.'s Opp'n 15.)
2. Accommodations/Driving to Work
Plaintiff commuted to work by car for months before she went on medical/disability leave in October 2008, and states that "although [driving] aggravated [her] anxiety and severe migraine headache[,] it was not as big a factor as the anxiety [*14]  caused by the Red Cross' retaliation."13 (Limon Decl. ¶ 15.) Instead, Plaintiff alleges that "[t]he primary cause of [her] disabling anxiety and depression was her underlying condition aggravated by her employer's demand that [she] assist it in determining when Valenzuela was likely to become pregnant so that [the Red Cross] could terminate Valenzuela." (Pl.'s Opp'n 18.)
Because of her "long and stressful commute," Plaintiff requested that she be permitted to work part-time or full-time from an office closer to her home.14 (Limon Decl. ¶ 16; Pl.'s SOF ¶ 8, 25, 27.) Plaintiff also requested that:
Red Cross . . . accommodate [her] disabilities by not excessively and unfairly criticizing her, retaliating against [her], [or] repeatedly asking [her] to participate in illegal unfair treatment of a coworker. This was part of why [Plaintiff] met with . . . Norvell in September 2008, and told her, while crying, that . . . Alvarez was asking [Plaintiff] to do unethical things relating to Valenzuela and that this was affecting [Plaintiff's] emotional state.
(Limon Decl. ¶ 16.) Plaintiff alleges that she made this request to Archuleta and Alvarez and "also told others that her commute time adversely affected [*15]  [her] health." (Pl.'s Opp'n 18.) Accordingly, Plaintiff was permitted to work at another facility of her choice one day per week and was also granted "flex time" so that she could adjust her schedule to the commute. (Def.'s Mot. 10.) Plaintiff complains, however, that "[Defendant] refused to accommodate [her]," and instead, was told: "we decided we are not going to accommodate you."15 (Pl.'s Opp'n 18.)
D. Procedural Background
Following her termination on April 24, 2009, Plaintiff sought and exhausted administrative remedies on September 2, 2009, pursuant to California Government Code §§ 12940, 12945, and California Civil Code § 3294. (Compl. ¶ 1, Ex. 1.) On September 4, 2009, Plaintiff filed the present action, alleging the following causes of action: (1) disability discrimination in violation of the California Fair Employment and Housing Act, California Government Code §§ 12900, et seq.; (2) medical leave discrimination and retaliation in violation of California Family Rights Act, California Government Code § 12945.2; (3) retaliation in violation of the California Fair Employment and Housing Act, California Government Code § 12900; (4) wrongful termination in violation of public policies, California Government Code §§ 12940, 12945, 12948, and the California State Constitution; and (5) associational discrimination in violation of the California Fair Employment and Housing Act, California Government Code § 12940.16 (See generally Compl.)
Defendant [*16]  now moves for summary judgment or, in the alternative, partial summary judgment. (See generally Def.'s Mot.) Defendant claims that "[t]his lawsuit springs from two basic events, that Plaintiff no longer wanted to drive herself to her job at the Red Cross and that due to an unfortunate . . . drop in revenue in 2009, the Red Cross had to reduce its workforce." (Def.'s Mot. 17.)
II. DISCUSSION
A. Standard for Summary Judgment
Summary judgment is proper only if "the pleadings, the discovery and disclosure materials on file, and any affidavits show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). A "material" fact is one that could affect the outcome of the case under the governing substantive law, and an issue of material fact is "genuine" if "the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the non[-]moving party." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986); see Atlanta Attachment Co. v. Leggett & Platt, Inc., 516 F.3d 1361, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2008) (internal citation omitted).
In determining whether a genuine issue of material fact exists, the court must not make credibility determinations or weigh conflicting evidence. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 255. Rather, the court must view the evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, drawing all "justifiable inferences" in its favor. Id. (internal citation omitted); [*17]  see Atlanta Attachment Co., 516 F.3d at 1365 (internal citation omitted); Group One, Ltd. v. Hallmark Cards, Inc., 254 F.3d 1041, 1045 (Fed. Cir. 2001) (internal citations omitted).
B. Statute of Limitations
"Under the [Fair Employment and Housing Act ("FEHA")], [an] employee must exhaust the administrative remedy provided by the statute by filing a complaint with the Department of Fair Employment and Housing (the "Department") and must obtain from the Department a notice of right to sue in order to be entitled to file a civil action in court based on violations of the FEHA." Romano v. Rockwell Int'l, Inc., 14 Cal. 4th 479, 59 Cal. Rptr. 2d 20, 926 P.2d 1114 (Cal. Ct. App. 1996) ("The timely filing of an administrative complaint is a prerequisite to the bringing of a civil action for damages under the FEHA."); see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 12960, 12965 ("The FEHA provides that no complaint for any violation of its provisions may be filed with the Department after the expiration of one year from the date upon which the alleged unlawful practice or refusal to cooperate occurred.").
Here, Plaintiff filed her administrative complaint of discrimination with the Department on September 2, 2009. (Compl. Ex. 1) Defendant, however, alleges that certain of Plaintiff's claims are barred by the applicable statute of limitations because they occurred prior to September 2, 2009. (Def.'s Reply 1; Compl. Ex. 1.) Defendant explains: "Because Plaintiff . [*18]  . . commenced a leave of absence on October 3, 2008, which lasted until the date of her layoff on April 24, 2009, the vast majority of [Plaintiff's claims are untimely under the FEHA's] one year statute of limitation for the filing of an administrative complaint." (Def.'s Reply 1.) Defendant alleges that "only two occurrences of note . . . occurred during the one year limitations period, . . . [1] that Plaintiff met with Archuleta and Norvell on October 2, 2008 . . . and [2] that [Plaintiff] was laid off on April 24, 2009." (Def.'s Reply 1.)
In response, Plaintiff cites Yanowitz v. L'Oreal USA, Inc., which stands for the proposition that under the continuing violation doctrine, "an employer is liable for actions that take place outside the limitations period if these actions are sufficiently linked to unlawful conduct that occurred within the limitations period." Yanowitz v. L'Oreal USA, Inc. (Yanowitz), 36 Cal. 4th 1028, 32 Cal. Rptr. 3d 436, 457, 116 P.3d 1123 (Cal. 2005). In Yanowitz, the California Supreme Court explained that "when the requisite showing of a temporally related and continuous course of conduct has been established, it is appropriate to apply the continuing violation doctrine to disability accommodation claims, as well as to harassment claims." Id. at 458; see Morgan v. Regents of the Univ. of California, 88 Cal. App. 4th 52, 105 Cal. Rptr. 2d 652, 662 (Cal. Ct. App. 2000) (internal citations omitted) [*19]  ("In attempting to show a continuing violation through a series of related acts against a single individual . . . . The question boils down to whether sufficient evidence supports a determination that the alleged discriminatory acts are related closely enough to constitute a continuing violation."). Moreover, "the liberal construction mandated by the FEHA extends to interpretations of the FEHA's statute of limitations: 'In order to carry out the purpose of the FEHA to safeguard the employee's right to hold employment without experiencing discrimination, the limitations period set out in the FEHA should be interpreted so as to promote the resolution of potentially meritorious claims on the merits.'" Yanowitz, 32 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 458, n. 17 (internal citations omitted).
For the continuing violation doctrine to apply, courts consider the following factors:
Whether the employer's actions were (1) sufficiently similar in kind — recognizing . . . that similar kinds of unlawful employer conduct, such as acts of harassment or failures to reasonably accommodate disability, may take a number of different forms; (2) have occurred with reasonable frequency; (3) and have not acquired a degree of permanence.
Id. at 459 (internal citations omitted); [*20]  see Douglas v. Cal. Dep't of Youth Auth., 271 F.3d 812, 822 (9th Cir. 2001) (holding that a plaintiff may first introduce acts of discrimination by his employer that occurred outside of the statute of limitations period because they were sufficiently related to later, timely incidents of discrimination. "Second, a plaintiff may show a systematic policy or practice of discrimination that operated, in part, within the limitations period of a systemic violation.").
As Yanowitz explained, "foreclosing the application of the continuing violation doctrine in a case such as this one, where the plaintiff alleges a retaliatory course of conduct rather than a discrete act of retaliation, would undermine the fundamental purpose of the FEHA by encouraging early litigation and the adjudication of unripe claims." Yanowitz, 32 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 458. Here, Plaintiff alleges acts of discrimination and retaliation based in part on conduct that occurred prior to her termination. (Pl.'s Opp'n 5-6.) To preclude Plaintiff from pursuing certain of her claims because conduct did not occur within the statute of limitations, however, would be inconsistent with Yanowitz and the FEHA. See Yanowitz, 32 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 457 (internal citations omitted) (explaining that "the FEHA statute of limitations should not be interpreted to force upon a disabled [*21]  employee engaged in the process of seeking reasonable accommodations or ending disability harassment the unappealing choice of resigning at the first sign of discrimination or, on the other hand, persisting in the reconciliation process and possibly forfeiting a valid claim should that process prove unsuccessful.").
Indeed, Plaintiff is not precluded from pursuing her claims because certain of the alleged conduct did not occur within the relevant statute of limitations. The October 3, 2008 Meeting occurred within the one year statute of limitations and is sufficiently connected and relevant to the "older" conduct alleged. Therefore, pursuant to the continuing violation doctrine and the intended liberal construction of the FEHA, the Court is satisfied that the "older" conduct alleged by Plaintiff is similar in kind and sufficiently related to that which occurred within one year of Plaintiff's administrative complaint. See Yanowitz, 32 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 458. Accordingly, Plaintiff is not precluded from alleging and relying on conduct that occurred before the FEHA's one year statute of limitations.
C. Disability Discrimination
The "FEHA makes it unlawful employment practice to discriminate against any person because of a [*22]  physical or mental disability."17 Faust v. California Cement Co. (Faust), 150 Cal. App. 4th 864, 886, 58 Cal. Rptr. 3d 729 (Cal. Ct. App. 2007); see Cal. Gov't Code § 12940; see Avila, 82 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 448. To allege a prima facie case for disability discrimination under the FEHA, a plaintiff must show the following: "(1) he suffers from a disability; (2) he is otherwise qualified to do his job; and (3) he was subjected to adverse employment action because [of] his disability."18 Faust, 150 Cal. App. 4th at 886. On a motion for summary judgment, "the plaintiff bears the burden of establishing a prima facie case of discrimination based upon a [mental] disability . . . [T]he burden then shifts to the employer to offer a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse employment action." Faust, 150 Cal. App. 4th at 886 (internal citations omitted).
Assuming the employer offers a legitimate and nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse employment action, "the plaintiff must offer evidence that the employer's stated reason is either false or pretextual, or evidence that the employer acted with discriminatory animus, or evidence of each which would permit a reasonable trier of fact to conclude the employer intentionally discriminated." Faust, 150 Cal. App. 4th at 886 (internal citations omitted); see Morgan, 105 Cal. Rptr. 2d 665 ("under the three-part test developed in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green: (1) the complainant must establish a prima facie case of [*23]  discrimination; (2) the employer must offer a legitimate reason for his actions; (3) the complainant must prove that this reason was a pretext to mask an illegal motive."); see Guz v. Bechtel Nat'l, Inc. (Guz), 100 Cal. Rptr. 2d 352, 24 Cal. 4th 317, 8 P.3d 1089 (Cal. 2000) (finding summary judgment for an employer appropriate where "[the plaintiff's] evidence raised at best, only a weak suspicion that [age] discrimination was a likely basis for his release. Against that evidence, [the employer] presented a plausible, and largely uncontradicted, explanation that it . . . chose others over [the plaintiff], for reasons unrelated to age.").19
1. Whether Plaintiff Suffers a Disability, Pursuant to the FEHA
The FEHA articulates five non-exclusive definitions of "mental disability:"
(1) Having any mental or psychological disorder or condition, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, or specific learning disabilities, that limit a major life activity; (2) Any other mental or psychological disorder or condition not described in paragraph (1) that requires special education or related services; (3) Having a record or history of mental or psychological disorder or condition described in paragraph (1) or (2), which is known to the employer or other entity covered [*24]  by this part; (4) Being regarded or treated by the employer or other entity covered by this part as having, or having had, any mental condition that makes achievement of a major life activity difficult; and (5) Being regarded or treated by the employer or other entity covered by this part as having, or having had, a mental or psychological disorder or condition that has no present disabling effect, but that may become a mental disability as described in paragraph (1) or (2).
Cal. Gov't Code § 12926(i). "[M]ental disabilities" under the FEHA include but are not limited to: "chronic or episodic conditions such as HIV/AIDS, hepatitis, epilepsy, seizure disorder, diabetes, clinical depression, bipolar disorder, multiple sclerosis, and heart disease." Cal. Gov't Code § 12926.1 (emphasis added); see Auburn Woods Homeowners Assoc. v. Fair Employment and Hous. Comm'n (Auburn Woods), 121 Cal. App. 4th 1578, 18 Cal. Rptr. 3d 669 677-78 (Cal. Ct. App. 2004) [*25]  ("Numerous cases under state and federal law have held that depression and its related manifestations can meet the definition of disability under antidiscrimination laws").
The FEHA's distinction between "physical" and "mental" disabilities "require[s] a limitation upon a major life activity . . . not a substantial limitation. That distinction is intended to result in broader coverage under the law of this state than under the federal act." Diaz II v. Federal Express Corp., 373 F. Supp. 2d 1034, 1048-49 (C.D. Cal. 2005) (internal citations omitted) (emphasis added); see Auburn Woods, 18 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 677-78 (holding that the "FEHA is to be 'construed liberally.'"). Accordingly, it is clear that "the FEHA contains a broader disability standard than does the ADA." Id. at 1049.
a. Plaintiff's Conditions: Clinical Depression, Anxiety, and Migraines
Plaintiff alleges that she "suffered various disabilities from 2004 through . . . her 2009 termination that directly interfered with her ability to work, regardless of any commuting issues." (Pl.'s Opp'n 8.) Plaintiff states:
[My] disabilities included clinical conditions of depression, anxiety, and severe migraines up to six times per week, insomnia, reduced sex drive, difficulty thinking and concentrating, loss of appetite, panic attacks, difficulty breathing, and rapid heartburn, sadness, guilt, irritability, loss of interest in formerly pleasurable activities, exhaustion, frequent crying spells, back and body pain, teeth grinding, nausea, vomiting.20
(Pl.'s Opp'n 9.)
Defendant claims that Plaintiff was and is not disabled, and that her "purported disability springs from her driving to work at the Red Cross' facility in West Los Angeles." (Def.'s Mot. 3.) Defendant cites [*26]  several cases in which courts have concluded that the inability to drive to work does not constitute a disability, under the ADA. See Chenoweth v. Hillsborough County (Chenoweth), 250 F.3d 1328 (11th Cir. 2001) (holding that a plaintiff who had suffered a seizure and was diagnosed with epilepsy could not assert that the inability to drive to work was a covered disability because "millions of Americans do not drive, millions are passengers to work, and deprivation of being self-driven to work cannot sensibly be compared to inability to see or to learn."); see LaResca v. AT&T (Laresca), 161 F. Supp. 2d 323, 333-34 (D.N.J. 2001) (holding that employers are not required to reasonably accommodate an employee's commute to work).
In response, Plaintiff alleges that although "the commute somewhat aggravated [her] existing disabilities, it was not the primary cause of the disabilities." (Pl.'s Opp'n 10.) Plaintiff also states that when asked if her disability was caused by her commute, her psychiatrist responded: "of course not." (Pl.'s Opp'n 10.) In any event, because the FEHA's definition of mental disability is necessarily broader than the ADA's definition, the Court is satisfied that Plaintiff's alleged clinical depression may be regarded as a mental disability for purposes of the FEHA analysis. See Cal. Gov't Code § 12926(i).
b. Whether Defendant Knew or [*27]  Had Reason to Know of Plaintiff's Disabilities
"An adverse employment decision cannot be made because of a disability when the disability is not known to the employer." Faust, 58 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 746; see Avila, 82 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 450 (internal citations omitted) ("While knowledge of the disability can be inferred from the circumstances, knowledge will only be imputed to the employer when the fact of disability is the only reasonable interpretation of the known facts. Vague or conclusory statements revealing an unspecified incapacity are not sufficient to put an employer on notice of its obligations under the FEHA."). "[A]n employer knows an employee has a disability when the employee tells the employer about his condition, or when the employer otherwise becomes aware of the condition, such as through a third party or by observation." Faust, 58 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 746 (internal citations omitted). Furthermore, "[t]he employer need only know the underlying facts, not the legal significance of those facts." Id.
Defendant states that Plaintiff "never told anyone at Red Cross that she was upset with the length of the commute. Plaintiff never presented any medical evidence of any alleged disability to the Red Cross nor did Plaintiff ever present to the Red Cross any medical evidence of any [*28]  restrictions on her performance of her job." (Def.'s Mot. 5.) However, Defendant admits that "[o]n or about June 3, 2008, Plaintiff alleged to Archuleta and Alvarez that her drive to work was affecting her health and that she had needed to seek medical treatment from Dr. Mauer, her primary care physician, because of the commute." (Pl.'s SOF ¶ 19.) Furthermore, Plaintiff's long history of exercising her right to take medical leave indicates that Defendant was put on notice and aware that Plaintiff had certain medical conditions. (See generally Pl.'s Opp'n.) Further, prior to October 2008, Plaintiff requested and was granted accommodations on several occasions. Accordingly, because Plaintiff provides instances where Defendant could reasonably infer that she had a mental disability and Defendant impliedly concedes that it was put on notice, the Court concludes that Defendant was reasonably aware of Plaintiff's disability or disabilities.
Because Plaintiff alleges that she suffers a clinical depression, it is not contested that she was qualified to perform her job, and Plaintiff ultimately suffered an adverse employment action, which she alleges was due in part to her disability, Plaintiff [*29]  sufficiently alleges a prima facie case of disability discrimination.21
2. Whether Defendant Terminated Plaintiff for Valid and Nondiscriminatory Reasons
"If the employee establishes a prima facie case, the employer is required to offer a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse employment action. The employer's burden at this stage is to go forward with additional evidence; it does not take on a burden of persuasion." Morgan, 105 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 665; see Scotch, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 354 ("If . . . the motion for summary judgment relies in whole or in part on a showing of nondiscriminatory reasons for the discharge, the employer satisfies its burden as the moving party if it presents evidence of such nondiscriminatory reasons that would permit a trier of fact to find, more likely than not, that they were the basis for the termination."); see Schultz v. Spraylat Corp., 866 F. Supp. 1535, 1539 (C.D. Cal. 1994) (internal citations omitted) ("To rebut [a plaintiff's] prima facie case of disability discrimination, [the defendant] is only required to articulate some legitimate non-discriminatory reason for its decision to terminate [the employee].").
To that end, courts have consistently held that a reduction in force is good cause to terminate employees, absent an unlawful motive. In Villanueva, the court concluded: [*30]  "[T]he law is settled that an employer's depressed economic condition can be good cause for discharging an employee." Villanueva, 73 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 349. Similarly, in Schultz, the court explained that the defendant articulated a "legitimate reason for terminating [the plaintiff]: it purport[ed] to have terminated [him] to save money. The burden therefore shifts to [the plaintiff] to produce evidence that [the defendant's] articulated reason was pretextual." Schultz, 866 F. Supp. at 1539; see Hanson v. Lucky Stores, Inc., 74 Cal. App. 4th 215, 87 Cal. Rptr. 2d 487, 495 (Cal. Ct. App. 1999) ("The employer must show that the procedure by which the employee was terminated was validly and fairly devised and administered to serve a legitimate business purpose.").
In Scotch, the employer stated that it experienced "declining enrollment in 2006, had to restructure its course schedule to offer fewer course sections, and, as a result, between the spring and summer terms of 2006 had to change 10 faculty members from full-time to part-time status and asked seven faculty members to leave based on their failure to enroll in a master's degree program." Scotch, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 355. The court concluded: "This evidence would permit a trier of fact to find, more likely than not, the stated reasons were the basis for placing [the plaintiff] on part-time status." Id.
Here, Defendant contends that Plaintiff [*31]  was terminated as part of a reduction in its work force. (Def.'s Mot. 6.) Specifically, Defendant alleges: "Revenue at the beginning of 2009 was falling short of budget and, in order to adjust expenses to reduced revenues, there needed to be a reduction in force." (Def.'s Mot. 6; Pl.'s SOF ¶¶ 76, 77.) Thus, in addition to Plaintiff, 13 other employees in the Health and Safety Department were terminated, and a total of 30 employees were terminated in 2009, overall.22 (Def.'s Mot. 6.)
Defendant alleges that in determining which employees to terminate, Archuleta, as the head of the Health and Safety Department, "looked at each of the business lines in his department and the amount of revenue each line brought into the Red Cross." (Def.'s Mot. 7.) Pursuant to this, Defendant contends that Plaintiff's position was terminated because her "primary responsibility was selling [APs], and that, in contrast to such [AP] sales, the revenue from full service training was the most substantial source of revenue raised by [Archuleta's] department."23 (Def.'s Mot. 7; Pl.'s SOF ¶ 97.) The Account Representatives with primary responsibility for selling to [FSCs] at the time Plaintiff took medical leave in [*32]  October 2008, were Jenkins, Marron and Alvarez.24 (Def.'s Mot. 7.) Compared to them, Defendant contends that Plaintiff "did not have primary responsibility for selling to [FSCs]." (Def.'s Mot. 7-8.) Thus, because she was primarily responsible for [APs] only, Plaintiff was terminated. Defendant also alleges that Archuleta looked at which positions' responsibilities could be reassigned or moved elsewhere. (Def.'s Mot. 7-8.) Defendant states: "since Marron had spent time selling to [APs] as well as [FSCs], Archuleta could easily transfer Plaintiff's [AP] responsibilities to Marron in addition to her other duties." (Def.'s Mot. 8.)
Accordingly, because Defendant has shown that Plaintiff and 29 other employees were laid off because Defendant needed to reduce its work force, as a result of low revenues in 2009, and because Plaintiff was essentially less valuable than other Account Representatives who were responsible for selling to [FSCs], Defendant has set forth compelling and nondiscriminatory business reasons for terminating Plaintiff which would permit a trier of fact to find, more likely than not, that they were the basis for Plaintiff's termination. See Scotch, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 354.
4. Whether Plaintiff Can Show [*33]  that Defendant's Proffered Reason Is Pretextual
"If the employer produces substantial evidence of a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse employment action, the presumption of discrimination created by the prima facie case 'simply drops out of the picture' and the burden shifts back to the employee to prove intentional discrimination." Morgan, 105 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 665. Therefore:
The employee may establish pretext either directly by persuading the court that a discriminatory reason more than likely motivated the employer or indirectly by showing that the employer's proffered explanation is unworthy of credence. Circumstantial evidence of pretext must be specific and substantial in order to create a triable issue with respect to whether the employer intended to discriminate on an improper basis.
Morgan, 105 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 665; see Scotch, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 354 ("To defeat the motion, the employee then must adduce or point to evidence raising a triable issue, that would permit a trier of fact to find by a preponderance that intentional discrimination occurred. In determining whether these burdens were met, we must view the evidence in the light most favorable to plaintiff, as the nonmoving party, liberally construing her evidence while strictly scrutinizing [the] [*34]  defendant's [evidence]".); see Villiarimo v. Aloha Island Air, Inc., 281 F.3d 1054, 1062 (9th Cir. 2002) (internal citations omitted) (holding that if the employer articulates some legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the challenged action, "the plaintiff must show that the articulated reason is pretextual either directly by persuading the court that a discriminatory reason more likely motivated the employer or indirectly by showing that the employer's proffered explanation is unworthy of credence. Although a plaintiff may rely on circumstantial evidence to show pretext, such evidence must be both specific and substantial."); see Villanueva, 73 Cal. Rptr. at 349 (internal citations omitted) ("An employee in this situation cannot simply show the employer's decision was wrong, mistaken, or unwise. Rather the employee must demonstrate such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, incoherencies, or contradictions in the employer's proffered legitimate reasons for its action that a reasonable factfinder could rationally find them unworthy of credence and hence, infer that the employer did not act for the asserted non-discriminatory reasons."); see Diaz II, 373 F. Supp. 2d at 1064 ("While the plaintiff does not have to show direct evidence of pretext, [he] cannot merely make conclusory statements that the defendant's [*35]  decisions were motivated by unlawful discrimination The plaintiff must produce specific, substantial, evidence of pretext. An employee's subjective personal judgment of her competence does not raise a material fact.").
In Scotch, the plaintiff argued that "the implementation of . . . accreditation standards and [the employer's] method of scheduling courses for summer 2006 were a pretext for discriminating against him." Scotch, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 356. The plaintiff contended that pretext was shown "by evidence establishing the master's degree requirement was new and he was not informed of it until April 2006, after he revealed to [the employer that] he was HIV positive." Id. The court, however, concluded that the plaintiff "failed to demonstrate such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, incoherencies, or contradictions in [the employer's] reason for assigning [him] fewer than five course sections that a reasonable trier of fact could rationally find those reasons not credible." Id. The court emphasized that the plaintiff's discrimination claim rested on inferences that a reasonable jury simply could not draw. Id.
Here, Plaintiff concedes that unlike Marron, Alvarez, and Jenkins, whose primary responsibility [*36]  was FSCs, her "primary responsibility" was with APs. (Pl.'s Opp'n 13.) Plaintiff, however, suggests that even though she did not have primary responsibility for [FSCs], she was nonetheless, a valuable asset, as "[she still] generated substantial revenues for Red Cross." (Pl.'s Opp'n 13.) Plaintiff also states that full service accounts "were dropping like flies," and "[FSC] revenues were down." (Pl.'s Opp'n 13.) However, the simple fact that Plaintiff was valuable and generated revenues for Red Cross does not show that she was more valuable than the other Account Representatives, or that she was wrongfully terminated in the midst of a reduction in force. (See generally Pl.'s Opp'n.) Instead, and which the Court finds insufficient to overcome Defendant's proffered reason for terminating her, Plaintiff simply proffers that she was qualified.
Plaintiff also contends that she was chosen to "do 'cold calls' to new [FSCs]" and "generated approximately $60,000 worth of [FSC] revenue[s] in 2008" so that she was familiar with [FSCs] and would "not need additional training to take on additional responsibilities for [FSCs]." (Pl.'s Opp'n 13.) The Court finds these claims equally unavailing. Plaintiff's [*37]  familiarity with FSCs does not indicate that she was any more qualified than the other Account Representatives or that her termination was therefore, pretextual. Similarly, the fact that FSC revenues were down does not show that the other Account Representatives should have been terminated, instead of Plaintiff. Rather, it only strengthens Defendant's position that revenues were down, generally, and so a reduction in force was necessary.
Finally, Plaintiff contends that "[Retaliation, and therefore intent to discriminate, may be inferred where there is an adverse employment action within a few months of an employee's exercise of a protected right." (Pl.'s Opp'n 11.) Indeed, in Passantino v. Johnson & Johnson Consumer Products, Inc., in the context of a claim of retaliation, the Ninth Circuit concluded that "causation may be established based on the timing of the relevant actions. Specifically, when adverse employment decisions are taken within a reasonable period of time after complaints of discrimination have been made, retaliatory intent may be inferred." Passantino v. Johnson & Johnson Consumer Prods., Inc., 212 F.3d 493, 507 (9th Cir. 2000); see Ray v. Henderson, 217 F.3d 1234, 1244 (9th Cir. 2000) ("That an employer's actions were caused by an employee's engagement in protected activity may be inferred from proximity [*38]  in time between the protected action and the allegedly retaliatory employment decision."). However, in Porter v. California Department of Corrections, the Ninth Circuit explained:
It is important to emphasize that it is causation, not temporal proximity itself, that is an element of [a] plaintiff's prima facie case, and temporal proximity merely provides an evidentiary basis from which an inference can be drawn. The element of causation, which necessarily involves an inquiry into the motives of an employer, is highly context-specific. When there may be valid reasons why the adverse employment action was not taken immediately, the absence between the cause and effect does not disprove causation.
Porter v. Cal. Dep't of Corrections, 419 F.3d 885, 895 (9th Cir. 2005). Similarly, in Scotch, the California Court of Appeals explained: "Close proximity in time to an adverse action to an employee's resistance or opposition to unlawful conduct is often strong evidence of a retaliatory motive," but that it is not necessarily dispositive or sufficient. Scotch, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 366.
Plaintiff was terminated several days before she intended to return to work, but termination was not limited to her. Rather, as Defendant asserts: "In April 2009, Plaintiff was laid off as part of an overall reduction [*39]  in force at the Red Cross due to reduced revenues." (Def.'s Mot. 1.) In total, 30 employees were laid off, of which 14 were from Plaintiff's department. (Def.'s Mot. 6.) Thus, that Plaintiff was terminated at around the same time as her intended return must be weighed in light of the fact that it was at this time that Defendant was reducing its overall work force. Accordingly, the fact that Plaintiff's termination was temporally proximate to her intended return is of minimal significance. Additionally, Defendant contends that it was only required to provide Plaintiff with 12 weeks of disability/medical leave, pursuant to CFRA, and which had already expired by the time Plaintiff was terminated. See Cal. Gov't Code § 12945.2(a). Defendant alleges that it was therefore under no obligation to reinstate Plaintiff at the end of that 12-week period. See Neisendorf v. Levi Strauss & Co. (Neisendorf), 143 Cal. App. 4th 509, 49 Cal. Rptr. 3d 216 (Cal. Ct. App. 2006).
In the face of Defendant's legitimate and nonretaliatory reasons for terminating Plaintiff, Plaintiff has failed to show that a discriminatory reason more than likely motivated Defendant or that Defendant's proffered explanations are unworthy of credence. Indeed, Defendant has shown that it had to reduce its work force and Plaintiff was considered less valuable than [*40]  the Account Representatives who were not terminated. See Scotch, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 355 (finding that the employee "failed to present evidence that the employer's stated reason is either false or pretextual, or evidence that the employer acted with discriminatory animus, or evidence of each which would permit a reasonable trier of fact to conclude that the employer intentionally discriminated."). Accordingly, Defendant's Motion is GRANTED to the extent it seeks summary adjudication of Plaintiff's disability discrimination claim.
D. Failure to Make Reasonable Accommodations
The FEHA provides that "[i]t shall be an unlawful employment practice, unless based upon a prima facie occupational qualification . . . for an employer or other entity covered by this part to fail to make reasonable accommodation for the known physical or mental disability of an . . . employee." Scotch, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 352 (citing Cal. Gov't Code § 12940). "Two principles underlie a cause of action for failure to provide a reasonable accommodation. First, the employee must request a reasonable accommodation. Second, the parties must engage in an interactive process regarding the requested accommodation and, if the process fails, responsibility for the failure rests with the party who failed to participate [*41]  in good faith." Avila, 82 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 453.
1. Reasonable Accommodations
To establish a failure to make reasonable accommodation, a plaintiff must show the following: "(1) the plaintiff has a disability under the FEHA, (2) the plaintiff is qualified to perform the essential functions of the position, and (3) the employer failed to reasonably accommodate the plaintiff's disability."25 Scotch, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 358; see Jensen v. Wells Fargo Bank, 85 Cal. App. 4th 245, 102 Cal. Rptr. 2d 55, 69 (Cal. Ct. App. 2000) ("[A]ssuming the employee is disabled, the employer cannot prevail on summary judgment on a claim of failure to reasonably accommodate unless it establishes through undisputed facts that (1) reasonable accommodation was offered and refused; (2) there simply was no vacant position within the employer's organization for which the disabled employee was capable of performing with or without accommodation; or (3) the employer did everything in its power to find a reasonable accommodation, but the informal interactive process broke down because the employee failed to engage in good faith."). Moreover:
The employer is not obligated to choose the best accommodation or the accommodation the employee seeks. Rather, . . . the employer providing the accommodation has the ultimate discretion to choose between effective accommodations, and may choose [*42]  the less expensive accommodation or the accommodation that is easier for it to provide. As the Supreme Court has held in analogous circumstances, an employee cannot make his employer provide a specific accommodation if another reasonable accommodation is instead provided.
Hanson, 87 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 495.
"'Reasonable accommodation' is defined by the FEHA and its implementing regulations only by way of example." Nadaf-Rahrov v. Neiman-Marcus Group, Inc., 166 Cal. App. 4th 952, 83 Cal. Rptr. 3d 190, 209 (Cal. Ct. App. 2008); see Scotch, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 358. The term "reasonable accommodation" is therefore defined by the FEHA to include:
(1) making existing facilities used by employees readily accessible to, and usable by, individuals with disabilities; (2) Job restructuring, parttime or modified work schedules, reassignment to a vacant position, acquisition or modification of equipment or devices, adjustment or modifications of examinations, training materials or policies, the provision of qualified readers or interpreters, and other similar accommodations for individuals with disabilities.
Cal. Gov't Code § 12926; Hanson, 87 Cal. Rptr. 2d 487 (The "FEHA's list of accommodation measures, by its terms, is incomplete, and so we may look at its federal cognates for guidance."). In Nadaf-Rahrov, in adopting the definition found in the federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC") [*43]  interpretive guidance on the ADA, the court interpreted "reasonable accommodation" to mean a modification or adjustment to the workplace that enables the employee to perform the essential functions of the job held or desired." Id.; see Scotch, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 358. "As the Nadaf-Rahrov court reasoned, [because] the California Legislature modeled the reasonable accommodation requirements of §§ 12940(m) and 12940(n) on the parallel federal requirements, the EEOC's definition of 'reasonable accommodation' serves as guidance in construction of the state laws." Scotch, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 358 (citing Nadaf-Rahrov, 83 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 211).
Here, Plaintiff alleges that "[a]s a result of her long and stressful commute, [she] explicitly requested permission to work full-time or part-time from an office closer to her home as a disability accommodation." (Pl.'s Opp'n 18.) Defendant argues, however, that assuming Plaintiff can establish that even if it is assumed that Plaintiff has a disability under the FEHA:
Plaintiff cannot establish that she needed any accommodation to perform the essential functions of her job once she arrived at work. Second, Plaintiff [drove] herself to Red Cross' West Los Angeles facility for more than a year after her reassignment to that facility. Third, Plaintiff cannot establish that [*44]  she was unable to commute to the West Los Angeles facility by means other than self-driving; indeed, she admits that she made no efforts to use public transportation. Fourth, Plaintiff failed to present to the Red Cross any medical evidence that she was unable to continue to drive herself to the West Los Angeles facility. Finally, Plaintiff admits that the Red Cross did attempt to accommodate her by permitting her to work one day a week at another facility of her choice and by granting her flex time to adjust her schedule to the commute.
(Def.'s Mot. 10.)
As an initial matter, to the extent Plaintiff requested to be excused from driving to Red Cross' West Los Angeles facility, the inability to self-drive is not generally considered a covered disability. See Chenoweth, 250 F.3d at 1330 (holding that a plaintiff's inability to drive herself to work was not a covered disability as "millions of Americans do not drive, millions are passengers to work, and deprivation of being self-driven to work cannot be sensibly compared to [the] inability to see or to learn . . . [The plaintiff] provided no evidence that she was, in fact, unable to perform her job. Neither did she offer any evidence showing that [the defendant] [*45]  regarded her as disabled to perform her work. Nothing in the record prevented summary judgment on her claim of disability to work."); see LaResca, 161 F. Supp. 2d at 333-34 ("A number of courts have held that commuting to and from work is not part of the work environment that an employer is required to reasonably accommodate . . . . In so holding, the court[s] recognize that under the [ADA], activities such as commuting to and from work fall outside the scope of the job and are therefore, not within the scope of an employer's obligations under the ADA."); see also Kimble v. Potter, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 60303, 2009 WL 2045379 (N.D. III. July 13, 2009) (holding that "[t]he cases cited . . . establish that one's commute to work falls outside the scope of [one's] job. And again, [the plaintiff] did not require assistance once she arrived at work. Rather, she preferred a shorter commute because her physician suggested that she limit her driving to [30] minutes. Either way, we find that [the plaintiff's] preference for a shorter commute falls outside the responsibility of the [employer].").
Moreover, to the extent Plaintiff argues that "[t]here was no need for [her] to be physically present at the West Los Angeles office in order to do her job . . . . [n]umerous courts have held that attendance at work is an essential job function." Diaz II, 373 F. Supp. 2d at 1060 (internal [*46]  citations omitted); see Nesser v. Trans World Airlines, Inc., 160 F.3d 442, 445 (8th Cir. 1998) (holding that the plaintiff did not establish that he could perform essential functions of his job without accommodation because he was unable to attend work on a regular basis); see Carr v. Reno, 23 F.3d 525, 530, 306 U.S. App. D.C. 217 (D.C. Cir. 1994) (holding that coming to work regularly is an "essential function."); see Rogers v. Int'l Marine Terminals, Inc., 87 F.3d 755 (5th Cir. 1996) (internal citations omitted) (holding that "an essential element of any job is [the] ability to appear for work."). By contrast, the Ninth Circuit explained in Humphrey v. Memorial Hospital Association that "[w]orking at home is a reasonable accommodation when the essential functions of the position can be performed at home and a work-at-home arrangement would not cause undue hardship for the employer." Humphrey v. Mem'l Hosps. Ass'n., 239 F.3d 1128, 1137 (9th Cir. 2001).
Accordingly, Plaintiff's claimed inability to regularly drive herself to Red Cross' West Los Angeles facility does not seemingly constitute a disability under the FEHA, as a matter of law. In any event, since Defendant permitted Plaintiff to work from a different facility of her choice one day per week and granted her flex time to adjust her schedule, of which Plaintiff took advantage, Defendant provided Plaintiff with reasonable accommodations.
2. Duty to Engage in an Interactive Process
"The FEHA makes it unlawful [*47]  for an employer to fail to engage in a timely, good faith, interactive process with the employee or applicant to determine effective reasonable accommodations, if any, in response to a request for reasonable accommodation by an employee or applicant with a known medical condition." Scotch, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 352. However, "[t]he interactive process required by the FEHA is an informal process with the employee or the employee's representative, to attempt to identify a reasonable accommodation that will enable the employee to perform the job effectively. Ritualized discussions are not required." Id. at 360.
"The interactive process imposes burdens on both the employer and employee." Scotch, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 350. Generally, the employee must "initiate" the process: "Where the disability, resulting limitations, and necessary reasonable accommodations, are not open, obvious, and apparent to the employer . . . the initial burden rests primarily upon the employee . . . to specifically identify the disability and resulting limitations and to suggest the reasonable accommodations." Id. at 360-61. "It is important to distinguish between an employer's knowledge of an employee's disability versus an employer's knowledge of any limitations experienced by the employee as a result [*48]  of the disability. The distinction is important because the ADA requires employers to reasonably accommodate limitations, not disabilities." Id. (internal citations omitted). "Although it is the employee's burden to initiate the process, no magic words are necessary, and the obligation arises once the employer becomes aware of the need to consider an accommodation." Id. (internal citations omitted).
"Once the interactive process is initiated, the employer's obligation to engage in the process in good faith is continuous." Scotch, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 361. In particular, the employer is obligated to engage in the interactive process from the first attempt at accommodation "and continues where the employee asks for a different accommodation or where the employer is aware that the initial accommodation is failing and further accommodation is needed." Id.; see Humphrey v. Mem'l Hosps. Ass'n, 239 F.3d 1128, 1138 (9th Cir. 2001).26 "Both employee and employer have the obligation to keep communications open and neither has a right to obstruct the process." Scotch, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 361 (internal citations omitted). Accordingly:
Each party must participate in good faith, undertake reasonable efforts to communicate its concerns, and make available to the other information which is available, or more accessible, to one party. [*49]  Liability hinges on the objective circumstances surrounding the parties' breakdown in communication, and responsibility for the breakdown lies with the party who fails to participate.
Id.
Here, assuming that Defendant had a duty to engage in the interactive process, Plaintiff admits that she first raised the issue of accommodations with Archuleta in 2008. (Pl.'s Opp'n 18; Def.'s Mot. 10-11, 18.) As previously mentioned, Plaintiff received the accommodations she requested. Pl.'s Opp'n 18 (Plaintiff "explicitly requested permission to work full-time or part-time from an office closer to home.") Indeed, Plaintiff admits that pursuant to her request, she was permitted to work at a facility of her choice one day per week and that she also took advantage of the flex program. (Def.'s Mot. 11; Pl.'s Opp'n 18.) Thus, Defendant clearly engaged in the interactive process.
4. Conclusion
Because the inability to drive one's self to work is not generally considered a disability under the FEHA, but in any event, since Plaintiff received the accommodations she requested, Defendant provided Plaintiff with reasonable accommodations.27 It is also clear that Defendant engaged in the interactive process. Accordingly, [*50]  Defendant's Motion is GRANTED to the extent it seeks summary adjudication of Plaintiff's claim that Defendant failed to provide reasonable accommodations.
C. Medical Leave Discrimination/Retaliation
The "CFRA is intended to give employees an opportunity to take leave from work for certain personal or family medical reasons without jeopardizing job security." Avila, 82 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 453. "In general, [the] CFRA makes it an unlawful employment practice for an employer of 50 or more persons to refuse to grant an employee's request to take up to 12 'workweeks' in any 12-month period for family care and medical leave." Id. 454. "The FEHA makes it unlawful for an employer to discharge, expel, or otherwise discriminate against any person because the person has opposed any practices forbidden under this part or because the person has filed a complaint, testified, or assisted in any proceeding under this part." Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(h).
To establish a claim of retaliation under the CFRA, a plaintiff must show: (1) that defendant was an employer covered by the CFRA; (2) that she was an employee eligible to take CFRA leave;28 (3) that she exercised her right to take leave for a qualifying CFRA purpose; and (4) that she suffered an adverse employment action, [*51]  such as termination because she exercised her right to take CFRA leave. See Avila, 82 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 454.
Defendant provided Plaintiff with substantially more than the 12 weeks of leave required under the CFRA. (Def.'s Mot. 12.) As the California Court of Appeals explained:
After the 12 weeks of CFRA leave expires, an employee is entitled to be returned to the same position the employee held when leave commenced, or to an equivalent position with equivalent benefits, pay, and other terms and conditions of employment . . . . [However,] an employer does not violate the FMLA when it fires an employee who is indisputably unable to return to work at the conclusion of the 12-week period of statutory leave.
Neisendorf, 49 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 221; see Tomlinson v. Qualcomm, 97 Cal. App. 4th 934, 118 Cal. Rptr. 2d 822, 826 (Cal. Ct. App. 2002) (citing Cal. Admin. Code tit. 2, § 7297.2) ("If an employee is laid off during the course of taking CFRA leave and employment is terminated, the employer's responsibility to continue CFRA leave, maintain group health plan benefits and reinstate the employee ceases at the time the employee is laid off . . . ") Because Plaintiff took more than 12 weeks of medical and/or disability leave, Defendant was not required to reinstate her, pursuant to the CFRA. Accordingly, Defendant's Motion is GRANTED to the extent it seeks [*52]  summary adjudication of Plaintiff's medical leave discrimination and/or retaliation claim.
D. Retaliation for Opposing Violations of Government Code § 12940(h)
"[T]o establish a prima facie case of retaliation under the FEHA, a plaintiff must show the following: (1) he or she engaged in a 'protected activity'; (2) the employer subjected the employee to an adverse employment action; and (3) a causal link existed between the protected activity and the employer's action." Yanowitz, 32 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 444; see Scotch, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 361; Morgan, 105 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 666 ("The retaliatory motive is proved by showing that plaintiff engaged in protected activities, that his employer was aware of these activities, and that the adverse action followed within a relatively short time thereafter."). "Once the employee establishes a prima facie case, the employer is required to offer a legitimate, nonretaliatory reason for the adverse employment action." Yanowitz, 32 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 445.
1. Protected Activity
The statutory language of § 12940(h) provides that protected conduct can take many forms. Section 12940(h) makes it an unlawful employment practice: "for an employer . . . to discharge, expel, or otherwise discriminate against any person because the person has opposed any practices forbidden under this part or because the person has filed a complaint, [*53]  testified, or assisted in any proceeding under this part." Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(h). Protected speech also includes conduct that an employee "reasonably and in good faith believes to be discriminatory, whether or not the challenged conduct is ultimately found to violate the FEHA." Yanowitz, 32 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 445.
In Yanowitz, the California Supreme Court explained:
Standing alone, an employee's unarticulated belief that an employer is engaging in discrimination will not suffice to establish protected conduct for the purposes of establishing a prima facie case of retaliation, where there is no evidence the employer knew that the employee's opposition was based upon a reasonable belief that the employer was engaging in discrimination . . . . The relevant question is not whether a formal accusation of discrimination is made but whether the employee's communications to the employer sufficiently convey the employee's reasonable concerns that the employer has acted or is acting in an unlawful discriminatory manner."
Yanowitz, 32 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 448-49. There, the plaintiff refused to implement an order, which, "coupled with her multiple requests for adequate justification, sufficiently communicated to [the employer] that she believed his order was discriminatory." Id.; see Truskoski v. ESPN, Inc., 823 F. Supp. 1007, 1012 (D. Conn. 1993) (holding [*54]  that complaints about disparate impact of staffing policy, which had "overtones of gender bias and discrimination," constituted protected speech). Similarly, in Villanueva, the California Court of Appeals concluded that there was no evidence that the employee engaged in protected activity related to an employment practice proscribed by the FEHA because the record "was devoid of any evidence that he ever complained to anyone about alleged racial discrimination or did anything to imply that racial discrimination was an issue." Villanueva, 73 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 353.
Here, Plaintiff's "neutral responses" are insufficient to constitute protected activity under either a participation or opposition theory of retaliation. (Def.'s Mot. 13; see Villanueva, 73 Cal. Rptr. at 353.) In particular, Plaintiff's "I don't think so," and "silence" in response to Alvarez do not constitute opposition to sex/pregnancy discrimination, pursuant to Yanowitz. Accordingly, because Plaintiff cannot show that she engaged in any protected speech, since she did not actually oppose anything, her retaliation claim under the FEHA fails.29
2. Conclusion
Principally, Plaintiff's retaliation claim fails because Plaintiff did not engage in any type of protected activity, as she did not expressly [*55]  oppose Alvarez's alleged unlawful discrimination and there is no evidence that Defendant knew that Plaintiff reasonably believed it was engaging in discrimination. Additionally, for the reasons stated above, Defendant has shown that it terminated Plaintiff for a valid and nonretaliatory business reason. See Scotch, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 367. Accordingly, Defendant's Motion is GRANTED to the extent it seeks summary adjudication of Plaintiff's claim of retaliation under the FEHA.
E. Wrongful Termination in Violation of Public Policy
"The tort cause of action for wrongful termination in violation of public policy provides a vehicle for recourse that otherwise would be unavailable under general rules of the at-will employment doctrine." Diaz II, 373 F. Supp. 2d at 1065. "Apart from the terms of an express or implied employment contract, an employer has no right to terminate employment for a reason that contravenes fundamental public policy as expressed in a constitutional or statutory provision." Scotch, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 367. Thus, "this public policy exception allows an employee to bring a tort cause of action against an employer who terminates an at-will employment on a ground that violates public policy." Diaz II, 373 F. Supp. 2d at 1065.
To establish a prima facie claim of wrongful termination in violation [*56]  of public policy, a plaintiff must prove: (1) an employer-employee relationship; (2) the termination of plaintiff's employment was a violation of public policy; (3) the termination was a legal cause of the plaintiff's damage; and (4) the nature and extent of plaintiff's damages. See Holmes v. Gen. Dynamics Corp., 17 Cal. App. 4th 1418, 22 Cal. Rptr. 2d 172, 177; see Scotch, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 367; see Avila, 82 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 460-61 (holding that "an employee may state a claim under California law for wrongful termination in violation of the public policy within the CFRA."); see Holmes v. General Dynamics Corp., 17 Cal. App. 4th 1418, 22 Cal. Rptr. 2d 172 (Cal. Ct. App. 1993) ("To recover . . . the plaintiff must show the employer violated a public policy affecting society at large rather than a purely personal or proprietary interest of the plaintiff or employer.").
Plaintiff states that her "claim for wrongful termination in violation of important public policies is based on the anti-discrimination policies in FEHA and [the California State Constitution, Article 1, § 8]." (Pl.'s Opp'n 24.) Plaintiff argues that this claim "should survive for the same reasons as the FEHA claims." (Pl.'s Opp'n 24.) However, Plaintiff's claim for wrongful termination in violation of public policy fails for the reasons her FEHA claims fail. Accordingly, Defendant's Motion is GRANTED to the extent it seeks summary adjudication of Plaintiff's claim for wrongful termination [*57]  in violation of important public policy.
F. Associational Discrimination
To establish a prima facie case of associational discrimination, a plaintiff must establish the following: (1) that she was qualified for the position/job; (2) that she was subjected to an adverse employment action; (3) that she was known by her employer at the time to have a relative or associate with a disability or other protected characteristic; and (4) that the adverse employment action occurred under circumstances raising a reasonable inference that the disability or protected characteristic of the relative or associate was a determining factor in the employer's decision. See Den Hartog v. Wasatch Academy, 129 F.3d 1076, 1085 (10th Cir. 1997).
Plaintiff states that her claim "for association[al] discrimination should survive for the same reasons set forth in connection with the third [claim] for FEHA retaliation. This is based on the evidence that [Plaintiff] opposed sex/pregnancy discrimination against Valenzuela." (Pl.'s Opp'n 24.) However, because Plaintiff's other claims fail, so too does this one. Accordingly, Defendant's Motion is GRANTED to the extent it seeks summary adjudication of Plaintiff's associational discrimination claim.
III. RULING
For the foregoing reasons, Defendant's Motion [*58]  for Summary Judgment is GRANTED.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
Dated: October 6, 2010.
/s/ S. James Otero
S. JAMES OTERO
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

JUDGMENT IN FAVOR OF JUDGMENT
TO ALL PARTIES AND TO THEIR ATTORNEYS OF RECORD:
Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment or, in the Alternative, for Partial Summary Judgment was taken under submission by the Honorable S. James Otero of the United States District Court.
Having reviewed and considered the pleadings and evidence submitted in support of and in opposition to the Motion, the Court finds that the pleadings, discovery, and disclosure materials on file, including the declarations submitted by the parties show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that Defendant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
IT IS THEREBY ORDERED that summary judgment shall be, and hereby is, entered in favor of Defendant American Red Cross as to all claims.
IT IS SO ADJUDGED.
Dated: October 6, 2010.
/s/ S. James Otero
S. JAMES OTERO
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

