Lopez v. Hilti, Inc.
United States District Court for the Central District of California
December 19, 2014, Decided
CV-13-3287-MWF (JCGx)

Reporter
2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 206472 *
Jose Lopez -v- Hilti, Inc. et al.
Counsel:  [*1] For Jose Lopez, Plaintiff: Richard Scott Houtz, Imad Younan Elias, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Law Offices of Mann and Elias, Los Angeles, CA.
For Hilti Inc, Defendant: Heather M Davis, Steven Andrew Groode, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Jennifer L Mora, Littler Mendelson PC, Los Angeles, CA.
Judges: MICHAEL W. FITZGERALD, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: MICHAEL W. FITZGERALD
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES—GENERAL

Proceedings (In Chambers): ORDER RE SUMMARY JUDGMENT [21]
Before the Court is Hilti Inc.'s ("Hilti") Motion for Summary Judgment or, in the Alternative, Partial Summary Judgment (the "Motion") filed on November 17, 2014. (Docket No. 21). Plaintiff Jose Lopez filed an Opposition to Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment (the "Opposition") on November 24, 2014. (Docket No. 23). Hilti filed its Reply Memorandum of Points and Authorities in Support of Motion for Summary Judgment (the "Reply") on December 1, 2014. (Docket No. 25).
The Court considered the papers on the matter and held a hearing on December 18, 2014. The Court notes that Plaintiff's Opposition was well in excess of this Court's 25-page limit. Local Rule 11-6. In the interests of justice the Court considered the full extent of Plaintiff's argument but reminds Plaintiff of the importance [*2]  of abiding by the requirements set forth in the Local Rules to ensure fairness to all parties. For the reasons stated below, Hilti's Motion is GRANTED in part and DENIED in part.

I. BACKGROUND
In this action, Plaintiff alleges four claims for relief under the California Fair Employment and Housing Act ("FEHA") against his former employer Hilti. Plaintiff alleges disability discrimination, failure to reasonably accommodate Plaintiff's disability, failure to engage in a good faith interactive process, and failure to prevent disability discrimination. (Docket No. 1-1).
Plaintiff had been employed at Hilti as an Account Manager since 2006. Hilti manufactures and sells tools used in the construction industry. Account Managers drive around their sales territory bringing Hilti's tools to potential customers and demonstrating the tools for them. Account Managers work alone when on their sales runs. The work involves moving and demonstrating tools that range in weight from a few pounds to roughly 60 pounds.
In April 2010, Plaintiff injured his neck and back at a Hilti function. Initially, Plaintiff and his doctors believed the injury to be temporary and he returned to work shortly but with some [*3]  lifting restrictions. Hilti told Plaintiff that he could request assistance from his potential customers in lifting the tools for demonstration. However, in June 2010 he received further treatment for the injury and took another leave of absence. He returned to work on November 16, 2010.
In early 2011 Plaintiff continued to have pain and was scheduled to have surgery on his back on February 2, 2011. He returned to work on May 1, 2011 with modified work duty limiting his ability to lift more than 15 pounds. On July 31, 2011, Hilti terminated Plaintiff because it determined that it could not reasonably accommodate his disability.
In October 2013, Plaintiff began receiving Social Security Disability Insurance benefits based on a finding that he had become disabled on the date of his February 2011 surgery.
Plaintiff filed this action against Hilti under California's Fair Employment and Housing Act on March 27, 2013, in the Los Angeles County Superior Court. Hilti removed the action to this Court on May 8, 2013. (Notice to Federal Court of Removal of Civil Action from State Court Pursuant to 28 U.S.C. §§ 1332, 1441, Docket No. 1).

II. SUMMARY JUDGMENT
In deciding this Motion under Rule 56(a), the Court applies Anderson, Celotex, and their [*4]  Ninth Circuit progeny. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a); Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986); Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323-24, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986).
The party bringing the motion bears the initial burden of informing the Court of the basis of their Motion, and identifying those portions of "'pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any,' which [they] believe[] demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact." Celotex, 477 U.S. at 323 (quoting Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)). When the moving party meets this initial burden, the burden shifts to the nonmoving party to present evidence showing that a genuine issue of material fact exists. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248. The nonmoving party "must do more than simply show that there is some metaphysical doubt as to the material facts." Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986). It must introduce evidence raising a genuine issue of material fact. Id. The court must draw all inferences in favor of the party opposing the motion, and deny summary judgment where the nonmovant is able to identify specific, relevant evidence raising a genuine issue of material fact. T.W. Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Pac. Elec. Contractors Ass'n, 809 F.2d 626, 631 (9th Cir. 1987) (explaining the standard for summary judgment).

A. Plaintiff is not Judicially Estopped from Asserting His FEHA Claims
Hilti argues that this action fails as a matter of law because the representations that Plaintiff must make to sustain his FEHA [*5]  claims are fundamentally inconsistent with the representations he made in obtaining his Social Security Disability Insurance ("SSDI") payments. (Mot. at 8-11). Hilti claims that because of these claims, Plaintiff is estopped from making claims that he can work with reasonable accommodations at Hilti.
"[F]ederal law governs the application of judicial estoppel in federal court. Judicial estoppel enables a court to protect itself from manipulation. The interested party is thus the court in which a litigant takes a position incompatible with one the litigant has previously taken." Rissetto v. Plumbers and Steamfitters Local 343, 94 F.3d 597, 603 (9th Cir. 1996). "Judicial estoppel is an equitable doctrine that is intended to protect the integrity of the judicial process by preventing a litigant from playing fast and loose with the courts." Wagner v. Prof'l Eng'rs in Cal. Gov't, 354 F.3d 1036, 1044 (9th Cir. 2004) (holding that plaintiffs were judicially estopped from bringing later summary judgment motion when earlier representation to court as to full extent of their suit did not include the basis for their summary judgment motion).
In Cleveland v. Policy Management Systems Corp., 526 U.S. 795, 797, 119 S. Ct. 1597, 143 L. Ed. 2d 966 (1999), the United States Supreme Court addressed specifically the question of whether a plaintiff who has obtained Social Security Disability benefits claim is judicially estopped from also bringing an ADA claim [*6]  because the two were inherently incompatible. The Supreme Court explained that the two claims were not inherently incompatible because the legal standards for the two were different. Specifically, in determining whether an applicant is disqualified for SSDI purposes, the Social Security Administration "does not take the possibility of 'reasonable accommodation' into account." Id. at 803. The Supreme Court continued to explain that although there was not an inherent conflict between SSDI benefits and an ADA in certain cases, there may be a genuine conflict between establishing an essential element of an ADA claim and a "plaintiff's sworn assertion in an application for disability benefits." In such a circumstance, the plaintiff must proffer a "sufficient explanation" of the "apparent contradiction." Id. at 806; see also, Swanks v. WMATA, 116 F.3d 582, 586 (D.D.C. 1997) (holding that receipt of Social Security disability benefits did not preclude discrimination suit under the ADA because the Social Security Administration takes no account of reasonable accommodations).
Hilti asks the Court to conclude that Plaintiff has presented a position in his SSDI application that is contradictory to his claims for disability discrimination under the FEHA. Hilti [*7]  points to Plaintiff's receipt of SSDI benefits, and the statement by Plaintiff's doctor that he is not able to return to work "if accommodations were made." (Mot. at 10; DSUF ¶ 76). Hilti argues that Plaintiff cannot offer a sufficient explanation as to the apparent contradiction between her SSDI benefit claims and her FEHA disability claim.
The Court disagrees. Plaintiff contends that he is able to work if he is given a "reasonable accommodation," which is sufficient to establish liability under FEHA. (Plaintiff's Statement of Genuine Issues in Opposition To Defendant Hilti, Inc.'s Motion for Summary Judgment ("SGI") ¶ 23 (Docket No. 23)). As Cleveland made clear, SSDI determinations do not consider the possibility of work with reasonable accommodations. Therefore, the explanation that a plaintiff can work with reasonable accommodations is a "sufficient explanation" for any apparent discrepancy between the FEHA claims and the SSDI application. Cleveland, 526 U.S. at 806; Humphrey-Baker v. United Airlines, Inc., No. EDCV 07-1093-VAP-(JCRX), 2008 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 88381, 2008 WL 4661804, at *10 (C.D. Cal. Oct. 21, 2008) rev'd and remanded on other grounds, 406 F. App'x 117 (9th Cir. 2010) ("the ability to work only with an accommodation consists of an adequate explanation") (citing Cleveland, 526 U.S. at 806; Bell v. Wells Fargo Bank, 62 Cal. App. 4th 1382, 1386, 73 Cal. Rptr. 2d 354 (1998)). The cases to which Hilti cites are distinguishable. Most were decided before Cleveland and do not represent situations [*8]  that are factually analogous.
Hilti's claim that Plaintiff's doctor's statement presents a direct contradiction is also unavailing. Plaintiff's doctor indicated that Plaintiff was experiencing "temporary total disability." (Mora Declaration, Ex. G at P-JL-0200 (Docket No. 21-11)). That Plaintiff was temporarily disabled is not wholly contradictory to a claim that he is able to work with accommodations at another point. The tension between such claims may well be examined on cross-examination, but the Court does not view them to be so directly contradictory that it sees Plaintiff to be "playing fast and loose with the courts" such that it should apply the doctrine of judicial estoppel. Wagner, 354 F.3d at 1044.
B. The Essential Functions of an Account Manager
Hilti contends that lifting 60 pounds or more is an essential function of Plaintiff's former job as Account Manager. Plaintiff disagrees, arguing that it is a task that is required only occasionally, and can be done with the assistance of customers. The question of whether the task can be reasonably expected to be done with the assistance of customers is better addressed in determining whether Hilti failed to reasonably accommodate Plaintiff's disability [*9]  and so is addressed separately below.
California law defines the essential functions of a job as "the fundamental job duties of the employment position the individual with a disability holds or desires. 'Essential functions' does not include the marginal functions of the position." Cal. Gov't Code § 12926(f). California regulations have provided further guidance on the meaning of "essential job functions" as follows:
e) "Essential job functions" means the fundamental job duties of the employment position the applicant or employee with a disability holds or desires.
(1) A job function may be considered essential for any of several reasons, including, but not limited to, the following:
(A) The function may be essential because the reason the position exists is to perform that function.
(B) The function may be essential because of the limited number of employees available among whom the performance of that job function can be distributed.
(C) The function may be highly specialized, so that the incumbent in the position is hired for his or her expertise or ability to perform the particular function.
(2) Evidence of whether a particular function is essential includes, but is not limited to, the following:
(A) The employer's [*10]  or other covered entity's judgment as to which functions are essential.
(B) Accurate, current written job descriptions.
(C) The amount of time spent on the job performing the function.
(D) The legitimate business consequences of not requiring the incumbent to perform the function.
(E) Job descriptions or job functions contained in a collective bargaining agreement.
(F) The work experience of past incumbents in the job.
(G) The current work experience of incumbents in similar jobs.
(H) Reference to the importance of the performance of the job function in prior performance reviews.
(3) "Essential functions" do not include the marginal functions of the position. "Marginal functions" of an employment position are those that, if not performed, would not eliminate the need for the job or that could be readily performed by another employee or that could be performed in an alternative way.
2 Cal. Code Regs. § 11065(e).
As described above, the job of an Account Manager involves driving to various building and industrial sites to demonstrate and sell Hilti's tools. (DSUF ¶ 5, 7, 11). Account Managers work on their own. (DSUF ¶ 9). The tools that an Account Manager demonstrates range in weight from a few pounds to more than 60 pounds. [*11]  (DSUF ¶ 18). The job description for Account Managers at Hilti includes a requirement that Account Managers be able to lift 65 pounds. (DSUF ¶ 20).
Hilti maintains that an Account Manager must be able to lift more than 60 pounds to demonstrate Hilti's tools; these demonstrations are essential to the job of an Account Manager. Plaintiff argues that an Account Manager only occasionally must lift more than 60 pounds. On those rare occasions, a customer at the job site can assist.
Plaintiff's primary argument is that because an Account Manager must lift more than 60 pounds only occasionally, it cannot be an essential function. In support of his argument Plaintiff cites to Ackerman v. Western Elec. Co., Inc., 643 F. Supp. 836 (N.D. Cal. 1986). In Ackerman, the district court addressed the essential functions of a cable installer's job and reasonable accommodation, where Ackerman complained that her asthma prevented her from doing certain tasks expected of a telecommunications installer.
The district court concluded that the tasks accounted for only a small portion, roughly 12 percent, of the work done by an installer. The district court also noted that installers worked in teams and held that these particular functions could have been assigned to others on the team. [*12]  Plaintiff argues that the Court should consider as evidence "[t]he amount of time spent on the job performing the function" as articulated in section 11065(2)(c), and the court's holding in Ackerman to find that carrying more than 60 pounds is not an essential task.
Plaintiff, however, points to only one factor, and ignores the fact that in Ackerman the court found the tasks complained about by Ackerman to be essential to the team on which she worked but not to Ackerman herself. Indeed, the factors California's regulations instruct the Court to consider include that "[t]he function may be essential because of the limited number of employees available among whom the performance of that job function can be distributed." 2 Cal. Code Regs. § 11065(e)(1)(B). Unlike in Ackerman there is no team throughout which the tasks may be reassigned, there is only the Account Manager working alone. (DSUF ¶ 9).
Another factor to be considered is whether "[t]he function may be essential because the reason the position exists is to perform that function." Hilti does not argue that the Account Manager position only exists so as to have someone lift 60 pounds a few times a day. However, the position does exist so that tools, some of which weigh 60 pounds or more, can be brought to, [*13]  and demonstrated before customers. If an Account Manager cannot lift or carry the tools, then the Account Manager cannot demonstrate or sell the tools. California regulations also suggest that the "legitimate business consequences of not requiring the incumbent to perform the function" can be considered as evidence. 2 Cal. Code Regs. § 11065(e)(2)(D). And the legitimate business consequences of Plaintiff's not being able to lift and carry the tools such that they may be demonstrated would be substantial to Hilti.
Finally, the accurate written job description should also be given weight. 2 Cal. Code Regs. § 11065(e)(2)(B). Hilti's Account Manager job description states that an Account Manager must be able to lift 65 pounds. (DSUF ¶ 20). Plaintiff disputes this fact only to the extent that it says that an Account Manager must "occasionally" lift 65 pounds. (SGI ¶ 20). However, that it must happen only occasionally is not dispositive. Plaintiff does not dispute that in a typical day, in order to demonstrate the tool and attempt to make a sale, an Account Manager is required to lift the heaviest tool out of his truck and demonstrate it.
Plaintiff argues that whether a position is essential is a question of fact not to be determined on summary judgment, citing [*14]  to Hastings v. Department of Corrections, 110 Cal. App. 4th 963, 967 n. 6, 2 Cal. Rptr. 3d 963 (2003). While the citation is accurate, the facts in Hastings raise also do not support Plaintiff's arguments. In Hastings, a correctional officer candidate sued the California Department of Corrections under the FEHA. In outlining the essential functions of the job for which the plaintiff had applied, the court noted that while this was typically a question of fact, "plaintiff has failed to present any relevant facts that dispute CDC's evidence on this issue and therefore has failed to raise a triable issue of fact on the question." Id. Coincidentally, the essential functions included the need to lift substantial amounts "occasionally." Id. at 967. Similarly, Plaintiff's only dispute as to whether lifting more than 60 pounds is an essential function of the job is that it must happen only occasionally.
The Court remains dubious as to Plaintiff's argument that lifting is not an essential function of an Account Manager's job and the Court doubts that a jury will find otherwise. However, it remains to be seen whether no rational jury could determine that lifting is not an essential part of an Account Managers job. The Court may address the question again at the Rule 16 conference or may instruct the jury on the point at [*15]  trial after the evidence is heard. Presently, the Court DENIES Hilti's Motion as to this point, without prejudice.

C. Reasonable Accommodation
The next issue the Court must decide is whether letting Plaintiff request customer assistance in moving the heaviest tools constitutes a reasonable accommodation under the FEHA. This issue is clearly central to Plaintiff's claim for Hilti's alleged failure to reasonably accommodate under the FEHA. Further his other claims are dependent on the availability of a reasonable accommodation to survive summary judgment.
Hilti argues that it did not reasonably accommodate him because no reasonable accommodation was possible and it is Plaintiff who bears the burden of identifying any possible reasonable accommodation.
"The FEHA prohibits discrimination against any person with a disability but . . . provides that the law allows the employer to discharge an employee with a physical disability when that employee is unable to perform the essential duties of the job even with reasonable accommodation." Green v. State, 42 Cal. 4th 254, 257, 64 Cal. Rptr. 3d 390, 165 P.3d 118 (2007); see also Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(a)(1) ("This part does not . . . subject an employer to any legal liability resulting from . . . the discharge of an employee with a physical or mental disability, [*16]  where the employee, because of his or her physical or mental disability, is unable to perform his or her essential duties even with reasonable accommodations") (emphasis added).
Plaintiff contends that Hilti could have made reasonable accommodations by allowing Plaintiff to request customer assistance in carrying the heaviest tools, as Hilti had allowed for a limited period when it believed Plaintiff to be only temporarily injured. Hilti argues that requiring customers to assist Plaintiff in moving the tools that he was demonstrating is unreasonable as a matter of law and given the nature of the Account Manager position there was no other reasonable accommodation possible.
Hilti argues that Plaintiff essentially seeks to have a permanent light duty position created for him, which, as a matter of law, it is not required to do. It is well established that an employer is not required to create a new position by making a temporary position permanent. See, e.g., Scotch v. Art Inst. of California-Orange County, Inc., 173 Cal. App. 4th 986, 1011-12, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d 338 (2009) (holding that creation of a teaching position with priority for low level courses was not required under FEHA because it amounted to the creation of a new position); Lopez v. Unisource Worldwide, Inc., No. C 06-6290 SBA, 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 88984, 2007 WL 4259587 at *6 (N.D. Cal. Dec 4, 2007) (holding there is no duty to make a temporary light-duty position [*17]  available); Raine v. City of Burbank, 135 Cal. App. 4th 1215, 1228, 37 Cal. Rptr. 3d 899 (2006) (holding that reclassification of desk position to peace officer position to accommodate injured police officer was not a reasonable accommodation under the FEHA); Watkins v. Ameripride Services 375 F.3d 821, 828 (9th Cir. 2004) (delivery service had no duty to make a temporary "special delivery driver" position permanent as an accommodation).
However, the Court cannot conclude, as a matter of law, that Plaintiff's request to be allowed to obtain customer assistance in lifting and carrying the equipment is not a reasonable accommodation. While Hilti cites many cases in which temporary reassignment to a light-duty position was not required by the law, the Court does not view these cases as sufficiently analogous to the present situation to warrant a finding as a matter of law that the accommodation is unreasonable.
Plaintiff's request is not to have a new position created for him, or to have the duties substantially changed. Rather, he only asks that Hilti make permanent an accommodation it offered him on a temporary basis which did not alter significantly what he did on behalf of Hilti. Plaintiff maintains, and Hilti does not dispute, that with customer assistance, Plaintiff can lift and demonstrate the tools as required of an Account [*18]  Manager. By comparison, the Court of Appeal upheld a grant of summary judgment on the basis that a police officer's request to have his desk position made permanent was not required under the FEHA. Raine, 135 Cal. App. 4th at 1228. The court held that the request was not a restructuring of Raine's old job, but a "reclassification of the front-desk position from a civilian position to a sworn-officer position—effectively, a new position that retains the benefits afforded to sworn officers but without the attendant essential functions of the sworn-officer position." Id. By contrast, Plaintiff does not ask for a temporary position to be made permanent, because he has not had any different temporary position.
Hilti argues that it is unreasonable to allow Plaintiff to ask customers to assist with lifting the heavy tools that are an essential part of his work as an Account Manager. However, Hilti does not present evidence as to why it was reasonable for this accommodation to be made temporarily, but would unreasonable for a longer period. Plaintiff's request is for his job to be restructured as specifically considered by California Government Code section 12926(n)(2) (duty to accommodate may include "job restructuring") and California Code of Regulations section 7293.9(a) (same). Plaintiff will continue to have [*19]  the same responsibilities with the same expectations except that he may ask customers to assist with lifting the heavy tools. Further, unlike in Lopez v. Unisource Worldwide, Inc., No. C 06-6290 SBA, 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 88984, 2007 WL 4259587 at *5 (N.D. Cal. Dec. 4, 2007), Hilti presents no evidence that this accommodation would result in relieving Plaintiff from fulfilling the "normal productivity standards" of an Account Manager, as the plaintiff's light-duty warehouseman position in Lopez did.
The Court does not determine that the accommodation is in fact reasonable, only that the issue is for the trier of fact. As Hilti notes, it may also still show at trial that this accommodation, even if reasonable, would be an undue burden.
Further "the employer cannot prevail on summary judgment on a claim of failure to reasonably accommodate unless it establishes through undisputed facts that (1) reasonable accommodation was offered and refused; (2) there simply was no vacant position within the employer's organization for which the disabled employee was qualified and which the disabled employee was capable of performing with or without accommodation; or (3) the employer did everything in its power to find a reasonable accommodation, but the informal interactive process broke down because the employee failed to engage in [*20]  discussions in good faith." Jensen v. Wells Fargo Bank, 85 Cal. App. 4th 245, 263, 102 Cal. Rptr. 55 (2000) (holding that employer had not met its burden of establishing the absence of a triable issue of material fact with respect to reasonable accommodation where employer failed to give preferential treatment to disabled employee qualified for other positions). If the employee cannot be accommodated in his or her existing position and the requested accommodation is reassignment, an employer must make affirmative efforts to determine whether a position is available. Spitzer v. The Good Guys, Inc., 80 Cal. App. 4th 1376, 1389, 96 Cal. Rptr. 2d 236 (2000) (holding that genuine issues of material fact existed as to whether employee knew it had not reasonably accommodated employee's limitation and whether there were positions to which employee could have been reassigned).
Hilti provides no evidence that it considered Plaintiff for reassignment to a vacant position for which Plaintiff was qualified as it was required to do.
Because the Court determines that there is a genuine issue of material fact as to the availability of a reasonable accommodation which would have allowed Plaintiff to keep working, the Court DENIES Hilti's Motion.

D. Interactive Process
Hilti also seeks summary judgment as to Plaintiff's claim that it failed to engage in a good faith [*21]  interactive process as required by California Government Code section 12940(n). Hilti argues first that as a matter of law it engaged in a process to the extent require by the FEHA. Second, Hilti contends that even if the Court concludes that it did not engage in a sufficient interactive process it can nonetheless not liable because there was no reasonable accommodation for Plaintiff's disability and so it caused no harm to Plaintiff.
The burden is on the employer seeking summary judgment to show that it engaged in an interactive process. Jensen, 85 Cal. App. 4th at 260. In addition, as explained above, the obligation includes consideration of other open positions for which Plaintiff may have qualified given his disability.
Hilti argues that the communication between Plaintiff and Ricki Crawford regarding and during his leaves of absence constituted a sufficient interactive process. The problem with this argument is that it fails to show any interaction with Plaintiff after his surgery in February 2011 when Hilti apparently became aware that Plaintiff was permanently disabled. Indeed, Hilti cites four undisputed facts to support its claim of an interactive process, DSUF ¶¶ 43, 50, 53, and 65. DSUF ¶¶ 43 and 50 relate to discussions with Plaintiff as to his [*22]  progress during his leaves of absence in 2010. DSUF ¶ 53 states that Plaintiff contacted Crawford in January 2011 about his upcoming surgery and a need for another leave of absence, and DSUF ¶ 65 states "Crawford determined that Hilti could not accommodate Plaintiff's restrictions and communicated this to Plaintiff." Hilti presents no evidence as to any engagement with Plaintiff on how to accommodate his permanent disabled state or to consider him for alternative positions.
Further, in light of the Court's determination above regarding the availability of a reasonable accommodation the Court also cannot determine as a matter of law that Hilti's alleged failure to engage in an interactive process would have been futile and did not harm Plaintiff. Accordingly, the Court DENIES Hilti's Motion as to Plaintiff's third cause of action.

E. Plaintiff's Discrimination Claim
Hilti argues that Plaintiff cannot maintain his discrimination claim because he is not a qualified individual under the FEHA and so enjoys no protection. Plaintiff maintains that he is a qualified individual because he was disabled but able to perform the essential functions of his job with reasonable accommodation. Further, [*23]  he was fired because of his disability for which a reasonable accommodation would have allowed him to keep working.
Hilti is correct that it is not unlawful to terminate a disabled employee who is unable to perform the essential functions of the job, even with accommodations. Green, 42 Cal. 4th at 264 ("the FEHA and the ADA both limit their protective scope to those employees with a disability who can perform the essential duties of the employment position with reasonable accommodation"); see also Lopez, 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 88984, 2007 WL 4259587 at *6 ("Lopez is not able to perform the essential duties of the position, so he is therefore not a 'qualified individual" [and] thus unable to establish a prima facie case that he was discriminated in his employment on the basis of disability"). However, whether Plaintiff can perform the essential functions of the job with reasonable accommodation remains an open question. Plaintiff's claim that he was discriminated against because of his disability is otherwise straightforward given that Hilti explicitly fired him because it viewed him as being unable to perform the job.
Accordingly, the Court DENIES Hilti's Motion as to Plaintiff's first claim for relief for disability discrimination.

F. Failure to Take Reasonable Steps [*24]  To Prevent Discrimination
Hilti argues that Plaintiff's claim that it failed to take reasonable steps to prevent discrimination fails as a matter of law because there is not a private right of action allowing Plaintiff's claim. Hilti's argument, however, is premised on Plaintiff's inability to show an underlying case of employment discrimination.
The parties appear to agree, and the Court's reading of the case law further suggests, that a private suit for failure to prevent discrimination under California Government Code section 12940(k) is permitted, but may only be maintained by an individual if he or she can show an underlying instance of discrimination. Trujillo v. N. County Transit District, 63 Cal. App. 4th 280, 288-89, 73 Cal. Rptr. 2d 596 (1998) ("We do not believe the statutory language supports recovery on such a private right of action where there has been a specific factual finding that no such discrimination or harassment actually occurred at the plaintiffs' workplace"). Because the Court has determined that there are issues precluding summary judgment as to Plaintiff's discrimination claim it is premature at this stage to dismiss Plaintiff's claim for Hilti's failure to prevent discrimination.
Accordingly, the Court DENIES Hilti's Motion as to Plaintiff's fourth cause of action.

G. Punitive Damages
Hilti also [*25]  request that the Court grant summary judgment as to Plaintiff's request for punitive damages. Plaintiff argues that it may obtain punitive damages on the basis of Hilti's "callous" firing of Plaintiff, and because of an alleged policy that permitted employees to return only once they were "100% healed." (Opp. at 25-28). Plaintiff contends that this allegedly per se unlawful policy justifies punitive damages.
Punitive damages may be awarded upon a showing of "oppression, fraud or malice" on the part of the defendant. Ackerman, 643 F. Supp. at 857. Malice is described as conduct that is "despicable" or "willful and [in] conscious disregard of the     rights or safety of others." Cal. Civ. Code § 3294(c)(1). Plaintiff claims that Hilti's policies are sufficient to meet this standard because they did not allow for an interactive process.
The Court is unconvinced. While Hilti's decision may have been "callous" from Plaintiff's perspective, it is no more callous than any other decision to fire an otherwise capable employee only because of his or her disability. Such conduct is simply the basis for a claim under FEHA, and California requires significantly more to justify granting punitive damages.
Plaintiff's allegations of Hilti's "100 percent healed" [*26]  policy are also unconvincing. Even were such a policy to exist, as suggested by the declaration of non-party and former Hilti employee Monica Ford, Plaintiff still does not establish by any authority that such a policy is anything more than a violation of either FEHA or the ADA. See Henderson v. Security Pacific National Bank, 72 Cal. App. 3d 764, 771, 140 Cal. Rptr. 388 (1977) (Punitive damages "are never awarded as a matter of right, they are not favored by the law and they should be granted with the greatest of caution; they will be allowed only in the clearest of cases") (citations omitted).
Accordingly, Hilti's Motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's request for punitive damages.

III. CONTINUANCE UNDER FRCP 56(d)
Plaintiff requests that if the Court is inclined to grant summary judgment to Hilti, it continue the decision to provide an opportunity to pursue discovery on Plaintiff's theory that Hilti has an illegal "100% healed" return to work policy. (Opp. at 28-29). In light of the above reasoning, the issue is moot.

IV. CONCLUSION
In light of the above reasoning, the Court GRANTS in part and DENIES in part Hilti's Motion. The Court GRANTS Hilti's Motion as to Plaintiff's request for punitive damages. The Court otherwise DENIES Hilti's Motion, but does so without prejudice as to whether lifting [*27]  more than 60 pounds is an essential function of an Account Manager's job.
IT IS SO ORDERED.


End of Document