Maahs-Mccann v. Dakota County
United States District Court for the District of Minnesota
September 15, 2009, Decided; September 15, 2009, Filed
Civ. No. 07-4917 (JJG)

Reporter
2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 151096 *
Heidi Maahs-McCann, Plaintiff, v. Dakota County, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Heidi Maahs-McCann, PLAINTIFF: Trevor S Oliver, Kelly and Lemmons PA, St Paul, MN.
For Dakota County of the, DEFENDANT: Kathryn M Keena, Andrea G White, Dakota County Attorney's Office, Hastings, MN.
Judges: JEANNE J. GRAHAM, United States Magistrate Judge.
Opinion by: JEANNE J. GRAHAM
Opinion



ORDER
JEANNE J. GRAHAM, United States Magistrate Judge
This case is before the undersigned Magistrate Judge on Defendant Dakota County's Motion for Summary Judgment and Motion to Strike Exhibits.1 At the motion hearing, Trevor S. Oliver appeared for Plaintiff Heidi Maahs-McCann, and Kathryn M. Keena appeared for Defendant Dakota County. For the reasons set forth below, the Court grants in part and denies in part the Motion to Strike, grants the Motion for Summary Judgment, and dismisses this case with prejudice.

I. INTRODUCTION
Plaintiff began working as an intake probation officer for the Dakota County Community Corrections Department in 1994. After she was diagnosed with chronic fatigue syndrome ("CFS"), among other illnesses, she was approved to take disability leave in October 2006. She returned to work part-time two months later, and Defendant assigned her to a different probation unit in order to accommodate the part-time [*2]  work restrictions imposed by her doctor.
In anticipation of eventually returning to work full-time, Plaintiff requested three accommodations: frequent rest breaks, a flexible work schedule, and a telecommuting option. Based on the recommendation of Plaintiff's doctor, however, Defendant offered only the flexible work schedule and rest break accommodations. This was not acceptable to Plaintiff, who preferred the telecommuting alternative. Plaintiff therefore took a personal leave of absence before returning to work full-time without significant accommodations in August 2008.
Plaintiff filed a charge of discrimination with the Minnesota Department of Human Rights in August 2007, alleging disability discrimination. The charge was also forwarded to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, and both agencies ultimately dismissed the charges. Plaintiff then commenced this action, bringing claims for disability discrimination under the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") and the Minnesota Human Rights Act ("MHRA"), and for failure to make reasonable accommodations in violation of the ADA and MHRA. Following a period of discovery, Defendant moved for summary judgment, arguing that (1) [*3]  Plaintiff was not disabled during the relevant time period; (2) Plaintiff did not suffer an adverse employment action; (3) telecommuting was not a reasonable accommodation; and (4) the accommodations offered were reasonable. Defendant separately moved to strike several exhibits Plaintiff filed with her opposition to the summary judgment motion.

II. BACKGROUND
Plaintiff began working for Defendant as an intake probation officer in 1994 at Defendant's facility in Hastings, Minnesota. Her primary duty was to meet with and interview offenders on supervised release approximately twice a day, three days a week. She also collected data, filled out forms, prepared memos, and determined case plans. Her hours were relatively flexible, depending on her appointment calendar and the needs of the offenders. Rarely did she appear in court.
In 1998, Plaintiff was diagnosed with cervical cancer. Her treatment included a hysterectomy, chemotherapy, and radiation. She did not work during her cancer treatment and was approved for short-term disability leave. Plaintiff returned to work full-time about six months after her treatment ended, even though she felt she had not fully regained her health and physical [*4]  strength. Plaintiff's primary physician, Dr. Jeanne Hesse, tested her for Lyme disease, arthritis, and other conditions.
Over the next several years, Plaintiff continued to see Dr. Hesse for her health problems. On December 11, 2003, Plaintiff reported to Dr. Hesse that she was sleeping at least twelve hours a day and was too exhausted to participate in any social or personal activities. In addition to feeling fatigued, Plaintiff felt excessively hot, sweaty, and shaky, and had chronic headaches. Plaintiff was diagnosed with a tumor in her pituitary gland in April 2006 and had surgery to remove it. Her fatigue worsened significantly after the surgery. In May 2006, Plaintiff told Dr. Hesse she had difficulty completing daily tasks and could not concentrate adequately at work. Every good day was followed by three bad days. Dr. Hesse did not immediately diagnose CFS, however, because Plaintiff was not experiencing persistent sleepiness and because Dr. Hesse thought some of the symptoms could be attributed to the recent surgery. Dr. Hesse extended Plaintiff's short-term disability leave because Plaintiff was unable to sustain work activities or to maintain concentration for longer than [*5]  two hours.
On June 7, 2006, Dr. Hesse opined that Plaintiff was disabled by severe fatigue. On the worst days, Plaintiff was able to be active for only an hour or two. The following month, Plaintiff told Dr. Hesse she wanted to return to work full-time, but preferred to work offsite. Dr. Hesse remarked that Plaintiff needed to rest at least two hours in the middle of each day and could not be out of bed for more than eight consecutive hours a day. Dr. Hesse continued Plaintiff's disability leave for another month and referred Plaintiff to Dr. Carolyn Torkelson-Beneke at the University of Minnesota's Chronic Fatigue Center for a consultative examination. Dr. Torkelson- Beneke examined Plaintiff in August 2006 and extended her short-term disability leave to August 23, 2006.
Plaintiff returned to her job on August 24, 2006, working reduced hours. She had transferred to the Apple Valley office several years before, and her supervisor at that location was Randy Shimizu. After Plaintiff resumed working, she performed mostly computer work, attempting to locate and contact individuals who had not reported to the probation office after their release from prison. Plaintiff told Shimizu she was [*6]  worried about her health and was not sure she could work full-time. Shimizu explained that if Plaintiff could not eventually work fulltime, she would have to be transferred from the intake unit to a position such as assistant probation officer or case aide. Concerned that such a position change would result in a salary change or demotion, Plaintiff began working full-time on September 21, 2006.
Approximately two weeks later, Dr. Torkelson-Beneke opined that Plaintiff was disabled by CFS and restricted Plaintiff from work for thirty days. Dr. Torkelson-Beneke referred Plaintiff to Dr. Fahra Ikramuddin at the University of Minnesota Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Center for physical therapy and medical rehabilitation services. To assist Plaintiff in returning to work, Dr. Ikramuddin developed a "work-hardening" program to increase Plaintiff's strength and endurance through physical therapy and gradually increased work hours.
Plaintiff continued to see Dr. Hesse as well as Dr. Ikramuddin. During an office visit in October 2006, Plaintiff told Dr. Hesse she was occasionally too exhausted to get out of bed before noon and that emotional upset and agitation were causing severe setbacks. [*7]  Dr. Hesse felt Plaintiff had not regained adequate strength to return to work, and she encouraged Plaintiff to seek accommodations from Defendant.
Meanwhile, Defendant had decided to post Plaintiff's full-time position in the intake unit, due to the quantity of work amassed in her absence, the time-sensitive nature of intake work, and an impending shortage in staff. Although Dr. Ikramuddin did not want Plaintiff to return to work until December, Plaintiff was worried she would lose her job if she did not. Plaintiff therefore contacted Nancy Hohbach in the Employee Relations Department, who told Plaintiff she could keep her job if she returned to work before the posting closed. Hohbach later learned that Defendant had continued to post and filled the position because Plaintiff would be able to work only part-time when she returned, and the intake unit had a pressing need for a full-time probation officer. Plaintiff's supervisor, Timothy Cleveland, committed to finding her a full-time probation officer position in the Dakota County Community Corrections Department when her doctor cleared her to return to work full-time.
In December 2006, Plaintiff met with Dr. Hesse in preparation for [*8]  returning to work. Plaintiff told Dr. Hesse she was feeling extremely fatigued. Even a mundane activity such as cleaning her apartment would cause her to remain in bed for two days. Plaintiff described her job as a probation officer as mostly computer work, with occasional client interviews. Given the amount of perceived computer work, Dr. Hesse thought Plaintiff would be able to work from home frequently. Dr. Hesse described the advantages of telecommuting as allowing Plaintiff to focus her energy on her work tasks, rather than getting ready for work and driving, and providing Plaintiff with rest breaks that were genuinely restful and rejuvenating. Ideally, Dr. Hesse wanted Plaintiff to take rest breaks every two hours, which could be extended over time, and to pace her activities. Dr. Hesse felt a forty-hour work week eventually could be possible if sufficient accommodations were made, but that such a schedule would severely limit Plaintiff's ability to do any other daily activities.
Plaintiff returned to work part-time, in accordance with work restrictions imposed by Dr. Ikramuddin, on December 8, 2006. Under Dr. Ikramuddin's work-hardening program, Plaintiff was initially scheduled [*9]  to work four days a week, from 11:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. She was paid the same hourly rate and received the same benefits as before, but was assigned to the transfer violation unit located in West St. Paul. Defendant had created and funded this part-time position especially for Plaintiff. It was intended to be a temporary accommodation until Dr. Ikramuddin cleared her to return to work full-time. Plaintiff's specific job duties were to determine the location of offenders who had moved outside Dakota County, prepare violation reports, and make recommendations for supervision. Although these duties were new to Plaintiff, they could be done mostly on the telephone and computer, and were not time-sensitive. Plaintiff's new supervisor was Phyllis Grubb.
Plaintiff's former supervisor, Shimizu, considered the temporary work assignment a mutually beneficial situation. The transfer violation unit had a backlog of work, but because the work was not time-sensitive, the unit would not be overburdened if Plaintiff was not able to maintain a full schedule. In compliance with her doctor's orders, Plaintiff needed a part-time position with flexible hours, which the transfer violation unit could provide. [*10]  Shimizu did not believe that an intake probation officer could work from home on a regular basis, because one of the primary duties is to be physically available to offenders arriving after a court appearance. In addition, given the steady stream of work, if an intake probation officer is absent on a regular basis, the other staff must take on his or her workload.2
From December 2006 until July 2007, Plaintiff worked varying part-time schedules as set by Dr. Ikramuddin. On January 3, 2007, Dr. Ikramuddin limited Plaintiff to working three days a week, six hours a day. On February 14, 2007, Dr. Ikramuddin increased Plaintiff's workdays to four a week, six hours per day. Dr. Ikramuddin later reduced Plaintiff's workdays to three a week, six hours per day, and then back to four days a week, six hours a day. This pattern continued until July. Despite the aims of the work-hardening program, Plaintiff's CFS symptoms remained severe, and she would usually fall asleep exhausted after each workday.
When Plaintiff had returned to work in December, she submitted a formal request for reasonable accommodations to Defendant in anticipation of eventually returning to full-time status. She asked for [*11]  a telecommuting option, flexible work hours, and rest breaks. Dr. Hesse submitted a certification form in conjunction with Plaintiff's request, explaining Plaintiff needed "frequent rest periods (minimum of 2 hours) that may require reclining. Flexible work day hours. Telecommuting to reduce fatigue associated with travel time [and] workplace limitations would improve productivity to complete computer-based tasks." (Keena Aff. Ex. 40.)
Patric Herndon is the individual typically responsible for reviewing accommodation requests from employees of the Dakota County Community Corrections Department. In Plaintiff's case, however, this responsibility was delegated to Hohbach, because Herndon was on leave when Plaintiff returned to work. Hohbach thought the certification form submitted by Dr. Hesse was unclear in several respects. For example, she was uncertain whether Dr. Hesse had recommended rest breaks two hours in length or a rest period every two hours. She also could not discern if Dr. Hesse had suggested the three accommodations in combination or in the alternative. Because Dr. Ikramuddin had not yet cleared Plaintiff to work full-time, Hohbach felt there was sufficient time to obtain [*12]  clarification from Dr. Hesse.
Plaintiff met with Hohbach on December 21, 2006 to discuss the status of her requested accommodations and the ambiguities in Dr. Hesse's certification form. Plaintiff explained to Hohbach she wanted to work flexible hours, such as a shorter workday and varying days of the week, while she gradually worked back to full-time status. Hohbach said these accommodations had already been implemented. Plaintiff also asked for opportunities to take rest breaks, to which Hohbach agreed. Plaintiff's request to telecommute, however, presented an impasse. Hohbach did not agree that an intake probation officer's job duties could be performed from home. According to Hohbach, probation officers need access to files and confidential information located in Defendant's on-site files and systems. Probation officers must also be physically available to meet with clients after their court appearances. Because Hohbach understood telecommuting to be an option, not a necessity, she asked Plaintiff to obtain clarification from Dr. Hesse concerning her recommended accommodations. Herndon also sent a letter directly to Dr. Hesse on January 12, 2007.
On January 19, 2007, Dr. Hesse responded [*13]  to Defendant's request for clarification of the specific accommodations Plaintiff required. Dr. Hesse wrote that Plaintiff should be allowed to recline fifteen minutes for every two hours worked, or alternatively, should be permitted to telecommute so that she could take those rest periods. Under either alternative, Dr. Hesse believed Plaintiff would need flexibility in her workday hours.
Despite Dr. Hesse's clarification, Plaintiff continued to insist that telecommuting was a necessary accommodation. Ultimately, however, Defendant decided to allow Plaintiff to rest for fifteen minutes following every two hours of sustained work activity, and to lie down if desired. Defendant also offered to allow Plaintiff to start her workday after the typical start time of 8:00 a.m. and to begin her workday with a rest period. Plaintiff told Defendant these accommodations were not acceptable, and she hired an attorney.
In mid-June 2007, Defendant decided it could no longer fund Plaintiff's temporary, parttime position in the transfer violation unit. Those funds had originally been designated to hire a part-time financial analyst, and Defendant needed to fill that position. Defendant reiterated its [*14]  willingness to accommodate Plaintiff as previously offered whenever she was able to return to work full-time, but held firm on its telecommuting decision. Plaintiff's attorney asked Defendant to place Plaintiff on part-time, paid administrative leave for two weeks, and Defendant agreed.
Throughout June and July 2007, Plaintiff's attorney and Defendant's attorney discussed whether Plaintiff could fill several open positions, but no suitable position existed. Plaintiff therefore took a year-long, unpaid leave of absence beginning in July 2007. In July 2008, Plaintiff notified Hohbach that Dr. Hesse had cleared her to return to work full-time and without the previously requested accommodations. The record reflects that Plaintiff returned to work as a full-time probation officer in the Hastings office on August 6, 2008, without any significant accommodations and performing essentially the same duties as when she was originally hired.

III. MOTION TO STRIKE

A. Failure to Disclose
Pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 37(c), Defendant moves to strike Plaintiff's Exhibits R, S, and X because Plaintiff did not produce these documents as written discovery. Exhibit R is a copy of notes purportedly drafted by Plaintiff. Exhibit [*15]  S is a copy of notes purportedly drafted by Grubb. Exhibit X is an unsigned letter purportedly written by Dr. Hesse, which was never sent to Defendant.
Plaintiff contends the nondisclosure of these documents was unintentional. According to Plaintiff, all three documents were attached to her charge of discrimination, which she assumed Defendant had. Plaintiff had also referred to these documents in an answer to an interrogatory, indicating they had already been produced to Defendant as part of the charge of discrimination, but Defendant never corrected this misunderstanding.
Rule 37(c) provides that a party will be prevented from using information it failed to provide during discovery "unless the failure was substantially justified or is harmless." Defendant has not demonstrated any harm caused by the nondisclosure, and the Court will not strike the exhibits under Rule 37(c).

B. Authentication
Alternatively, Defendant asks that Exhibits R, S, and X be stricken because they are not authenticated. "To be considered on summary judgment, documents must be authenticated by and attached to an affidavit made on personal knowledge setting forth such facts as would be admissible in evidence or a deposition that meets [*16]  the requirements of Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e). Documents which do not meet those requirements cannot be considered." Stuart v. Gen. Motors Corp., 217 F.3d 621, 635 n.20 (8th Cir. 2000) (citations omitted).
The Court strikes Exhibits R, S, and X because they are not adequately authenticated. First, there is no affidavit or certification from Plaintiff that she drafted the notes contained in Exhibit R. For the Court to consider a document attached to an affidavit, "the affiant must be a competent witness through whom the document can be received into evidence." 11 J. Moore et al., Moore's Federal Practice § 56.14[2][c] (3d ed. 2009). Although the notes are attached to Plaintiff's attorney's affidavit, her attorney would not be a witness through whom his client's notes could be received into evidence. Second, with respect to the notes comprising Exhibit S, Plaintiff claimed she found them near a printer at work, but there is no authentication or independent evidence that Grubb actually wrote the notes. Plaintiff's attorney did not even question Grubb about the notes during her deposition. Third, the letter contained in Exhibit X was not signed by Dr. Hesse or ever sent to Defendant, and there is no independent evidence confirming Dr. Hesse even drafted this letter.
The Court notes that even if Exhibits R, S, and X [*17]  had been properly authenticated, they would not affect the Court's findings or conclusions. Most of the information included in those exhibits is either inconsequential or cumulative of evidence contained elsewhere in the record.

C. Hearsay
Exhibit V is an excerpt from a Department of Labor publication, which Defendant challenges on hearsay grounds. A party cannot rely on hearsay to oppose summary judgment. See Mason v. Corr. Med. Svcs., Inc., 559 F.3d 880, 885 (8th Cir. 2009) (citation omitted). As a Department of Labor publication, however, the material likely qualifies as a hearsay exception under Federal Rule of Evidence 803(8). Thus, the Court will not strike Exhibit V.

D. Failure to Cite in Memorandum
Finally, Defendant seeks to strike Exhibit O, which is a report from Dr. Charles Lapp dated October 23, 2008.3 Defendant observes that Plaintiff failed to cite this exhibit in her memorandum, but Defendant cites no authority permitting the Court to strike it on this ground. The Court will not strike Dr. Lapp's report, but will consider it in proportion to its relevance to the issues and time period under consideration.

IV. STANDARD OF REVIEW ON SUMMARY JUDGMENT
Summary judgment is proper if there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment [*18]  as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c); Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). "A dispute is genuine if the evidence is such that it could cause a reasonable jury to return a verdict for either party; a fact is material if its resolution affects the outcome of the case." Chial v. Sprint/United Mgmt. Co., 569 F.3d 850, 853-54 (8th Cir. 2009) (citing Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 252, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986)). The moving party bears the burden to show that the material facts are not in dispute. Mems v. City of St. Paul, 224 F.3d 735, 738 (8th Cir. 2000). The nonmoving party may not respond with mere allegations or denials but must present specific facts creating an authentic issue for trial. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 256. The evidence and resulting inferences are viewed in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Graves v. Ark. Dep't of Fin. & Admin., 229 F.3d 721, 723 (8th Cir. 2000).

V. PLAINTIFF'S DISCRIMINATION CLAIMS
Plaintiff contends that Defendant discriminated against her in violation of the MHRA and the ADA. These claims are analyzed under the same legal framework. See Fenney v. Dakota, Minn. & E. R.R. Co., 327 F.3d 707, 711 n.5 (8th Cir. 2003). Plaintiff has the initial burden to establish a prima facie case of discrimination by producing evidence that: (1) she was disabled under the ADA; (2) she was "qualified to perform the essential functions of [her] job with or without reasonable accommodation;" and (3) she "suffered an adverse employment action under circumstances that give rise to an inference of unlawful discrimination based on disability." Dropinski v. Douglas County, 298 F.3d 704, 706 (8th Cir. 2002) (citation omitted). If Plaintiff [*19]  meets her prima facie burden, Defendant must produce a legitimate and nondiscriminatory explanation for its actions. See Kiel v. Select Artificials, Inc., 169 F.3d 1131, 1135 (8th Cir. 1999) (citation omitted). If Defendant meets its burden, Plaintiff must show the reason was a mere pretext for discrimination. See id. (citation omitted).

A. Disability
Defendant asserts Plaintiff is not disabled because she is not substantially limited in a major life activity. Under the ADA, a person is disabled if he or she has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, has a record of such an impairment, or is regarded as having such an impairment. Heisler v. Metro. Council, 339 F.3d 622, 627 (8th Cir. 2003) (quoting 42 U.S.C. § 12102(2)). The MHRA definition is essentially the same. See Minn. Stat. § 363A.03, subd. 12. Major life activities include caring for oneself, walking, working, and performing manual tasks. Fjellestad v. Pizza Hut of Am., Inc., 188 F.3d 944, 948 (8th Cir. 1999) (citing 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(i)). "An impairment is 'substantially limiting' if it renders an individual unable to perform a major life activity that the average person in the general population can perform, or if it significantly restricts the condition, manner, or duration under which an individual can perform a particular major life activity as compared to an average person in the general population." Id. (citing 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(1)(i)-(iii)).
Viewed in the light [*20]  most favorable to Plaintiff, the record reveals a genuine dispute of material fact regarding whether she was disabled during the relevant time period. Medical evidence and testimony from Plaintiff demonstrates that her fatigue frequently rendered her unable to work, perform manual tasks associated with housekeeping, and to care for herself in 2006 through mid-2007. During this time, Plaintiff's fatigue hindered her completion of daily tasks and impaired her concentration at work. Some days she could be active for only an hour or two. Cleaning her entire apartment in one day would cause her to remain in bed for two days. Dr. Hesse opined that Plaintiff was unable to sustain work activities or maintain concentration for longer than two hours at a time. If Plaintiff worked a forty-hour week, Dr. Hesse thought she would be severely limited in her ability to perform any other daily tasks. Dr. Torkelson-Beneke opined that Plaintiff was disabled by her CFS. Accordingly, there is sufficient evidence to create a triable question of fact on the issue of disability.

B. Qualified To Perform Essential Functions
As framed by the parties, the next question is whether Plaintiff would have been qualified [*21]  to perform the essential functions of her job if Defendant had implemented the telecommuting accommodation. To survive summary judgment, Plaintiff must make a facial showing that she could have performed the essential functions of her job while telecommuting. See Fjellestad, 188 F.3d at 950.
Plaintiff estimates more than eighty percent of her job as an intake probation officer consisted of completing reports and other paperwork that she could do from home. Her requested accommodation to work from home no more than one or two days a week would correspond with this estimated workload. Both Shimizu and Grubb testified that Plaintiff could do some probation officer work from home, and Plaintiff conceded that certain duties such as meeting with offenders and administering drug tests would have to be done at Defendant's facility. Based on this evidence, Plaintiff has made a facial showing sufficient to create an issue of fact regarding whether she could perform the essential functions of her job while telecommuting one or two days a week.4
Having found an issue of material fact concerning Plaintiff's ability to perform the essential functions of her job even with the telecommuting accommodation, the Court will only briefly [*22]  address Plaintiff's related argument that Defendant failed to engage in an interactive process regarding her request to telecommute. Once an "employer knows of an employee's disability and the employee . . . has requested accommodation, the employer's obligation to participate in the interactive process has been triggered." Fjellestad, 188 F.3d at 952 (citation omitted). There is no question Defendant engaged in an interactive process with Plaintiff. When Plaintiff submitted her requested accommodations, Hohbach met with her and discussed the options. Hohbach and Herndon also sought additional input from Dr. Hesse. After receiving Dr. Hesse's clarification, Defendant offered to implement the recommended accommodations. Indeed, Plaintiff received every accommodation she requested except for the telecommuting alternative. Plaintiff's argument that Defendant failed to participate in an interactive process has no merit.

C. Adverse Employment Action
Defendant next contends that Plaintiff did not suffer an adverse employment action. Plaintiff responds that her assignment to the transfer violation unit in December 2006 was an adverse employment action, because she had no job security and received a significant cut in [*23]  pay and benefits. At the summary judgment hearing, Plaintiff pinpointed the critical time period as December 8, 2006 through May 2007, and accordingly, the Court will focus its discussion on this six-month period.
Plaintiff's argument that she incurred a significant cut in pay and benefits finds no support in the record. After Defendant created a new position for her in the transfer violation unit, she was paid at the same rate and received the same benefits as she did in the intake unit. She was assigned to work a part-time schedule based solely on her doctor's instructions. For Plaintiff to complain of being paid less as a part-time employee, when she was working part-time pursuant to her doctor's orders, is disingenuous, especially considering that Defendant created the part-time position especially to suit her needs. Cf. Fjellestad, 188 F.3d at 950 ("[T]he ADA does not require an employer to create a new position to accommodate a disabled employee.") (citations omitted).
A reassignment or transfer can constitute an adverse employment action when it "results in a significant change in working conditions or a diminution in the transferred employee's title, salary, or benefits." Fisher v. Pharmacia & Upjohn, 225 F.3d 915, 919 (8th Cir. 2000) (citations omitted). In Fisher [*24] , the plaintiff was transferred from a "premier sales unit" to a "less prestigious unit." Id. at 919-20. As a result, his title was diminished, he lost important sales accounts, and he had a smaller territory. Id. at 920. Here, however, Plaintiff's reassignment resulted in no material change in working conditions or a diminution in her title or status. Putting aside the changes necessitated by Dr. Ikramuddin's work restrictions, which were made at Plaintiff's own request, Plaintiff performed much of the same work as she had before: conducting investigations, speaking with offenders on supervision, and preparing reports. Plaintiff has described her work in the transfer unit as less prestigious than the intake unit, in part because the work was not as time-sensitive. But it is not reasonable to infer that prestige necessarily corresponds to turnaround time. Furthermore, the unhurried nature of the work accommodated Plaintiff's need for flexibility to follow Dr. Ikramuddin's work-hardening program.
Moreover, even if the reassignment had resulted in significantly different working conditions, the changes were not permanent. The reassignment was merely a temporary solution until Plaintiff's doctor released her [*25]  to work full-time in her former position. Although a transfer from a permanent position to a temporary one can be an adverse action if it hurts the employee's future career prospects or prevents her from using certain professional skills, Brown v. Cox, 286 F.3d 1040, 1045-46 (8th Cir. 2002), Plaintiff presents no evidence that this was the case. Indeed, it was always Defendant's intention to restore Plaintiff to her former position as a full-time probation officer.
At the motion hearing, Plaintiff argued emphatically that she had no job security after she was placed in the transfer violation unit, because Defendant could have ceased funding the part-time position at any time. But Plaintiff cannot create a genuine issue of material fact with mere conjecture. The undisputed facts are that Defendant created the part-time position especially for Plaintiff, and that Defendant committed to finding her a full-time position when she was able to return to work full-time. Defendant funded the part-time position for six months, until mid-June 2007, when it needed to redirect those funds to the purpose for which they were originally intended: hiring a part-time financial analyst. At that time, Defendant reiterated to Plaintiff that she could resume [*26]  working full-time in the intake unit, with the accommodations it had previously offered, as soon as she was able to work full-time. At no point can it be inferred that Plaintiff's job security was threatened. Rather, Defendant consistently assured Plaintiff that her employment was secure, and that it would reinstate her as a full-time probation officer when she was cleared to work full-time. Thus, Plaintiff has failed to create a genuine issue of material fact regarding her job security.
In sum, the only adverse employment action alleged by Plaintiff was her temporary reassignment to the transfer violation unit in December 2006. Plaintiff has not met her burden to show a triable fact issue regarding whether the reassignment was an adverse employment action, however, and Defendant is therefore entitled to summary judgment on her ADA and MHRA discrimination claims.

D. Legitimate, Nondiscriminatory Reason and Pretext
Although consideration of the discrimination claims appropriately ends with Plaintiff's failure to meet her prima facie burden, the Court will also briefly discuss the final two steps of the burden-shifting analysis.
Defendant has produced evidence of a legitimate and nondiscriminatory [*27]  reason for placing Plaintiff in the transfer violation unit in December 2006. When Plaintiff began working part-time after her surgery in April 2006, Defendant initially managed the workload by increasing other part-time employees to full-time, hiring a temporary employee, and assigning some of Plaintiff's caseload to supervisors and other probation officers. In November 2006, however, Defendant decided to fill Plaintiff's position with a full-time employee because of the amount of work required and its time-sensitive nature. Plaintiff was not allowed to return to her former position in the intake unit because that department needed a full-time probation officer, and Plaintiff had not been cleared to work full-time. The staffing shortage was further compounded because one intake probation officer was on maternity leave and another was scheduled to retire shortly. To accommodate Plaintiff's need to work part-time, Defendant created a position for her in the transfer violation unit, even though it was under no legal obligation to do so. Defendant has met its burden to show that its reason for temporarily reassigning Plaintiff to a part-time position in the transfer violation unit is [*28]  both legitimate and nondiscriminatory.
As for pretext, Plaintiff presents no evidence that her reassignment to the transfer violation unit was a pretext for discrimination. Instead, she maintains her prima facie case is so strong that a jury would be compelled to render a verdict for her absent evidence of a discriminatory motive. "Although it is possible for strong evidence of a prima facie case to also present a factual issue on pretext, . . . the ultimate question is whether the plaintiff presents evidence of 'conduct or statements by persons involved in [the employer's] decision-making process reflective of a discriminatory attitude sufficient to allow a reasonable jury to infer that that attitude was a motivating factor in [the employer's] decision . . . .'" Kiel, 160 F.3d at 1135 (citation and quotation omitted). Here, Plaintiff did not succeed in meeting her prima facie burden, much less present strong evidence of prima facie discrimination. Therefore, her prima facie case cannot create a factual issue on pretext.
Nor has Plaintiff presented evidence of conduct or statements reflective of a discriminatory attitude. To the contrary, Defendant's conduct time and again demonstrated not an intent to discriminate, [*29]  but an intent to accommodate. Defendant was not obligated to redirect funding and create a part-time position for Plaintiff in December 2006, but it did, and for the next six months, Defendant accommodated Plaintiff's fluctuating part-time schedule. Defendant also offered to accommodate Plaintiff according to Dr. Hesse's recommendations when she was able to return to work full-time. When Plaintiff requested a personal leave of absence in July 2007, Defendant did not consider her separated from employment, but continued her leave for an entire year. When Plaintiff wanted to return to work, Defendant reinstated her as an intake probation officer. Accordingly, Plaintiff has not created a triable question of fact regarding whether Defendant's reason for temporarily reassigning her was pretextual.

VI. PLAINTIFF'S FAILURE-TO-ACCOMMODATE CLAIMS
Plaintiff asserts that Defendant failed to reasonably accommodate her disability in violation of the ADA and the MHRA. To defeat summary judgment on these claims, Plaintiff must show the same three prima facie elements as her discrimination claims, and additionally, that Defendant knew of and failed to reasonably accommodate her disability. Kammueller v. Loomis, Fargo & Co., 383 F.3d. 779, 784 (8th Cir. 2004) (citations [*30]  omitted). Because Plaintiff has not shown she suffered an adverse employment action, her failure-to-accommodate claims necessarily fail.
Moreover, Defendant reasonably accommodated Plaintiff's disability. When Plaintiff returned to work in December 2006, she asked for flexible work hours, rest breaks, and a telecommuting option. Plaintiff provided a certification form from Dr. Hesse, which Defendant found ambiguous in some respects and thus sought further clarification. Dr. Hesse responded that a reasonable accommodation for Plaintiff's CFS would be to allow her to rest for fifteen minutes after every two hours of sustained work activity. Dr. Hesse gave telecommuting as an alternative to this accommodation. "If more than one accommodation would allow the individual to perform the essential functions of the position, 'the employer providing the accommodation has the ultimate discretion to choose between effective accommodations, and may choose the less expensive accommodation or the accommodation that is easier for it to provide.'" Kiel, 169 F.3d at 1137 (quoting 29 C.F.R. § 1630.9 (App.)). Here, Defendant chose one of the alternative accommodations recommended by Dr. Hesse: to allow Plaintiff to take a fifteen-minute rest [*31]  break after every two hours of sustained work activity. Defendant later added that Plaintiff could begin her workday with a rest period and after the typical start time of 8:00 a.m. Contrary to Plaintiff's position, telecommuting was not the only reasonable accommodation for her disability. The undisputed facts warrant summary judgment for Defendant.
Accordingly, based on all the files, records, and proceedings herein, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that:
1. Defendant Dakota County's Motion for Summary Judgment (Doc. No. 13) is GRANTED;
2. Defendant Dakota County's Motion to Strike Exhibits (Doc. No. 28) is GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART as set forth fully herein; and
3. This case is DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE.
LET JUDGMENT BE ENTERED ACCORDINGLY.
Dated: September 15, 2009.
/s/ Jeanne J. Graham
JEANNE J. GRAHAM
United States Magistrate Judge


End of Document

