Mack v. Georgetown Univ.
United States District Court for the District of Columbia
August 4, 2017, Decided; August 4, 2017, Filed
Case No. 15-cv-793 (RMC/GMH)

Reporter
2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 159039 *
ALETA MACK, Plaintiff, v. GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY, Defendant.
Subsequent History: Adopted by, Objection overruled by, Summary judgment granted by Mack v. Georgetown Univ., 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 158739 (D.D.C., Sept. 27, 2017)
Counsel:  [*1] ALETA MACK, Plaintiff, Pro se, Arlington, VA.
For GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY, Defendant: William David Nussbaum, LEAD ATTORNEY, Aaron John Kornblith, SAUL EWING LLP, Washington, DC.
Judges: G. MICHAEL HARVEY, UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE.
Opinion by: G. MICHAEL HARVEY
Opinion



REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION
Pro se Plaintiff Aleta Mack ("Plaintiff") brings this action against her former employer, Georgetown University ("Defendant" or "Georgetown"), alleging discrimination and retaliation in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), codified at 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq. This matter was referred to the undersigned for a report and recommendation on Defendant's mo-tion for summary judgment, which is now ripe for adjudication. Upon consideration of the motion and the entire record,1 the undersigned recommends that the Court grant Defendant's motion.

INTRODUCTION
Plaintiff's pro se Amended Complaint contains two claims, both of which involve a series of requests for reasonable accommodations for her diabetes and rhinitis that she made while em-ployed as an Executive Assistant at Georgetown in 2014 and 2015. Plaintiff first claims that: (1) Georgetown unlawfully denied her request to work off-site, which was prompted by her health care provider's [*2]  conclusion that exposure to mold and dust mites in her workspace likely triggered her rhinitis; and (2) Georgetown effectively denied her request to be reassigned to a vacant posi-tion, which she initially made to accommodate her rhinitis and later made to accommodate both her rhinitis and her diabetes, by offering her an inferior position after an unreasonable delay. Sec-ond, Plaintiff claims that Defendant retaliated against her for making these requests and engaging in other protected activity under the ADA by threatening her, suspending her, and terminating her.
Plaintiff's claims are without merit for a variety of reasons. Chief among them is her failure to provide sufficient testimonial or documentary evidence to establish a genuine dispute of mate-rial fact. Indeed, Plaintiff has failed to establish facts sufficient to allow a reasonable jury to con-clude that she would have been capable of performing the essential functions of her job even if she had been granted a reasonable accommodation. Likewise, Plaintiff has failed to provide facts sufficient to establish that there was a vacant position for which she was qualified at Georgetown superior to the position that she was ultimately [*3]  offered for reassignment. Finally, as to her retali-ation claim, the allegedly adverse actions that Plaintiff has identified are either too immaterial or insufficiently tied to her engagement in protected activity to support an ADA retaliation claim.
Accordingly, the undersigned concludes that Defendant should be granted summary judg-ment on all of Plaintiff's claims.

BACKGROUND
Before providing a recitation of the undisputed facts, the undersigned must, for clarity's sake, analyze the deficiencies in Plaintiff's pro se response to Defendant's statement of undis-puted facts.

A. Plaintiff's Response to Defendant's Statement of Material Facts
In support of its motion for summary judgment, Defendant submitted a statement of mate-rial facts which it claims supports the entry of summary judgment against Plaintiff. See Def. SOF. Plaintiff, in turn, submitted her own statement of facts in response. See Pl. SOF. The facts set forth in Part B of this section represent those facts presented by Defendant that Plaintiff does not dispute; any dispute raised by Plaintiff is addressed in the analysis as it arises. See L. Civ. R. 7(h) ("In determining a motion for summary judgment, the Court may assume that facts identified [*4]  by the moving party in its statement of material facts are admitted, unless such a fact is controverted in the statement of genuine issues filed in opposition to the motion.").
As a general matter, while Plaintiff attempts to dispute many of the facts proffered by De-fendant, she fails to meet the standards for doing so under Rule 56 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. Rule 56 requires a party disputing an asserted fact to support that dispute with citation to "particular parts of materials in the record[.]" Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(1)(A). The Rule further provides that a court need not consider materials not cited by a party in determining whether a genuine dispute of fact exists. Id. at 56(c)(3). Finally, the Rule warns that failing to properly address a fact permits a court to find that the fact is undisputed and, thus, conceded for purposes of summary judgment. Id. at 56(e); see also LCvR 7(h)(1) ("An opposition to . . . a motion [for summary judgment] shall be accompanied by a separate concise statement of genuine issues set-ting forth all material facts as to which it is contended there exists a genuine issue necessary to be litigated, which shall include references to the parts of the record relied on to support the state-ment.").
The D.C. Circuit has repeatedly warned litigants [*5]  against shirking their duties under Rule 56 and Local Rule 7(h). See, e.g., Jackson v. Finnegan, Henderson, Farabow, Garrett & Dunner, 101 F.3d 145, 151, 322 U.S. App. D.C. 35 (D.C. Cir. 1996). In Jackson, the plaintiff fell short of his duty "to crystallize for the district court the material facts and relevant portions of the record" by failing to cite to parts of the factual record to support his opposition to the defendant's motion for summary judgment, and instead "[b]lending factual assertions with argument regarding their legal significance." Id. at 148-51. Noting that a district court should not be forced to comb through the factual record to ferret out disputes of material fact, the D.C. Circuit found that the plaintiff's statement of disputed facts, which was "[r]eplete with factual allegations not material to [the plaintiff's] substantive claims," was wholly inadequate. Id. at 153; see also SEC v. Banner Fund Int'l, 211 F.3d 602, 616, 341 U.S. App. D.C. 175 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (district court was "fully justified in treating as admitted [plaintiff's] statement of material facts" where defendant failed to "point[] to specific parts of the record controverting" those facts); Robertson v. Am. Airlines, Inc., 239 F. Supp. 2d 5, 9 (D.D.C. 2002) (striking movant's statement of facts for "liberally mix[ing] facts with argument," which "does nothing to assist the court in isolating the material facts, distinguishing disputed from undisputed facts, and identifying the pertinent parts of the record").
Here, the majority [*6]  of Plaintiff's response to Defendant's statement of material facts does not meet the requirements of Rule 56 and Local Rule 7(h). In nearly every paragraph, Plaintiff fails to meaningfully respond to defendant's factual assertions. Of the 197 factual assertions for-warded by Defendant in its statement of facts, Plaintiff expressly concedes eight of them—state-ment nos. 1, 2, 9, 10, 16, 17, 21, and 22—and simply repeats a little over one hundred of them without offering any comment or additional information.2 She claims that an additional forty-three assertions are immaterial,3 and responds to twenty-four of them by offering additional, sometimes tangential information or legal argument without putting the underlying factual assertion in dis-pute.4 She claims to dispute the remaining fourteen factual assertions—statement nos. 11, 18, 20, 34, 35, 141, 146, 153, 154, 155, 159, 160, 162, 163—but does so without pointing to any specific parts of the record controverting Defendant's factual assertions. Id. at 12-13, 30-41. In the few instances where Plaintiff references the record, she either does not provide the Court with the rel-evant evidence or appears to mischaracterize it. See id. at 7, 9-10 (citing to portions of her depo-sition testimony [*7]  not provided to the Court). In short, Plaintiff's statement of facts contains the kind of factual assertions that the D.C. Circuit specifically cautioned against in Jackson, forcing this Court to sift through the record to determine which facts remain in dispute. What follows are the relevant facts that went undisputed or were inadequately disputed by Plaintiff.

B. Relevant Facts
Defendant hired Plaintiff to work as an Executive Assistant in Georgetown's Department of Public Safety ("DPS") on February 19, 2014. Def. SOF at ¶ 32; Def. Ex. 9 [Dkt. 57-9] at 2. The position is a Grade 9 administrative one—it required Plaintiff to provide clerical and sched-uling support to Jay Gruber ("Chief Gruber"), her supervisor and Georgetown's Chief of Police, as well as the Associate Director of DPS. Def. SOF at ¶¶ 32-34; Def. Ex. 10 [Dkt. 57-10] at 2-4. Specifically, the Executive Assistant is responsible for providing assistance with
advanced scheduling, meeting planning, event management, travel arrangements, working group participation, answering phones/screening calls, and assisting call-ers with resolution of problems, compil[ing] dashboard and other reports, as-sist[ing] with campus outreach [*8]  event planning and special projects such as audits and process analysis, purchasing and invoice processing, ProCard reconciliation, prepar[ing] expense reports, order[ing] office supplies, produc[ing], format[ting], and edit[ing] documents, presentations and event promotional materials, digital and paper filing, faxing, photocopying, reception services for the Chief, and other ad-ministrative and clerical responsibilities as needed.
Id. As compensation, she received a gross annualized salary of $50,000.08 and a standard em-ployee benefits package. Def. Ex. 9 [57-9] at 2.
On July 14, 2014, roughly four months after she began working for Georgetown and shortly after she attended an employee orientation, Plaintiff submitted a disability accommodation request form to Michael Smith ("Smith"), the Director of Affirmative Action Programs at Georgetown's Office of Institutional Diversity, Equity, and Affirmative Action ("IDEAA"). Def. SOF at ¶¶ 38-39; Def. Ex. 13 [Dkt. 57-13] at 3-4. On the form, Plaintiff explained that she has "a physical disability that substantially limits the major life activity of endocrine function due to blood glucose level"—that is, type 2 diabetes, which she was diagnosed with in 2008—and requested eleven accommodations, [*9]  including the provision of a discrete environment to monitor her blood sugar level, an area to store food and medication near her workspace, and scheduling flexibility for med-ical appointments. Am. Compl. at ¶ 13; Def. Ex. 14 [Dkt. 57-14] at 2-3. She also identified Dr. Rebecca Fitch as her primary care provider and authorized Dr. Fitch to release to Defendant all medical records concerning her disclosed disability and her capacity to perform job-related func-tions. Id. at 3. Three days later, Smith informed Plaintiff that Georgetown would largely provide her requested accommodations with some minor alterations. Def. SOF at ¶ 40; Def. Ex. 13 [Dkt. 57-13] at 5-6; Def. Ex. 15 [Dkt. 57-15] at 2-3. These proposed accommodations were agreed upon and put into effect on July 24, 2014, when Plaintiff and Georgetown representatives signed an accommodation agreement. Def. SOF at ¶ 41; Def. Ex. 16 [Dkt. 57-16] at 2-4. Five days later, Plaintiff alleges that she heard "derogatory remarks" about employees with disabilities during a Command Staff meeting. See Am. Compl. at ¶ 17.
On August 4, 2014, Plaintiff contacted her supervisor to inform him of a mildew odor and possible mold in the DPS building's ground-level [*10]  administrative suite, where she worked. Def. SOF at ¶ 43; Def. Ex. 17 [Dkt. 57-17] at 2-4. That same day, members of Georgetown's Depart-ment of Safety and Environmental Management ("SEM") toured the DPS building and observed a mold spot close to Plaintiff's workspace as well as a number of stained ceiling tiles. Def. SOF at ¶ 44; Def. Ex. 18 [Dkt. 57-18] at 3.5 Safety and Environmental Management noted that flooding accidents have led to mold growth in that building in the past, and concluded that some moisture intrusion was "inevitable" given the building's "'semi-basement' level" and humidity. Id. Nev-ertheless, according to a report from SEM, the flooding issue had been resolved, the stained tiles were replaced, and the mold growth was disinfected. Id.
Plaintiff also met with her supervisor, Chief Gruber, on August 4, 2014 to discuss his con-cerns with her job performance. Def. SOF at ¶ 44; Def. Ex. 19 [Dkt. 57-19] at 2. According to an email Chief Gruber sent to Plaintiff summarizing the meeting, he: reminded her of the protocol for requesting overtime; reminded her to take and promptly distribute meeting notes during weekly Command Staff meetings; reminded her to maintain Chief [*11]  Gruber's calendar, answer phones, and take notes; instructed her to provide administrative and coordinative support in the hiring process; assigned her a few new work projects; and reminded her to manage her time at work independently. Id. at 2-3. Two days later, Plaintiff contacted Smith again to request an opportunity to discuss an additional accommodation. Def. SOF at ¶ 47; Def. Ex. 20 [Dkt. 57-20] at 2. Smith responded that he could meet that day, but Plaintiff had already informed Joe Pappalardo, the Senior Business Manager at DPS, that she was feeling ill following a hyperglycemic episode and left work early. See id.; Def. Ex. 21 [Dkt. 57-21] at 2. That same day, Plaintiff saw an allergist, Dr. Sheryl Lucas, who noted that she was suffering from a headache and fatigue, possibly in response to the mold exposure at work. Def. SOF at ¶ 51; Def. Ex. 5 [Dkt.57-5] at 18. An allergy skin test taken that day was negative for mold but positive for dust mites. Def. Ex. 5 [Dkt. 57-5] at 18. An additional mold screening returned negative results and a CT scan of Plaintiff's sinuses revealed no signifi-cant sinus disease. Id. at 16-19; Def. SOF at ¶¶ 52-56.6
Plaintiff did not return to work the following day [*12]  and was not scheduled to work the day after that. Ex. 21 [Dkt. 57-21] at 2. She returned to work on August 11, 2014, and informed Chief Gruber that the mold by her workspace caused the medical incident from five days prior. Id. She requested to work remotely that day, but Chief Gruber denied that request because the essential duties of her job required her to be present in the office and instead permitted her to leave work early to see a doctor again. Def. Ex. 21 [Dkt. 57-21] at 2; see also Def. SOF at ¶ 60. That same day, Dr. Lucas wrote a letter "[t]o whom it may concern," stating that Plaintiff was "experiencing adverse reactions that correlate with mold exposure" and recommending that she be permitted to change "her work site to an area that has not had previous water damage." Def. Ex. 23 [Dkt. 57-23] at 2; Def. SOF at ¶ 61. The next day, Plaintiff submitted a second disability accommodation request form, explaining that she suffered from a disability, later identified as rhinitis,7 that impairs her "breathing/respiratory function and working due to headache and fatigue," and requesting only one accommodation: reassignment to a vacant position. Def. SOF at ¶¶ 62-64; Def. Ex. 24 [Dkt. [*13]  57-24] at 2-3.
After Plaintiff submitted her second disability accommodation request, Smith referred her to Mary Spring ("Spring"), an employee in Georgetown's Department of Human Resources. Def. SOF at ¶ 65; Def. Ex. 25 [Dkt. 57-25] at 2. Spring placed Plaintiff on paid leave on August 12, 2014, and arranged for her to begin working in a new room on the same ground-level floor of the DPS building. Def. SOF at ¶ 66; Def. Ex. 26 [Dkt. 58-1] at 2; Am. Compl. at ¶ 21. Plaintiff reached out to Smith two days later, asking him to place her request for reassignment to a vacant position in her accommodation plan. Def. SOF at ¶ 67; Def. Ex. 27 [Dkt. 58-2] at 2. Smith in-formed Plaintiff that since her request for reassignment stemmed from a different medical condi-tion than the one that formed the basis of her previous plan, she would need to engage with Georgetown and her physicians again to develop a new plan pursuant to the ADA. Id. Smith also attempted to clarify Plaintiff's request, asking whether she was dissatisfied with the change in her work location and explaining that the mold issue in her old office had been remedied. Id.
Smith then contacted Plaintiff's [*14]  physician, Dr. Lucas, and requested additional information on Plaintiff's disability. Def. SOF at ¶ 71; Def. Ex. 28 [Dkt. 58-3] at 2-3. Dr. Lucas responded on August 21, 2014, explaining that the symptoms of Plaintiff's impairment began on August 4, 2014 and substantially limited her ability to concentrate and breathe comfortably. Id. at 3-4. She recommended that Defendant allow Plaintiff to relocate to a workspace that has no water damage or obvious mold contamination, and only minimal dust mite exposure. Id. at 4. Around this time, Defendant retained the services of Air Cleaning Technologies, Inc., an environmental inspection consultant. Def. SOF at ¶ 74; Def. Ex. 29 [Dkt. 58-4] at 3. The company tested Plaintiff's original work location and the room to which she had been relocated and determined that there was no significant mold in either space. Def. SOF at ¶ 74; Def. Ex. 29 [Dkt. 58-4] at 3. On August 25, 2014, Smith contacted Plaintiff to inform her of these results and let her know that, while her physician's recommendation to relocate her was no longer necessary, she could continue to work out of her new location while Defendant arranged for her old work space to be tested for dust mites. Def. [*15]  Ex. 31 [Dkt. 58-6] at 2. Another company tested her work area for dust mites and determined that there was no significant risk of dust mite exposure either. Def. SOF at ¶¶ 77-78; Def. Ex. 30 [Dkt. 58-5] at 4. Despite these results, Plaintiff continued to report experiencing head-aches while working in her new office. Am. Compl. at ¶¶ 23-24.
Plaintiff met with Chief Gruber on August 26, 2014 to discuss concerns with her job per-formance for a second time. Def. SOF at ¶ 80; Def. Ex. 32 [Dkt. 58-7] at 2. Chief Gruber again informed Plaintiff of her job responsibilities, including her obligation to keep the "Uniform Room" in order and to promptly send him notes from Command Staff meetings. Id. at 2-3. Chief Gruber also provided Plaintiff with new assignments—a "scanning project" and an invitation drafting as-signment—but Plaintiff informed him multiple times that she was "too fatigued and lethargic" to complete her work and needed additional accommodations. Id.; see also Def. SOF at ¶ 82.8 After her meeting with Chief Gruber, Plaintiff requested a short break to eat a snack to raise her blood sugar, but failed to return to the Command Staff meeting scheduled later that day. Chief Gruber noted in his [*16]  record of the meeting that he informed Plaintiff that her failure to attend events without prior notice was unacceptable. Def. Ex. 32 [Dkt. 58-7] at 3.
At the same time, Plaintiff continued to request from Chief Gruber and Smith that she be permitted to work in a different building or remotely. Def. SOF at ¶ 86; Def. Ex. 34 [Dkt. 58-9] at 2-5; see also Am. Compl. at ¶¶ 24-26. Chief Gruber informed her that any accommodations had to come through an interactive process with IDEAA and that she was expected to report to work in her new office in the DPS building. Def. Ex. 34 [Dkt. 58-9] at 3-5. Additionally, Chief Gruber informed Smith that the essential functions of Plaintiff's job require her to be physically present for work and that he would have no work for her to do if she worked off-site. Def. SOF at ¶ 88; Def. Ex. 35 [Dkt. 58-10] at 3. Smith replied to Plaintiff's request by letting her know that, based on testing of her work site for mold and dust mites, he did not believe that she required an accommodation that allowed her to work outside the building. Def. Ex. 35 [Dkt. 58-10] at 3. In his correspondence with Plaintiff, Smith additionally acknowledged her request to be reassigned [*17]  to a vacant position, informing her that he would provide a response to that request "in a reasonable period of time." Id. When Plaintiff persisted in her request to work in an interim location, Smith told Plaintiff that he would be happy to re-engage her physician to clarify the specific condition that prevented her from working in her office. Id. at 2. Two days later, on August 28, 2014, Plaintiff spoke with an investigator at the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC") regarding the alleged disability-based discrimination and retaliation that she was expe-riencing at work. See Am. Compl. at ¶¶ 29-30. The eventual EEOC charge, which she filed on August 28, 2014, alleges that Defendant discriminated against her by ignoring or denying her re-quests for reasonable accommodations, and then harassed her in retaliation for asserting her rights as a person with a disability. Def. Ex. 41 [Dkt. 58-16] at 5.
That same day, Smith contacted Plaintiff again, this time in regards to the meeting she had with Chief Gruber two days prior. Def. SOF at ¶ 89; Def. Ex. 36 [Dkt. 58-11] at 2. Chief Gruber had informed Smith that Plaintiff claimed to be unable to complete the essential functions of [*18]  her job due to lethargy and fatigue. Id. Accordingly, Smith told Plaintiff that he would reach out Dr. Fitch and Dr. Lucas—the two physicians who previously provided reports for Plaintiff's accom-modation requests—to get more information on her medical conditions and whether additional accommodations would help. Id. He reiterated, however, his belief that her old workspace was mold-and dust-mite-free and informed her that her request for permission to work remotely would thus not be considered. Id. In his letter to Plaintiff's health care providers, Smith detailed the history of Plaintiff's accommodation requests, informed them that telework was not a possibility for Plaintiff because the essential functions of her job require that she work on-site, and requested information related to any additional reasonable accommodations that they believed would help Plaintiff perform the essential functions of her job. Def. SOF at ¶¶ 90-92; Def. Ex. 37 [Dkt. 58-12] at 2-3. Neither doctor responded to Smith's inquiry, but another doctor—Dr. Daniel Glor, a neurologist—sent an unsolicited response recommending that Plaintiff be transferred to a different office or building. See Pl. Ex. [Dkt. 81-4] at 7-8. Smith then reached [*19]  out again to Drs. Lucas, Fitch, and Glor on September 2, 2014, providing them with the test results showing no risk of mold or dust mite exposure in Plaintiff's workspace and asking if they could better explain their recom-mendation or whether any additional accommodations would help her perform the essential func-tions of her job. Def. Ex. 38 [Dkt. 58-13] at 2-3; Def. Ex. 39 [Dkt. 58-14] at 5-8.
Unbeknownst to Defendant, Plaintiff had instructed her doctors not to respond to additional requests for medical information from Georgetown. Def. SOF at ¶ 95; Def. Ex. 5 [Dkt. 57-5] at 5, 11, 12, 14. An IDEAA representative contacted Plaintiff on September 22, 2014 to let her know that Georgetown had not yet received a response to its request for clarification from Drs. Fitch or Lucas, and contacted them again. Def. SOF at ¶ 99; Def. Ex. 40 [Dkt. 58-15] at 2. Both doctors reached out to Plaintiff on the same day to make sure that Georgetown knew that she had revoked her authorization for them to share her medical information, but it is not clear what steps, if any, Plaintiff took to make this known. Def SOF at ¶¶ 99-104; Def. Ex. 5 [Dkt. 57-5] at 7-8.
During this time, Plaintiff continued to [*20]  struggle professionally at work. See Am. Compl. at ¶ 32. On September 5, 2014, Chief Gruber provided Plaintiff with a written warning that her job performance was unsatisfactory. Def. SOF at ¶ 109; Def. Ex. 45 [Dkt. 58-20] at 2. The warning explained that Plaintiff had repeatedly failed to provide him with notes from weekly management meetings and had failed to begin working on a "scanning project" as instructed. Id. After receiving this report and meeting with Chief Gruber, Plaintiff sent an email alleging that she was verbally abused by Chief Gruber to IDEAA's Vice-President, which the Vice-President forwarded to Human Resources. Def. SOF at ¶ 110; Def. Ex. 46 [Dkt. 58-21] at 2-3. More specifically, she claimed in the email that she was "experiencing fast heartbeats" on the afternoon of September 5, 2014 after Chief Gruber asked her to meet with him, and that Chief Gruber denied her request to leave early to go to the Georgetown's student health center. Id. According to Plaintiff's email, Chief Gruber ordered her to meet with him in a "boisterous" voice and appeared threatening, but also asked her if he should call Georgetown Emergency Response Medical Service pursuant to her ADA [*21]  accommodations plan. Id. at 3. Despite Chief Gruber's alleged command and after he "loudly state[d] that [she] was disobeying his direct orders," Plaintiff left work and went to Georgetown's student health center, where a nurse informed her that her blood pressure was "extremely high." Id. She alleges that she received urgent care after speaking with the nurse, and that Chief Gruber's behavior that afternoon, and on several other occasions, frightened her to the point of impacting her health. Id. at 4.
The Human Resources Department then initiated an investigation into Plaintiff's allegations. During an interview with a Human Resources specialist, Plaintiff reported another incident that occurred on September 9, 2014, in which Chief Gruber allegedly stood in a doorway to her office unannounced and stared at her. See Am. Compl. at ¶ 33; Def. Ex. 48 [Dkt. 58-23] at 4. Plaintiff reported that her heart began to race when she noticed him and that Chief Gruber appeared defensive. Id. She then allegedly ran out of her office and asked someone to call IDEAA while she attempted to leave. Id. Plaintiff alleges that Chief Gruber refused to permit her to leave and blocked her from collecting her belongings. Id. Plaintiff [*22]  reported that she felt threatened by Chief Gruber's behavior and that he only relented after other officers walked by. Id. Her medical records indicate that she reported a work incident with her boss to Dr. Fitch a few days later, and that Dr. Fitch prescribed her Xanax as a result. See Def. Ex. 5 [Dkt. 57-5] at 9.
At the end of the investigation, which included interviews with multiple witnesses, the Human Resources Department concluded that Chief Gruber did not act in a threatening manner on either September 5, 2014 or September 9, 2014. Instead, based on a majority of the interviews and a review of security footage, Human Resources determined that Chief Gruber was calm—not loud or threatening—during both incidents, and that Plaintiff's accusations were "unfounded." Def. Ex. 48 [Dkt. 58-23] at 3-12. Additionally, according to the report, Chief Gruber repeatedly asked Plaintiff whether she needed accommodation or wanted him to contact Georgetown Emergency Response Medical Service after she became agitated on both dates. Id. To be sure, two DPS employees told Human Resources that Chief Gruber sounded abrasive and intended to intimidate Plaintiff during these two incidents, but Human [*23]  Resources found that these individuals were not entirely present for them and that their descriptions of the events contradicted the majority of the witnesses' descriptions and video surveillance footage. See id.9
On October 14, 2014, Chief Gruber suspended Plaintiff for three days "based on [her] continued unacceptable work performance and misconduct regarding tardiness and failure to follow call-in procedures, declining calendar appointments and subsequent untruthfulness, and refusals to meet with [her] supervisor." Def. SOF at ¶ 106; Def. Ex. 44 [Dkt. 58-19] at 2. A memorandum prepared by Chief Gruber informing Plaintiff of her suspension outlined a string of incidents—including multiple instances where Plaintiff left work without permission, showed up late without explanation, failed to complete assignments that she had been given, and interacted inappropriately with her co-workers—that led to her suspension, and notified her that failure to improve her work performance may result in termination. Id. at 2-4. Plaintiff, on the other hand, believes that she was suspended for seeking medical attention during the incidents in September described above. See Am. Compl. at ¶¶ 32-33, 36. The [*24]  next day, Plaintiff reached out to Human Resources, claiming that her condition had worsened and that she was unable to communicate with Chief Gruber without experiencing a deep state of fear. Def. SOF at ¶ 115; Def. Ex. 49 [Dkt. 58-24] at 2.
A few days later, on October 17, 2014, Plaintiff asked Smith to be reassigned to a vacant position as a reasonable accommodation under her July 2014 ADA plan. Def. SOF at ¶ 116; Def. Ex. 50 [Dkt. 58-25] at 5. She included in her correspondence a letter from her physician describing her type 2 diabetes diagnosis and its accompanying symptoms. Id. at 4. Smith informed her that she had not provided him with any new information about her condition that would warrant reassignment to a vacant position and denied her request. Id. Plaintiff responded the next day, explaining that the symptoms associated with her diabetes had worsened and were preventing her from performing the essential functions of her jobs, including completing tasks in a timely manner. Id. at 3. Smith let Plaintiff know that her admitted inability to perform the essential functions of her job may disqualify her from protection under the ADA. Id. In response, Plaintiff reiterated her request that she [*25]  be reassigned to a vacant position and noted that she is qualified for a number of positions at Georgetown. Id. Apparently confused by Plaintiff's statements, Smith let her know that he would reach out to Dr. Fitch to determine the exact limitations associated with Plaintiff's condition and, in the meantime, would place her on an unpaid leave of absence as an accommodation. Id. at 2; Def. SOF at ¶ 125.
On October 27, 2014, Dr. Fitch responded to Smith's request, explaining that Plaintiff had complained of palpitations, shakiness, and increased thirst and hunger, all of which are symptoms associated with extreme changes in blood sugar. Def. SOF at ¶ 128; Def. Ex. 54 at [Dkt. 59-4] at 2. Given the demands of Plaintiff's job and the fact that her symptoms persist despite the provided accommodations, Dr. Fitch opined that Plaintiff would benefit from reassignment to a vacant position. Id. On November 9, 2014, the day before Plaintiff was scheduled to return to work, Smith informed her that Dr. Fitch's report did not provide any new information that warranted reassignment to an open position because her symptoms could be managed under her current ADA plan. Def. SOF at ¶ 129; Def. Ex. 55 [Dkt. 59-5] [*26]  at 2-3. Nevertheless, Smith volunteered to meet with Plaintiff to review her ADA plan and to ensure that her accommodations were provided. Id. at 2. In response, Plaintiff reiterated that she could no longer perform the essential functions of her job and pleaded with Smith to reassign her to another position for which she was qualified. Id. Smith agreed to meet with her, but instructed her to report to her current position on November 10, 2014. Id.
Upon returning to work, Plaintiff began complaining to Chief Gruber about the level of dust at her workstation in the office that she had been reassigned to in August 2014. Def. SOF at ¶ 132; Def. Ex. 56 [Dkt. 59-6] at 3-4. She indicated that her eyes were burning and that she was coughing uncontrollably, and requested that she be relocated to a new office. Id. A few hours later, Plaintiff informed her supervisors that she would need to leave work to meet with her physician due to persistent headaches. Id. at 3. That same day, Dr. Lucas sent Defendant a medical report explaining that Plaintiff developed a severe headache within minutes of returning to work and that the headache only improved after she left. Def. Ex. 57 [Dkt. 59-7] at 2. Accordingly, Dr. [*27]  Lucas recommended that Plaintiff be permitted to work from a different location. Id. In response, Smith extended Plaintiff's unpaid leave until the end of the week to reassess her accommodation request. See Def. Ex. 58 [Dkt. 59-8] at 2. While Georgetown maintained that the mold and dust mite problems had been resolved, Smith arranged for an industrial-grade air purifier to be placed in Plaintiff's office and instructed her to report to work on November 17, 2014. Def. SOF at ¶¶ 137-38; Def. Ex. 59 [Dkt. 59-9] at 2. When she returned to work, Plaintiff immediately began complaining of similar symptoms and informed the Human Resources Department that she would be unable to report to work the following day. Def. SOF at ¶ 139; Def. Ex. 60 [Dkt. 59-10] at 2.
On November 19, 2014, Smith reached out to Plaintiff again, reminding her of the steps that Georgetown had taken to remove any irritants from her workspace and explaining that she had provided no documentation beyond reports of headaches and respiratory symptoms explaining the nature of the medical condition that required accommodation. Def. SOF at ¶¶ 140-41; Def. Ex. 61 [Dkt. 59-11] at 2. Following up with her physicians, according to [*28]  Smith, provided little clarification. Id. Dr. Lucas, for example, did not identify any underlying medical condition or provide information sufficient for Georgetown to determine how best to accommodate Plaintiff. Id. According to Smith, Dr. Fitch had been similarly unhelpful in response to Georgetown's requests for information related to Plaintiff's diabetes. Id. In order to develop an accommodation plan that would work for Plaintiff, Smith thus requested that she report for a medical examination with a professional of Georgetown's choice to determine the nature of the underlying medical condition impacting her ability to perform the essential functions of her job, at no cost to her. Id. at 3. In response, Plaintiff forwarded Smith a number of letters from her physicians regarding her conditions, including a detailed letter from Dr. Lucas that diagnosed Plaintiff with chronic rhinitis with headaches, shortness of breath, allergic rhinitis, and allergic conjunctivitis. Def. SOF at ¶ 144; Def. Ex. 62 [Dkt. 59-12] at 2. The letter further explains that Plaintiff had repeatedly reported feeling ill at work because "she is most likely inhaling mold, bacteria and other microbial agents" in her workspace. [*29]  Id. 2-4. Accordingly, Dr. Lucas recommended that Plaintiff avoid the first-floor, semi-basement level of the DPS building and be reassigned to another position in another building that has not experienced water damage. Id. at 4.
In light of Dr. Lucas' letter, Smith informed Plaintiff that an independent medical evaluation would no longer be necessary and that Georgetown had determined that she would be unable to perform the essential functions of her current position with or without accommodations. See Def. Ex. 63 [Dkt. 59-13] at 4. As a last resort, Smith indicated that Georgetown would search for an appropriate, vacant position for her. Def. SOF at ¶ 145; Def. Ex. 63 [Dkt. 59-13] at 4. In the meantime, Smith informed Plaintiff that she would need to serve her outstanding three-day unpaid suspension and could return to work in an unspecified temporary position beginning on December 1, 2014. Id. Mack responded that the suspension was discriminatory and informed Smith that she was interested in a Human Resources Analyst position, which she found by searching Georgetown's online job listings. Id. at 3. On November 26, 2014, Smith informed Plaintiff that Human Resources would be in charge of searching for a [*30]  vacant, permanent position for her, and that she should report to a new building on December 1, 2014, where she would work on a temporary assignment for the Georgetown Police Department. Id. at 2.
Dissatisfied with that offer, Plaintiff informed Smith by email on November 27, 2014 that she would rather be placed on unpaid leave. Def. SOF at ¶ 148; Def. Ex. 64 [Dkt. 59-14] at 2. Smith granted Plaintiff's request on November 30, 2014 and noted that the search for vacant positions would "take some time to complete." Id. After evaluating a number of positions, see Def. SOF at ¶ 151, a Human Resources specialist told Plaintiff on January 29, 2015 that they had identified an available position as a Recruiting Coordinator in the Cawley Career Education Center for which she was qualified. Def. SOF at ¶ 152; Def. Ex. 72 [Dkt. 59-22] at 2. This Grade 9 position paid an annual salary of $45,000 and included a six-month probationary period. Id. Human Resources instructed Plaintiff to respond to the offer by February 2, 2015. Id.
Plaintiff did not respond by that date, however, and Spring and Smith arranged to meet with her on February 13, 2015. Def. SOF at ¶ 156; Def. Ex. 73 [Dkt. 59-23] at 2. At the meeting, [*31]  Spring and Smith presented her with the Recruiting Coordinator position and discussed three positions that Plaintiff had expressed an interest in: a Grade 8 position as a Publishing Assistant that paid $38,000 per year; a Grade 9 position as a Business Manager that paid between $48,000 and $55,000 per year; and a position as a Human Resources Analyst that had been filled. Def. SOF at ¶ 157; Def. Ex. 74 [Dkt. 59-24] at 2. According to Spring, Plaintiff's resume did not establish the requisite three to five years of management experience to qualify her for the Business Manager, and, thus, Spring instructed her to either accept the Recruiting Coordinator position by February 20, 2015, or "designate one of the other two vacancies . . . (Business Manager of Publishing Assistant) for further discussion." Id. at 2-3; Def. SOF at ¶¶ 157-60. In order to discuss the Business Manager position, however, Spring told Plaintiff that she must submit an updated resume highlighting her managerial experience. Def. Ex. 74 [Dkt. 59-24] at 2. Plaintiff indicated that she would, but the record reflects that she instead emailed Spring on February 20, 2015, stating that she has "budget management skills from Lawrence [*32]  Technological University and [her] undergraduate studies at University of Detroit Mercy." Id. at 2; see also Def. Ex. 75 [Dkt. 59-25] at 2.
On February 23, 2015, Spring informed Plaintiff that the information she provided did not satisfy the Business Manager position's requirements. Def. SOF at ¶ 159-61. Spring extended Plaintiff's time to accept the Recruiting Coordinator position to March 5, 2015 and informed her that Georgetown would consider a failure to accept the offer by that date to be a resignation. Id. Plaintiff did not respond to the offer and, on March 6, 2015, Georgetown terminated her employment as an Executive Assistant. Def. SOF at ¶ 163; Def. Ex. 77 [Dkt. 60-2] at 2.10

B. Procedural Background
Plaintiff filed her first EEOC charge of discrimination against Georgetown on August 28, 2014. See Am. Compl. at p. 35. In that charge, she alleges that she faced disability discrimination when her requests for accommodations were denied, and then was subjected to retaliation after hearing "derogatory remarks" about employees with disabilities. Id. She amended this charge on February 12, 2015, claiming that she was subjected to additional harassment in the form of improper [*33]  infraction warnings from her supervisor and an eventual three-day suspension for, in her view, "becoming ill and seeking medical attention." Id. at p. 37-39. She also alleges in this charge that Georgetown refused to accommodate her rhinitis, forcing her to work in an environment that caused her "physical and mental injuries." Id. Finally, she claims that she was denied a reasonable accommodation when she was not reassigned to a Human Resources Analyst position for which she believed she was qualified. Id. On March 2, 2015, the EEOC dismissed Plaintiff's charge after finding no evidence of an ADA violation. Id. at p. 29.
Plaintiff filed a second EEOC charge against Georgetown on March 11, 2015, again alleging disability discrimination and retaliation, in response to her March 6, 2015 termination. Id. at p. 41. The EEOC dismissed Plaintiff's charge and notified her of her right to sue in federal court. Id. at p. 32. Plaintiff filed her initial Complaint in this Court on May 29, 2015. See Compl. [Dkt. 1]. Following discovery, Defendant now moves for summary judgment. See Def. Mot.

LEGAL STANDARD
Summary judgment is appropriate when the moving party demonstrates that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and that the moving [*34]  party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). "A fact is material if it 'might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law,' and a dispute about a material fact is genuine 'if the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the non[-]moving party.'" Steele v. Schafer, 535 F.3d 689, 692, 383 U.S. App. D.C. 74 (D.C. Cir. 2008) (quoting Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986)). In order to establish that a fact is or cannot be genuinely disputed, a party must (a) cite to specific parts of the record—including deposition testimony, documentary evidence, affidavits or declarations, or other competent evidence—in support of its position, or (b) demonstrate that the materials relied upon by the opposing party do not actually establish the absence or presence of a genuine dispute. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(1). Conclusory assertions offered without any factual basis in the record cannot create a genuine dispute sufficient to survive summary judgment. See Ass'n of Flight Attendants-CWA, AFL-CIO v. Dep't of Transp., 564 F.3d 462, 465-66, 385 U.S. App. D.C. 347 (D.C. Cir. 2009). Moreover, where "a party fails to properly support an assertion of fact or fails to properly address another party's assertion of fact," the court may "consider the fact undisputed for purposes of the motion." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e).
"Evaluating whether evidence offered at summary judgment is sufficient to send a case to the jury is as much art as science." Estate of Parsons v. Palestinian Auth., 651 F.3d 118, 123, 397 U.S. App. D.C. 236 (D.C. Cir. 2011). The [*35]  process is guided by a number of related principles, including, initially, that the moving party has the burden of demonstrating the absence of a genuine dispute as to any material fact. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). Once the moving party has met this burden, the non-moving party must designate "specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." Id. at 324. While the court must view the evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving party and draw all reasonable inferences in the party's favor, Grosdidier v. Broad. Bd. of Gov., 709 F.3d 19, 23-24, 404 U.S. App. D.C. 189 (D.C. Cir. 2013), the non-moving party must show more than "[t]he mere existence of a scintilla of evidence in support of" his or her position; instead, "there must be evidence on which the jury could reasonably find" for the non-moving party. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 252. If the evidence, for example, "is merely colorable, or is not significantly probative, summary judgment may be granted." Id. at 249-50. Moreover, the non-moving party "may not rest upon mere allegation or denials of his pleadings but must present affirmative evidence showing a genuine issue for trial." Laningham v. U.S. Navy, 813 F.2d 1236, 1241, 259 U.S. App. D.C. 115 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Indeed, a moving party may succeed on summary judgment simply by pointing to the absence of evidence proffered by the non-moving party. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249 ("If the [non-movant's] [*36]  evidence is merely colorable, or is not significantly probative, summary judgment may be granted." (internal citations omitted)). Likewise, "a complete failure of proof concerning an essential element of the nonmoving party's case necessarily renders all other facts immaterial," and, in that scenario, the moving party is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law. Celotex Corp., 477 U.S. at 323.
Further, it is well-established that "[c]redibility determinations, the weighing of the evidence, and the drawing of legitimate inferences from the facts are jury functions, not those of a judge at summary judgment." Barnett v. PA Consulting Grp., Inc., 715 F.3d 354, 358, 404 U.S. App. D.C. 439 (D.C. Cir. 2013) (citation omitted). Indeed, a court's role in deciding a summary judgment motion is not to "determine the truth of the matter, but instead [to] decide only whether there is a genuine dispute for trial." Id. In employment discrimination or retaliation cases, district courts approach summary judgment motions with "special caution" due to the "potential difficulty for a plaintiff . . . to uncover clear proof of discrimination or retaliatory intent." Nurriddin v. Bolden, 40 F. Supp. 3d 104, 115 (D.D.C. 2014). Nonetheless, a plaintiff is obligated to support her allegations by competent evidence. Id. Accordingly, a plaintiff may not avoid summary judgment through "conclusory allegations [*37]  and speculation." Id. (citing Greene v. Dalton, 164 F.3d 671, 675, 334 U.S. App. D.C. 92 (D.C. Cir. 1999)).

ANALYSIS
The parties' dispute requires the Court to make a threshold determination of the claims that Plaintiff has properly presented for adjudication. Though Plaintiff's pro se Amended Complaint does not contain a typical recitation of specific claims, it does clearly allege that she was "discriminated against on the basis of [her] disability and retaliated against for engaging in protected activity, in violation of the [ADA]." Am. Compl. at ¶ 46. To confirm the scope of her allegations, Defendant asked Plaintiff during her deposition in this matter if her claims are that Georgetown denied her reasonable accommodations and retaliated against her. See Def. Ex. 1 [Dkt. 57-1] at 350:1-350:17. She confirmed that to be the case then, see id., and Defendant fairly relied on that representation. In her opposition to Defendant's motion for summary judgment, however, Plaintiff asserts for the first time that she is also raising a hostile work environment claim. See Pl. Opp. at 1. Defendant objects to the late presentation of this claim. See Reply at 5. Because Plaintiff's Amended Complaint does not assert a hostile work environment claim and because Defendant [*38]  was first notified that Plaintiff seeks to raise a hostile work environment claim in her response to Defendant's pending dispositive motion, the undersigned recommends denying Plaintiff's request, to the extent she is making one, to constructively amend her Amended Complaint to assert a hostile work environment claim. See Franks v. Salazar, 816 F. Supp. 2d 49, 58 n.5 (D.D.C. 2011) ("[P]laintiffs cannot use their summary judgment briefing to press claims not raised in their amended complaint."); Turner v. Shinseki, 824 F. Supp. 2d 99, 122-23 (D.D.C. 2011). Indeed, Defendant's failure to brief Plaintiff's hostile work environment theory in the instant motion makes clear that this claim has not been "tried by the express or implied consent of the parties," and, thus, should not be considered by the Court. Id. at 122 n.23 (quoting Fed. R. Civ. P. 15(b)).
Accordingly, the undersigned finds that Plaintiff's claims fall into two categories: (1) discrimination in violation of Title I of the ADA based on Georgetown's alleged failure to accommodate her requests to work off-site and to be reassigned to a new position; and (2) retaliation for engaging in protected activity, in violation of Title IV of the ADA. Defendant first argues that it is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's failure-to-accommodate claim because there is no genuine dispute that: (1) [*39]  Plaintiff was unable to perform her job due to her type 2 diabetes and her undisclosed anxiety disorder; (2) Georgetown engaged in the ADA-required interactive process in good faith to provide Plaintiff with reasonable accommodations for her disabilities; and (3) Plaintiff did not engage with Georgetown in good faith by withholding information. See Def. Mot. at 26-41. Plaintiff counters by contending broadly—and, at times, opaquely—that she was a qualified individual capable of performing the essential functions of her job with reasonable accommodations, that Georgetown failed to make these reasonable accommodations, and that Georgetown failed to engage with her in good faith. See generally Pl. Opp.; see also Resp. at 1-14. With respect to Plaintiff's retaliation claim, Defendant argues that it is entitled to summary judgment because: (1) Plaintiff has failed to establish a causal link between any actual adverse employment action and her engagement in ADA-protected activity; and (2) some of the incidents identified by Plaintiff are too immaterial to qualify as adverse employment actions. Def. Mot. at 41-45. Plaintiff again argues in broad terms the opposite. See Pl. Opp. at 4; see [*40]  also Resp. at 5-7.
The undersigned addresses each claim in turn.

A. Plaintiff's Failure-to-Accommodate Claim
The ADA prohibits covered employers from "discriminat[ing] against a qualified individual on the basis of disability in regard to . . . the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, . . . and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). The ADA further provides that discrimination includes the failure to make "reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who is an applicant or employee, unless . . . the accommodation would impose an undue hardship" on the employer. Id. at § 12112(b)(5)(A). Such reasonable accommodations may include "making existing facilities . . . readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities," as well as "job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, reassignment to a vacant position, . . . and other similar accommodations[.]" Id. at § 12111(9).
To withstand a summary judgment motion on a failure-to-accommodate claim, an employee must produce sufficient evidence to allow a reasonable jury to conclude that: (1) she had a disability within the meaning of the statute; (2) her [*41]  employer had notice of her disability and any accompanying limitations; (3) she could perform the essential functions of her job with reasonable accommodations; and (4) her employer refused to make those accommodations. Doak v. Johnson, 798 F.3d 1096, 1105, 418 U.S. App. D.C. 375 (D.C. Cir. 2015); Adams v. Dist. of Columbia, 50 F. Supp. 3d 47, 53 (D.D.C. 2014).11 Here, there appears to be no dispute that Plaintiff had disabilities—type 2 diabetes and rhinitis—and that Georgetown was aware of them. See Def. Mot. at 27. Instead, the central questions raised by Defendant are whether she was capable of performing the essential functions of her job even with reasonable accommodations and whether Georgetown denied her those accommodations. The undersigned will consider these questions in the context of each of her requested accommodations—that is, with respect to her request to work off-site and her request to be reassigned to a vacant position.

1. Plaintiff's Request to Work Off-Site
The first question presented by Defendant's motion—whether Plaintiff was capable of performing the essential functions of her job with an accommodation—is not a straightforward inquiry. To receive protection as a "qualified individual" under the ADA, an employee must be able to perform the essential functions of her job with or without [*42]  accommodations. 42 U.S.C. §§ 12111(8) and 12112(a). Put differently, an employer need not provide an accommodation to an employee if she "could not perform the essential functions of [her] job even with such an accommodation," or "if it would impose an 'undue hardship' on the employer" such that the accommodation would be unreasonable. Adams, 50 F. Supp. 3d at 53-54. "'Essential functions' are the fundamental duties of a position,"12 and courts typically "defer to the employer's judgment as to what functions of a job are essential." Saunders v. Gallagher & Huguely Assocs., Inc., 741 F. Supp. 2d 245, 248 (D.D.C. 2010) (internal citations omitted); see also 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). Further, to be a qualified individual under the ADA, "a plaintiff alleging a failure to accommodate [claim] 'must establish her ability to perform' the essential functions of her job 'at the time the employer denied her request for accommodation.'" Reagan-Diaz v. Sessions, 246 F. Supp. 3d 325, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 47234, 2017 WL 1194162, at *9 (D.D.C. March 30, 2017) (quoting Minter v. Dist. of Columbia, 809 F.3d 66, 70, 420 U.S. App. D.C. 411 (D.C. Cir. 2015)).
Defendant argues that Plaintiff was not a qualified individual under the ADA beginning in October 2014 because she repeatedly admitted that she was unable to perform the essential functions of her job as an Executive Assistant to Chief Gruber, ostensibly due to an exacerbation of the symptoms of her diabetes. See Def. Ex. 32 [Dkt. 58-7] at 3; Def. Ex. 50 [Dkt. 58-25] at 2 ("As I mentioned previously, I can no longer [*43]  perform my essential functions in my current position as the Executive Assistant to the Chief of Police."); id. at 3 ("I can no longer perform the essential functions of my current position [because of an increased manifestation of diabetes-related symptoms.]"); Def. Ex. 55 [Dkt. 59-5] at 2 ("Since I can no longer perform the essential functions in my current position as Executive Assistant to the Chief of Police, with or without accommodation, because of my disability . . . ."). Plaintiff acknowledges these admissions, see Pl. SOF at 26-27, but nevertheless contends, without citation to supporting evidence, that she was capable of performing the essential functions of her job and other available jobs at Georgetown with reasonable accommodations. See id. at ¶ 110; see also Resp. at 19. Specifically, Plaintiff argues that she and her physicians determined that she would have been able to perform her job had she been permitted to work off-site—a request that Georgetown denied in late August 2014. Id.; see also Def. Ex. 34 [Dkt. 58-9] at 3.13 But, as noted, a plaintiff's capacity to perform the essential functions of her job is examined at the time of the denial of accommodations. See Reagan-Diaz v. Sessions,     F. Supp. 3d    , 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 47234, 2017 WL 1194162, at *9. Accordingly, [*44]  Defendant's contention that it can wash its hands of any responsibility for allegedly denying Plaintiff's request for reasonable accommodation in violation of the ADA in August 2014 by pointing to her October 2014 statements regarding her inability to perform the essential functions of her job—particularly when Plaintiff's health care provider opined that she could perform her job with certain accommodations—is unavailing. See Minter, 809 F.3d at 70 ("The plaintiff must establish her ability to perform those functions (with or without reasonable accommodation) at the time the employer denied her request for accommodation."); see also id. (finding no genuine dispute regarding Plaintiff's inability to perform her job at the time of the reasonable-accommodation denial where her physician explained that she was "totally disabled" before that denial); Basden v. Prof'l Transp., Inc., 714 F. 3d 1034, 1037 (7th Cir. 2013) ("[The plaintiff's] ability to work, or to otherwise perform the essential functions of her job, is examined as of the time of the adverse employment decision at issue.").
Setting aside Plaintiff's October 2014 admissions, an employee can nevertheless fail to qualify for protection under the ADA in her current position when the [*45]  undisputed evidence establishes that no reasonable accommodation could permit the employee to perform the essential functions of her position during the pertinent time period. See Buie v. Berrien, 85 F. Supp. 3d 161, 176-77 (D.D.C. 2015). Here, Defendant provided an array of evidence to demonstrate that Plaintiff was required to be on-site to perform the essential functions of her job in August 2014, and that her request to work off-site was thus unreasonable. Indeed, the description for Plaintiff's position—Executive Assistant to the Chief of Police—explains that the position exists for the incumbent to schedule and plan meetings and events, participate in working groups, answer and screen phone calls, give presentations, file papers, fax and photocopy documents, order office supplies, and provide reception services and various other administrative and clerical responsibilities. See Def. Ex. 10 [Dkt. 57-10] at 2. The Executive Assistant is also required to report directly to the Chief of Police and other members of the Command Staff, and personally assist them as necessary. Id. at 2-4. Her supervisor, Chief Gruber, emphasized as much during her employment, explaining in an email to Georgetown that she needed to be on-site to perform the essential [*46]  functions of her job and would not be able to work from an off-site location. Def. Ex. 35 [Dkt. 58-10] at 3. Chief Gruber's summary of a meeting in which he shared concerns about Plaintiff's job performance with her similarly underscores the necessity of her presence at work, explaining that Plaintiff was expected to: keep the Uniform Room neat and check in on the room at least once a week; be present at Command Staff meetings to take and then disseminate notes; be present for all scheduled events; and keep Chief Gruber apprised of her whereabouts if she left her workstation for any significant period of time. Def. Ex. 32 [Dkt. 58-7] at 2-3. Likewise, in Chief Gruber's memorandum notifying Plaintiff of her three-day suspension for poor performance, he explained that she frequently arrived to the office late, repeatedly left her workstation without notice, declined to meet with or speak to him and other Command Staff at the office, and refused to attend and take written record of Command Staff meetings. See Def. Ex. 44 [Dkt. 58-19] at 2-3. As his Executive Assistant, he explained, "it is essential that [they] meet on a frequent and regular basis." Id. at 3. Plaintiff offers no evidence to rebut [*47]  the abundance of evidence establishing the need for her to be on-site and interacting with Chief Gruber for her job, nor makes any attempt to explain how she would be able to perform its essential functions from an off-site location.
Compounding this problem is Plaintiff's self-professed "deep fear" of Chief Gruber, triggered by "any form of contact" with him, that exacerbates her medical ailments. Def. Ex. 49 [Dkt. 58-24] at 2. While Plaintiff denies that an undisclosed anxiety disorder was the root of this or any other problem, there is no genuine dispute that Plaintiff's working relationship with Chief Gruber deteriorated during the course of her employment such that she was unable to appropriately meet and interact with him. See Resp. at 10; see also supra note 10. Providing clerical and administrative assistance to Chief Gruber and other Command Staff, however, is an undisputed essential function of her job. See Def. Ex. 10 [Dkt. 57-10] at 2-4. And, as demonstrated above, it is similarly undisputed that Plaintiff's presence in the office was often required for her to perform that function. Beyond the vague, conclusory, and unsupported assertions in her briefing that she could perform [*48]  her job if allowed to work off-site and that Georgetown permitted other employees to work remotely, Plaintiff has not come forward with any documentary or testimonial evidence disputing these facts. See Pl. SOF at 31-32. Accordingly, the evidence points in only one direction: that it was essential to her job that she be physically present on-site and capable of frequently interacting with her supervisor. The undersigned thus finds that no reasonable fact finder could determine that Plaintiff's requested accommodation—permission to work off-site—would enable her to perform the essential functions of her job that she was otherwise incapable of performing. See Doak, 798 F.3d at 1106-07 (affirming summary judgment where "overwhelming and undisputed evidence" established "that it was essential to [plaintiff's] job that she be present for interactive meetings during normal business hours and that the accommodations she requested would not have enabled her to perform that function"); Buie, 85 F. Supp. 3d at 176-77 (granting summary judgment where evidence established that a job required plaintiff's presence and interaction with the public, and plaintiff only offered "self-serving and speculative assertion[s]" that she could perform the job with accommodations); [*49]  Weigert v. Georgetown Univ., 120 F. Supp. 2d 1, 14 (D.D.C. 2000) ("Numerous courts have held that . . . stability and the ability to interact with co-workers and supervisors can constitute an essential function." (string citation omitted)).
Accordingly, the undersigned recommends granting Defendant's motion for summary judgment with respect to this aspect of Plaintiff's failure-to-accommodate claim.

2. Plaintiff's Request for Reassignment to a Vacant Position
The other portion of Plaintiff's failure-to-accommodate claim involves her requests to be reassigned to a vacant position. See Am. Compl. at ¶ 41. Plaintiff first made this request on August 12, 2014, after her headache, fatigue, and respiratory issues made it too difficult for her to work in her current position. See Def. Ex. 24 [Dkt. 57-24] at 3-4. Though she was advised that reassignment to a vacant position is an accommodation of "last resort," Def. Ex. 27 [Dkt. 58-2] at 2, she made this request again on October 17, 2014, this time alleging that she needed to be reassigned to a vacant position because of her diabetes, see Def. Ex. 50 [Dkt. 58-25] at 2-5. In her Amended Complaint and briefing in this matter, Plaintiff makes no effort to differentiate these requests based on the disability [*50]  that she anticipated they would accommodate, ostensibly claiming instead that Georgetown's responses to both of her requests for reassignment violated the ADA. See Am. Compl. at ¶¶ 37-41.
As a preliminary matter and contrary to Defendant's suggestion, the undersigned observes that Plaintiff's inability to perform the essential functions of her Executive Assistant job with or without accommodations did not rid Georgetown of its obligation to consider her request for reassignment to a vacant position for which she was qualified. See Def. Mot. at 28, 36-39. After all, the ADA defines a qualified individual as someone who can perform the essential function of a job she "holds or desires" and provides that a reasonable accommodation "may include . . . reassignment to a vacant position[.]" 42 U.S.C. §§ 12111(8) and (9) (emphasis added). As the D.C. Circuit has explained, to be reassigned to a vacant position, an employee must be able to perform the essential functions of the desired position, with or without reasonable accommodation. See Aka v. Wash. Hosp. Ctr., 156 F.3d 1284, 1301, 332 U.S. App. D.C. 256 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (citing Daugherty v. City of El Paso, 56 F.3d 695, 698-99 (5th Cir. 1995)). Likewise, "[t]he reassignment 'can only be to an existing, vacant job for which the plaintiff is qualified, and positions to which other employees have a legitimate contractual [*51]  or seniority right are not considered vacant.'" Harris v. Chao, 257 F. Supp. 3d 67, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 104124, 2017 WL 2880827, at *6 (D.D.C. July 6, 2017) (quoting Alston v. Wash. Metro. Area Transit Auth., 571 F. Supp. 2d 77, 84 (D.D.C. 2008)).
Additionally, the EEOC regulations "instruct employers to 'reassign the individual to an equivalent position, in terms of pay, status, etc., if the individual is qualified, and if the position is vacant within a reasonable amount of time.'" Id. (quoting 29 C.F.R. § Pt. 1630, App.). That said, an employer has no obligation to "reassign an employee to a job that would constitute a promotion." Id. Further, the plaintiff bears the burden of demonstrating that "there existed some vacant position to which he [or she] could have been reassigned." Id. (citing Aka, 156 F.3d at 1304 n.27); see also Alston, 571 F. Supp. 2d at 82 ("[P]laintiff bears both the burden of production and the burden of persuasion on the question whether a suitable vacancy existed at the time she sought transfer." (internal citations and quotation marks omitted)).
Here, it is undisputed that Defendant approved Plaintiff's request to be reassigned to a vacant position in January 2015, roughly five months after she first requested it as an accommodation for her rhinitis, by offering her a position as a Recruiting Coordinator. See Def. Ex. 72 [Dkt. 59-22] at 2. Plaintiff's claim that this offer nevertheless constituted a denial [*52]  of a reasonable accommodation is two-fold. First, she contends that the approximately two-month delay between Georgetown's approval of her request and its offer of an alternative position was unreasonable. See Am. Compl. at ¶ 38; see also Pl. SOF at 33. Second, according to Plaintiff, Georgetown's failure to put her in the Human Resources Analyst or Business Manager position that she wanted was unlawful. See Am. Compl. at ¶ 41. Plaintiff is wrong both counts.
While "there are certainly circumstances in which a long-delayed accommodation could be considered unreasonable and hence actionable under the ADA," this is not one of them. Mogenhan v. Napolitano, 613 F.3d 1162, 1168, 392 U.S. App. D.C. 195 (D.C. Cir. 2010) (internal citation and quotation marks omitted). Relevant "factors to aid in determining whether a delay was reasonable or unreasonable . . . includ[e] the length of the delay, the reasons for the delay, whether the employee was offered any alternative accommodations while evaluating a particular request, and whether the employer has acted in good faith." Elzeneiny v. Dist. of Columbia, 125 F. Supp. 3d 18, 38 (D.D.C. 2015) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). For example, a disputed question of material fact may exist as to whether an employer unreasonably delayed an employee's request for reasonable accommodations where [*53]  the employer lost the employee's paperwork on multiple occasions and waited nine months to communicate to the employee that he needed to provide a medical release form. Pantazes v. Jackson, 366 F. Supp. 2d 57, 62-63, 70 (D.D.C. 2005). Likewise, a court may decline to grant summary judgment where an employee has averred that it took her employer "almost a year to provide specific guidance as to the kind of medical document it required" to process her accommodations request, Breen v. Dep't. of Transp., 282 F.3d 839, 844 n.7, 350 U.S. App. D.C. 212 (D.C. Cir. 2002), or where the employer's sole argument in favor of summary judgment is that the employee eventually received an accommodation after a three-year delay, Leiterman v. Johnson, 60 F. Supp. 3d 166, 181 (D.D.C. 2014). On the other hand, "[a] relatively short delay of a few weeks (or even a few months) in approving a request . . . does not support" a failure-to-accommodate claim. Marks v. Washington Wholesale Liquor Co. LLC, 253 F. Supp. 3d 312, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 80929, 2017 WL 2312860, at *10 (D.D.C. May 26, 2017) (collecting cases); see also Clayborne v. Potter, 448 F. Supp. 2d 185, 192-93 (D.D.C. 2006) (granting summary judgment where employer worked with a reasonable "accommodation committee" to find appropriate reassignment for employee over a twelve-month period). This is particularly true where the plaintiff relies solely on her own vague declarations of unlawful delay to support her claim. See Elzeneiny, 125 F. Supp. 3d at 38.
Applying these standards here, it is clear, based on the evidence proffered by both parties, that no reasonable jury could find that [*54]  Defendant's response to Plaintiff's request for reassignment to a vacant position constitutes an unreasonable delay actionable under the ADA. The extent of Plaintiff's argument with respect to this claim, which is raised in her statement of facts, is that Georgetown "warning [her] on November 30, 2014 that the process [for finding a vacant position for reassignment] 'may take some time to complete.' was another unnecessary delay and failure to accommodate [her] when she had requested to be reassigned to the HR Analyst position, which was vacant." Pl. SOF at 33 (providing no citation to the record). Considering that Plaintiff's request for reassignment was met by Defendant less than two months after a Georgetown representative sent the communication that Plaintiff is referencing in her bald assertion, "[t]his is obviously insufficient evidence to go to a jury," and summary judgment is thus appropriate. See Elzeneiny, 125 F. Supp. 3d at 38.
Indeed, much like in Marks, the undersigned is "reluctant to even call [Georgetown's] actions a 'delay' given that [it] sought to engage [Plaintiff] in a discussion about the scope of [her] need for an accommodation during this interval." Marks,     F. Supp. 3d    , 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 80929, 2017 WL 2312860 at *11; see also Clayborne, 448 F. Supp. 2d at 192-93. But even assuming that the delay in [*55]  meeting Plaintiff's request for reassignment to a vacant position can be deemed unreasonable, all evidence indicates that Plaintiff was the primary cause for this delay. It is undisputed, for example, that Plaintiff took affirmative steps to limit the availability of information regarding her medical conditions from Defendant—instructing her physicians not to respond to Georgetown's requests—and only turned over additional information in response to multiple requests a few months before ultimately receiving the offer of reassignment. See Def. Ex. 5 [Dkt. 57-5] at 5, 11, 12, 14; see also Ex. 62 [Dkt. 59-12] at 2; Pl. SOF. At 35. Further, Defendant has provided uncontested evidence to support its assertion that, during this period, IDEAA and Human Resources employees worked to find an appropriate, available position for Plaintiff. Def. Ex. 63 [Dkt. 59-13] at 2; see also Def. Exs. 65-71 [Dkts. 59-15-59-21]. Plaintiff, on the other hand, has pointed to no evidence beyond her own conclusory assertions to support a finding that Georgetown intentionally or unreasonably delayed responding to her request, or that Georgetown did anything to disrupt the informal, interactive process for making [*56]  accommodations under the ADA.14 Without such evidence, Plaintiff is unable to make a failure-to-accommodate claim based on any delay in Georgetown's offer of reassignment. See Elzeneiny, 125 F. Supp. 3d at 38 (finding that plaintiff's citation to "her own declaration, in which she states in very general terms that she requested a variety of accommodations and that, while 'many' of these were provided, 'it was months before [she received many of the[m]'" is "obviously insufficient evidence to go to a jury."); Clayborne v. Potter, 448 F. Supp. 2d 185, 192 (D.D.C. 2006).15
Likewise, Plaintiff's claim that Defendant's refusal to offer her either the Human Resources Analyst or Business Manager positions constitutes a denial of reasonable accommodations is without merit. Under the ADA, "an employer is not required to provide an employee that accommodation [she] requests or prefers, the employer need only provide some reasonable accommodation." Aka, 156 F.3d at 1305 (internal citations and quotation marks omitted). In the context of a reassignment request, "the 'reassignment need not involve a promotion' and the 'employer has the authority to pick and choose which appropriate vacant job is to be offered to the otherwise qualified disabled employee.'" Alston, 571 F. Supp. 2d at 84 (quoting Smith v. Midland Brake Inc, 180 F.3d 1154, 1170 (10th Cir. 1999)) [*57] . The reassignment should, however, be to "an equivalent position, in terms of pay, status, etc., if the individual is qualified, and if the position is vacant within a reasonable amount of time." 29 C.F.R. App. § 1630.2(o). Thus, "to prevail on an ADA claim where the employer has offered reassignment as a reasonable accommodation, the employee must offer evidence showing both that the position offered was inferior to her former job and that a comparable position, for which the employee was qualified, was open." Norville v. Staten Island Univ. Hosp., 196 F.3d 89, 99 (2d Cir. 1999). If no such position exists, an employer is permitted to "demote" an employee through reassignment to an inferior position. Harris,     F. Supp. 3d     , 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 104124, 2017 WL 2880827, at *7 (citing 29 C.F.R. § Pt. 1630, App.).
Without determining whether the Recruiting Coordinator position that Georgetown offered Plaintiff for reassignment constitutes a demotion,16 the undersigned finds that Plaintiff has failed to satisfy her burden of identifying another available position for which she was qualified. See Alston, 571 F. Supp. 2d at 84 ("The plaintiff bears the burden of showing that a vacant position exists and that . . . [she] is qualified for that position." (quoting McCreary v. Libbey-Owens-Ford Co., 132 F.3d 1159, 1165 (7th Cir. 1997)). To be qualified for a position, an individual must not only be able to perform the essential functions of the job, but must also satisfy "the requisite skill, experience, education, and other job-related requirements" of that job. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m). A review of Plaintiff's submissions to the Court reveals, at most, two positions that she believes she was qualified for: Business Manager and Human Resources Analyst. See Pl. SOF at 31-36. As she acknowledges, however, the Human Resources Analyst position was filled before she and Georgetown could [*58]  complete the ADA's required interactive process, and the Business Manager position required three to five years of managerial experience. See Am. Compl. at ¶¶ 37-41; see also Def. Ex. 76 [Dkt. 60-1] at 4. At the time she sought reassignment, a Human Resources specialist at Georgetown explained to Plaintiff that, based on her resume, which establishes that she worked exclusively as an administrative or executive assistant since 2001, she lacked the requisite managerial experience for the Business Manager position. See Def. Ex. 6 [Dkt. 57-6] at 2-8; see also Def. Ex. 74 [Dkt. 59-24] at 2-3. And while Plaintiff now argues that she has over six years of managerial experience based on her employment as an administrative assistant at Lawrence Technological University, see Pl. SOF at 39-40, she provides no affirmative evidence to support this assertion and instead asks the Court to rely exclusively on the unsupported representations in her statement of facts to deny summary judgment. Based on the record as it stands, the undersigned is reluctant to do so. See Alston, 571 F. Supp. 2d at 84-85 (finding factual dispute with regard to the defendant's failure to provide reassignment where the plaintiff "submitted a report from [*59]  a vocational rehabilitation expert indicating that she was qualified to perform" the vacant position and deposition testimony from the defendant's corporate designee indicating that she met the minimum qualifications for the vacant position); Drasek v. Burwell, 121 F. Supp. 3d 143, 159-60 (D.D.C. 2015) (finding genuine dispute of fact with regard to the plaintiff's ability to perform the essential functions of a vacant position where the record established that she had performed the functions of the same position for a previous employer and where her physician opined that her current failure to perform was due to her specific work environment).
Indeed, Plaintiff is unable to point the Court to any evidence in support of her qualifications for the Business Manager position other than the claims she made in her statement of facts, which, by themselves, are insufficient to create a genuine dispute of material fact. See McBride v. BIC Consumer Prods. Mfg. Co., 583 F.3d 92, 99 (2d Cir. 2009) ("[Plaintiff] has provided no evidence . . . indicating . . . that she possessed the requisite educational background or professional skills and experience [for the vacant position]. Neither her conclusory assertion in an affidavit that she was qualified for the then-available positions nor her counsel's unsubstantiated [*60]  statements before the district court remedy this defect."); see also Nordhoff v. Johnson, 81 F. App'x 885, 889 (7th Cir. 2003) (affirming summary judgment on a failure-to-accommodate claim where employee relied solely on his own "conclusory statements and unsubstantiated, self-serving affidavit" to argue that he met the educational and experiential requirements for a vacant position); Moore v. Computer Assocs. Int'l, Inc., 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 151847, 2010 WL 11515202, at *2 (D. Ariz. Sept. 7, 2010) ("Plaintiff's own testimony regarding his ability to perform the position [to which he hoped to be reassigned] is not sufficient to create a genuine issue of material fact regarding such ability, when Defendant cited medical evaluations strongly suggesting Plaintiff could not perform the position."); Hinson v. U.S.D. No. 500, 187 F. Supp. 2d 1297, 1309 (D. Kan. 2002) (granting summary judgment where Plaintiff relied solely on his alleged previous experience as a manager and his own opinions about his qualifications to establish that he was qualified for reassignment to a "food service manager position"). Finding that Plaintiff has failed to produce any evidence beyond her own unsupported statements to create a genuine issue as to whether a vacant position for which she was qualified and to which she could have been reassigned existed, the undersigned recommends granting Defendant's motion for summary judgment on this claim. [*61] 

B. Plaintiff's Retaliation Claim
The next claim raised in Plaintiff's Amended Complaint alleges that Georgetown retaliated against her for seeking accommodations for her disabilities. See Am. Compl. at ¶ 46. The ADA makes it unlawful to "coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any individual in the exercise or enjoyment of . . . any right granted or protected" by the ADA. 42 U.S.C. § 12203(b). When, as here, the plaintiff does not offer direct evidence of reprisal and instead relies on circumstantial evidence to support her claim,17 courts apply the three-step burden-shifting framework set forth in McDonnell Douglas Corporation v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). See Smith v. Dist. of Columbia, 430 F.3d 450, 455, 368 U.S. App. D.C. 361 (D.C. Cir. 2005) (using McDonnell Douglas to evaluate ADA retaliation claim). Under that framework, the plaintiff must first establish the three elements of a prima facie case of retaliation: (1) that she engaged in a protected activity under the ADA; (2) that the employer took a materially adverse action against her; (3) and that "there existed a causal linked between the adverse action and the protected activity." Id. (quoting Jones v. Wash. Metro. Area Transit Auth., 205 F.3d 428, 433, 340 U.S. App. D.C. 320 (D.C. Cir. 2000)). Once a plaintiff succeeds in making her prima facie showing, the burden of production shifts to the employer, who must articulate a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for its action. [*62]  Id. If the employer successfully does so, the burden shifts back to the plaintiff to prove that the employer's proffered reason is a pretext masking discrimination or retaliation. Id.; see also Anakor v. Archuleta, 79 F. Supp. 3d 257, 262 (D.D.C. 2015).
Where a defendant offers a legitimate, non-retaliatory reason for its actions, however, "the district court need not—and should not—decide whether the plaintiff actually made out a prima facie case under [the] McDonnell Douglas [framework]." Ellis v. Georgetown Univ. Hosp., 723 F. Supp. 2d 42, 52 (D.D.C. 2010) (quoting Brady v. Office of Sergeant at Arms, 520 F.3d 490, 494, 380 U.S. App. D.C. 283 (D.C. Cir. 2008)). In those circumstances, the only question to consider in determining whether to grant an employer's motion for summary judgment is "whether the plaintiff produced sufficient evidence for a reasonable jury to find that the employer's asserted non-[retaliatory] reason was not the actual reason and that the employer intentionally [retaliated] against the plaintiff on a prohibited basis." Id. (internal citation and quotation marks omitted); see also Walker v. Children's Nat'l Med. Ctr., 236 F. Supp. 3d 136, 2017 WL 680374, at *5 (D.D.C. 2017) ("At the summary judgment stage, the only question is whether the employee's evidence creates a material dispute on the ultimate issue of retaliation either directly by showing that a discriminatory reason more likely motivated the employer or indirectly by showing that the employer's proffered explanation [*63]  is unworthy of credence." (internal quotation marks and alterations omitted)). In answering this central inquiry, "the court reviews each of the three categories of evidence [presented by the plaintiff]—prima facie, pretext, and any other—to determine whether they either separately or in combination provide sufficient evidence for a reasonable jury to infer retaliation." Ellis, 723 F. Supp. 2d at 52 (quoting Jones v. Bernanke, 557 F.3d 670, 679, 384 U.S. App. D.C. 443 (D.C. Cir. 2009)).
Here, Plaintiff has identified three categories of materially adverse actions that make up her claim of retaliation: unspecified threats from her supervisor, Chief Gruber, from July through September 2014; her suspension in November 2014; and her termination in March 2015. See Def. Ex. 96 [Dkt. 60-21] at 3-4; see also Def. Ex. 1 [Dkt. 57-1] at 32:5-32:9.18 Defendant does not dispute that Plaintiff engaged in protected activity under the ADA, and instead contends that Plaintiff has failed to establish that the threats from her supervisor are adverse employment actions, and that her suspension and termination were motivated by retaliation. See Def. Mot. at 41-45. Defendant is correct on both counts.

1. Threats from Plaintiff's Supervisor
While Plaintiff fails to clearly identify the specific threats of disciplinary [*64]  action from her supervisor that make up her retaliation claim, see supra note 18, the undersigned finds that Defendant is entitled to summary judgment on this issue regardless of which incidents in her Amended Complaint she may have been referencing. While actionable "[a]dverse actions in the retaliation context encompass a broader sweep of actions than those in a pure discrimination claim" and need not necessarily "affect the terms and conditions of [a claimant's] employment," an employee bringing a claim of retaliation under the ADA must nevertheless establish that a reasonable employee would have found the action materially adverse. Paschal v. Dist. of Columbia, 65 F. Supp. 3d 172, 177 (D.D.C. 2014); see also Hargrove v. AARP, 205 F. Supp. 3d 96, 115 (D.D.C. 2016). Notably, "[a] long line of cases from this Circuit and others have held that threats, revoked disciplinary plans, and other such ultimately unconsummated actions are not materially adverse for purposes of retaliation claims." McNair v. Dist. of Columbia, 903 F. Supp. 2d 71, 75-76 (D.D.C. 2012) (collecting cases and entering judgment against claim of retaliation brought under the ADA). In fact, this Court has found on a number of occasions that the actions of which Plaintiff now complains—unspecified and unrealized threats of disciplinary action from Chief Gruber—are not adverse employment actions. See id. (finding [*65]  that receipt of a letter threatening employee with termination does not constitute an adverse employment action); see also Mahoney v. Donovan, 824 F. Supp. 2d 49, 61-62 (D.D.C. 2011) ("[W]hile actually subjecting Plaintiff to disciplinary action may have amounted to materially adverse action, merely advising him via email that if he continued a course of action he might be subject to discipline does not."); Bailey v. Wash. Metro. Area Transit Auth., 810 F. Supp. 2d 295, 301 (D.D.C. 2011) ("[N]o reasonable jury could find that the proffer of a severance package and a resulting discussion constituted a materially adverse employment action.").
Though the undersigned "does not doubt that it was both unpleasant and disconcerting" for Plaintiff to hear Chief Gruber threatening her with disciplinary action or critiquing her job performance, neither her bald allegations nor the statements from other DPS employees that she provided establish that Chief Gruber's critiques imposed a tangible harm on her. McNair, 903 F. Supp. 2d at 76; Rashad v. Wash. Metro. Area Transit Auth., 945 F. Supp. 2d 152, 164-65 (D.D.C. 2013) (letter of reprimand containing job-related constructive criticism and no abusive language was not a materially adverse employment action). "As our Circuit notes, 'not everything that makes an employee unhappy is an actionable adverse action.'" McNair, 903 F. Supp. 2d at 76 (quoting Broderick v. Donaldson, 437 F.3d 1226, 1233, 369 U.S. App. D.C. 374 (D.C. Cir. 2006)). Having found no evidence that a reasonable jury could conclude that Plaintiff experienced [*66]  an adverse employment action due to her supervisor's alleged threats, the undersigned recommends granting Defendant's motion for summary judgment with respect to this element of her retaliation claim.

2. Plaintiff's Suspension
Defendant is also entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's claim that her three-day suspension, which was issued on October 14, 2014 and effectively served from November 24 to November 26, 2014, was a materially adverse action taken by Georgetown in retaliation for her protected activity. As a preliminary matter, in response to Defendant's interrogatory requesting a recitation of all the alleged instances of retaliation, Plaintiff claims that the suspension was a response to her seeking medical accommodations "due to [her] anxiety disorder" on September 5 and September 9, 2014. Def. Ex. 96 [Dkt. 60-21] at 3-4; see also Am. Compl. at ¶ 33. There is no record of Plaintiff notifying Georgetown of her anxiety disorder or seeking reasonable accommodations for it while working there. See supra note 10. But even assuming that Plaintiff erred when she referenced her anxiety disorder in her response to Plaintiff's interrogatory, she has failed to produce evidence sufficient [*67]  to counter Defendant's explanation that the suspension was a legitimate response to Plaintiff's "repeated and well-documented performance issues." Def. Mot. at 43.
In various portions of her submissions to this Court, Plaintiff's appears to contend that the suspension was motivated by either the incidents with Chief Gruber that occurred on September 5 and September 9, 2014, or perhaps for her seeking reassignment. Am. Compl. at ¶¶ 33, 36; see also Pl. SOF at 31, 41. She provides no documentary or testimonial evidence to support either assertion, instead relying on her own vague and conclusory statements.19 Conversely, Defendant has provided documentation of two meetings—one on August 4, 2014, and another on August 26, 2014—in which her supervisor, Chief Gruber, informed her of deficiencies in her work performance and instructed her on areas in which she could improve. See Def. Ex. 19 [Dkt. 57-19] at 2-3; see also Def. Ex. 32 [Dkt. 58-7] at 2-3. Notably, Plaintiff's first meeting with Chief Gruber predates all protected activity in this case with the exception of her first disability accommodation request form related to her diabetes, which she submitted on July 14, 2014. Def. Ex. 14 [Dkt. [*68]  57-14]. What is more, Defendant produced a copy of a written warning, prepared on September 5, 2014, explaining that Plaintiff continued to perform below expectations at work and highlighting the specific instances in which she fell short. See Def. Ex. 45 [Dkt. 58-20] at 2. The written warning also instructs Plaintiff that her "[f]ailure to achieve prompt and continuing resolution of these performance deficiencies will result in progressive disciplinary action up [to] and including termination of [her] employment[.]" Id. Finally, Chief Gruber's October 14, 2014 notice to Plaintiff informing her of her three-day suspension makes specific reference to the incidents that precipitated both performance review meetings and this written warning, highlighting the various ways in which she failed to improve her performance leading up to her suspension and expressing significant concern about these deficiencies. See Def. Ex. 44 [Dkt. 58-19] at 2-4.20
In short, Defendant has offered a legitimate and non-discriminatory reason for its decision to suspend Plaintiff. See Richardson v. Petasis, 160 F. Supp. 3d 88, 109 (D.D.C. 2015) (finding that "insubordination" and "unsatisfactory performance" are "commonly asserted legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons" [*69]  for employee suspension); see also Drewrey v. Clinton, 763 F. Supp. 2d 54, 63 (D.D.C. 2011) (same). In turn, Plaintiff has failed to present any concrete evidence—not even her own sworn statement refuting Defendant's characterization of the events—to undercut Defendant's explanation for her suspension or support her own theory of this case. Plaintiff's bald and conclusory assertions that her suspension was motivated by discriminatory intent, unsupported by any evidence in the record beyond mere temporal proximity to her engagement in protected activity, are "insufficient to raise a genuine issue of material fact regarding the falsity of [D]efendant's justifications." See id.; see also Minter, 809 F.3d at 71-72 ("[P]ositive evidence beyond mere [temporal] proximity is required to create a genuine issue of material fact concerning whether the motive for an adverse employment action was retaliation." (internal citations and quotation marks omitted); Vickers v. Powell, 493 F.3d 186, 195-96, 377 U.S. App. D.C. 213 (D.C. Cir. 2007) (finding, in the context of a Title VII retaliation claim, that no reasonable jury could infer a retaliatory motive based solely on a plaintiff's allegations). Put differently, she has failed to establish that "but for" her protected activity, she would not have been terminated, and the undersigned thus recommends granting Defendant's motion [*70]  for summary judgment with respect to this claim. See Walker, 236 F. Supp. 3d 136, 2017 WL 680374, at *5 (applying the "traditional principles of but-for causation," whereby a plaintiff must prove that the unlawful retaliation would not have occurred absent the alleged wrongful action of the employer, in adjudicating a motion for summary judgment on an ADA retaliation claim).

3. Plaintiff's Termination
Plaintiff's final allegation of retaliation—that she was effectively fired by Georgetown for seeking accommodations under the ADA—fares no better than the rest. See Am. Compl. at ¶¶ 45-46; Def. Ex. 96 [Dkt. 60-21] at 3-4. Setting aside Defendant's detailed and well-supported description of Georgetown's efforts to reassign Plaintiff to an appropriate position once it became clear that she was incapable of performing the essential functions of her job, the gist of this iteration of Plaintiff's retaliation claim is obscured by the fact that she raised this exact issue in what the undersigned has liberally construed to be the first count of her Amended Complaint. See supra at 31-39. Indeed, Plaintiff specifically challenges Defendant's failure to provide her with a reassignment to the position of her choosing as a failure to provide a reasonable accommodation [*71]  under the ADA. See Am. Compl. at ¶ 44. The subject of a failure-to-accommodate claim, however, cannot "supply grounds for a separate retaliation claim." Buie v. Berrien, 85 F. Supp. 3d 161, 178 (D.D.C. 2015) (citing Floyd, 968 F. Supp. 2d at 334). Indeed, "if the denial of a request for accommodation could itself support a claim of retaliation based on the request, then every failure-to-accommodate claim would be doubled." Floyd, 968 F. Supp. 2d at 334.
In any event, Plaintiff has failed to present any evidence to refute Defendant's legitimate and non-discriminatory justification for terminating Plaintiff: that she was no longer able to complete the essential functions of her job as an Executive Assistant, was offered reassignment to a position as a Recruiting Coordinator as a reasonable accommodation, and was fired after rejecting that offer because she wanted to be reassigned to a position for which she was not qualified. See supra at pp. 17-20. Having refused Georgetown's offer of reasonable accommodation, Plaintiff can no longer claim that Defendant had a duty to accommodate her further. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.9(d) ("If [an individual with a disability] rejects a reasonable accommodation . . . that is necessary to enable the individual to perform the essential functions of the position held or desired, and cannot, as a result of [*72]  that rejection, perform the essential functions of the position, the individual will not be considered qualified [under the ADA]."); Hall v. Claussen, 6 F. App'x 655, 666 (10th Cir. 2001) ("[I]f the employee rejects an offer of reassignment that is consistent with an employer's duties of reasonable accommodation under the ADA, the employer is not required to offer additional reassignment."); Midland Brake, Inc., 180 F.3d at 1177 ("The ADA does not entitle an employee to a free ranging or perpetual right to a new position within the company. . . . Once the employer has offered . . . a reassignment [to a vacant position for which the employee is qualified], its duties have been discharged.").
Accordingly, the undersigned recommends that Defendant's motion for summary judgment be granted on this count.

CONCLUSION
The undersigned finds that Plaintiff has failed to allege facts sufficient to show that Defendant discriminated against her by denying her reasonable accommodations, or that Defendant retaliated against her for requesting reasonable accommodations for her disabilities. Moreover, the undersigned finds that Defendant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law on Plaintiff's claims. Accordingly, and for the reasons stated, the undersigned recommends that the Court grant Defendant's [*73]  motion for summary judgment.
* * * *
The parties are hereby advised that under the provisions of Local Rule 72.3(b) of the United States District court for the District of Columbia, any party who objects to this Report and Recommendation must file a written objection thereto with the Clerk of this Court within fourteen (14) days of the party's receipt of the Report and Recommendation. The written objections must specifically identify the portion of the Report and Recommendation to which the objection is made, and the basis for such objections. The parties are further advised that the failure to timely file objections to the findings and recommendations set forth in this report may waive their right of appeal from an order of the District Court adopting such findings and recommendations. See Thomas v. Arn, 474 U.S. 140, 106 S. Ct. 466, 88 L. Ed. 2d 435 (1985).
Date: August 4, 2017
/s/ G. Michael Harvey
G. MICHAEL HARVEY
UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE


End of Document

