Mayhew v. T-Mobile USA, Inc.
United States District Court for the District of Oregon
September 14, 2009, Decided; September 14, 2009, Filed
Civil No. 07-6313-TC

Reporter
2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 120933 *
RACHEL MAYHEW, Plaintiff, v. T-MOBILE USA, INC., Defendant.
Subsequent History: Adopted by, Summary judgment granted, in part, summary judgment denied, in part by Mayhew v. T-Mobile USA, Inc., 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 120935 (D. Or., Dec. 22, 2009)
Counsel:  [*1] For Rachel Mayhew, Plaintiff: Dana L. Sullivan, LEAD ATTORNEY, Buchanan Angeli Altschul & Sullivan LLP, Portland, OR.
For T-Mobile USA, Inc., Defendant: Jacqueline S. Bronson, James Severson, Margaret A. DeGooyer, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Bingham McCutchen LLP, San Francisco, CA; Dennis E. Westlind, Stoel Rives LLP, Portland, OR.
Judges: THOMAS M. COFFIN, United States Magistrate Judge.
Opinion by: THOMAS M. COFFIN
Opinion


ORDER AND FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATION
COFFIN, Magistrate Judge:
Plaintiff Rachel Mayhew alleges that her former employer T-Mobile USA, Inc. violated federal and Oregon law when it terminated her from her job as a customer care representative. Before the court is plaintiff's motion for partial summary judgment (doc. 29), defendant's motion for summary judgment (doc. 28), and defendant's motion to strike several of plaintiff's exhibits opposing defendant's summary judgment motion. (Doc. 62.) For the following reasons, I deny defendant's motion to strike the exhibits and recommend that the court: (1) grant T-Mobile's motion with respect to Mayhew's claim for failure to accommodate her son's disabilities; deny T-Mobile's summary judgment motion on all other claims; and (3) deny Mayhew's partial summary judgment  [*2] motion.

Background
Rachel Mayhew (Mayhew) worked at T-Mobile USA, Inc.'s (T-Mobile) Salem, Oregon call center as a customer care representative for approximately 2 1/2 years-from October 2003 through February 28, 2006. As a customer care representative, Mayhew provided customer service to T-Mobile customers who dialed T-Mobile's general customer service number. Calls to the general customer service number could be routed to a number of different call centers, including the Salem call center.
While she worked at T-Mobile, Mayhew had to manage her own health issues as well as those of her son and her mother. As a child, Mayhew was diagnosed with Shones Complex, a congenital heart defect which causes her to have ongoing health problems and causes viruses to pose health risks. Mayhew had Shones Complex related health issues while working at T-Mobile. Mayhew's son, who was between 7 and 8 when she worked at T-Mobile, suffers from severe autism, mental retardation, and Attention Deficit Hyper-Activity Disorder. He requires specialized care, and, on her son's "bad days," Mayhew is the only person who can calm him. Mayhew's mother suffered a heart attack in October 2005.
The parties agree on a  [*3] few issues. Mayhew had numerous absences from work and received verbal and written counseling for such. Mayhew requested and was granted leave under the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA)and Oregon Family Leave Act (OFLA) for her heart condition and to take care of her son. Mayhew asked T-Mobile for two accommodations to her work schedule. In September 2005, Mayhew requested a work schedule that gave her Saturdays off to take care of her son. That request was not granted. In January 2006, Mayhew requested that T-Mobile modify her schedule to give her intermittent leave due to her heart problems. T-Mobile refers to this schedule as a "work-when-able" schedule. T-Mobile terminated Mayhew before it addressed this request. The parties agreement, however, ends here.
According to Mayhew, although T-Mobile granted her FMLA for absences related to her Shones Complex and her son's autism, she was not properly trained on what absences qualified for FMLA protection, Mayhew believed that only conditions pre-approved by T-Mobile's human resources department qualified for FMLA protected leave. Mayhew claims that she had absences in June 2005 due to an infection following dental work that could have  [*4] affected her heart condition as well as flu illnesses requiring doctor's care in October 2005 and February 2006. 1 She also claims that: she reported to her supervisor and to T-Mobile's resource planning department 2 that she would be absent because her mother had a heart attack on October 4, 2005. However, based on her misunderstanding of the FMLA, Mayhew failed to request that T-Mobile mark these absences as FMLA leave. Mayhew asserts that T-Mobile was concerned about the impact of employees taking leave (also referred to as shrinkage) and, as such, made efforts to minimize employees use of protected leave, including not mentioning FMLA unless an employee raised the issue. Mayhew claims that: T-Mobile failed to timely inform her when she exhausted her FMLA leave, which resulted in T-Mobile retroactively designating several absences in late December 2005 and early January 2206 as unexcused.
Mayhew alleges that shift accommodations, such as Saturdays off for employees with child care issues, were typically granted to other T-Mobile employees. Mayhew contends that T-Mobile ignored her request to work-when-able to accommodate her heart condition and resulting complications. Mayhew states that T-Mobile's customer service representatives are fungible, and, due to this, regular attendance is not required to satisfactorily perform her job. Finally, Mayhew disputes that her termination from T-Mobile was based on absences which were not protected by FMLA, and instead asserts that T-Mobile unlawfully based her termination on FMLA and OFLA protected absences.
T-Mobile's version of the facts differs. T-Mobile concedes that Mayhew told the resource planning department that she was absent in October 2005 due to her mother's heart attack, but disputes that she informed her supervisor that this was the reason for her absence. According to T-Mobile, Mayhew simply reported to her supervisor that she was sick and that only the supervisor's notations were considered in determining whether absences wore protected. T-Mobile also disputes that it had any notice that Mayhew's  [*6] flu illnesses in October 2005 and February 2006 or her dental work related infection in June 2005 could qualify for FMLA protected leave. T-Mobile asserts that plaintiff was never denied FMLA or OFLA leave or flexibility in scheduling her leave as she scheduled all her leave herself. T-Mobile claims that shift accommodations, such as Saturdays off, were generally not granted for child care issues. Instead, such accommodation was granted for the employee's own health or education issues. T-Mobile denies that there was a company wide effort to reduce employees taking legally protected leave. T-Mobile asserts that regular attendance is an essential element of a customer service representative's job. Finally, T-Mobile states that, even if Mayhew's October 2005 absences were treated as protected leave, Mayhew would have been terminated anyway because she: would have exhausted her protected leave earlier

Legal Standard
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56 allows the granting of summary judgment:
if the pleadings, the discovery and disclosure materials on file, and any affidavits show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter  [*7] of law.
Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). There must be no genuine issue of material fact. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 247-48, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986).
The movant has the initial burden of establishing that no genuine issue of material fact exists or that a material fact essential to the nonmovant's claim is missing. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-24, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). Once the movant has met its burden, the burden shifts to the nonmovant to produce specific evidence to establish a genuine issue of material fact or to establish the existence of all facts material to the claim. Id.; see also, Bhan v. NME Hosps., Inc., 929 F.2d 1404, 1409 (9th Cir. 1991); Nissan Fire & Marine Ins. Co., Ltd., v. Fritz Cos., Inc., 210 F.3d 1099, 1105 (9th Cir. 2000). In order to meet this burden, the nonmovant "may not rely merely on allegations or denials in its own pleading," but must instead "set out specific facts showing a genuine issue of fact for trial." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e).
Material facts which preclude entry of summary judgment are those which, under applicable substantive law, may affect the outcome of the case. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248. Factual disputes are genuine if they "properly can be resolved only  [*8] by a finder of fact because they may reasonably be resolved in favor of either party." Id. On the other hand, if, after the court has drawn all reasonable inferences in favor of the nonmovant, "the evidence is merely colorable, or is not significantly probative,' summary judgment may be granted. Id.

Analysis
1. T-Mobile's Objections Under LR 56.1 and Fed. R. of Evid.
Before considering the parties' summary judgment motions, I must consider T-Mobile's objections to Mayhew's concise statement of fact (doc. 63) and several of her exhibits in support of her partial summary judgment motion. (Doc. 62.)
T-Mobile asserts that Mayhew's concise statement of fact in opposition to T-Mobile's summary judgment motion fails to comply with LR 56 because she includes facts which are disputed and irrelevant and because she exceeded the 5 page limit without seeking leave of the court. (Doc. 63, p. 2.) T-Mobile has not shown that Mayhew disregarded LR 56(1)(2). While it is true that Mayhew should have sought leave of the Court prior to filing a 7 page concise statement of facts, I decline to strike the excess pages.
Next, T-Mobile objects to excerpts of deposition testimony and affidavits from an unrelated  [*9] case that Mayhew submitted in support of her opposition to T-Mobile's summary judgment motion. T-Mobile asserts this evidence prohibited by FRE 402 because it is not relevant, by FRE 403 because it is unduly confusing and wastes time, and by FRE 802 because it is hearsay. In Golf USA Corp. v. Fed. Ins. Co., the Ninth Circuit stated that "sworn deposition testimony may be used by or against a party on summary judgment regardless of whether the testimony was taken in a separate proceeding." Id. 259 F.3d 1049, 1056 (9th Cir. 2001). I have considered the deposition excerpts and affidavit in question and find them relevant to the issues raised in Mayhew's opposition to summary judgment. The relevance is not outweighed by the danger of confusion of the issues or waste of time, and not hearsay as they are admissions of a party opponent. I deny T-Mobile's motion to strike this evidence.
2. T-Mobile's Motion for Summary Judgment
T-Mobile moves for summary judgment on Mayhew's claim that T-Mobile violated the FMLA and the OFLA when it terminated her. In order to establish that she was terminated in violation of the FMLA and the OFLA 3, Mayhew must establish that: (1) she took leave protected by  [*10] the FMLA and the OFLA; (2) she suffered an adverse employment action: (3) the adverse action was causally related to her protect+ed leave. Bachelder v. American West Airlines, Inc., 259 F.3d 1112, 1124-25 (9th Cir. 2001); Mott v. Office Depot, Inc., 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 51570, 2009 WL 1662906, *10 (D.Or. June 12, 2009). T-Mobile asserts that it is undisputed that based its decision to terminate Mayhew on unprotected absences.
In her opposition to summary judgment on this claim, Mayhew directs the court's attention to evidence in the record which establishes that she received verbal and written warnings and was subsequently terminated based, in part, on her absence on October 4, 2005 due to her mother's heart attack. Indeed, the record shows that at least one of T-Mobile's records indicates that Mayhew was absent because she was "out with mother how [sic] has had heart attack." (Doc. 37-6, p. 28.) The evidence shows that Mayhew's termination was also based, in part, on absences from October 20 through October 22, 2005 when she was ill for 3  [*11] consecutive days and ". . .out on dr's orders." (Doc. 37-6, p. 31.) Moreover, Mayhew points to evidence in the record that T-Mobile was on notice that infections could adversely affect her heart condition. (Doc. 37, P 3; see e.g. doc. 37-2, pp. 29,32 (noting that because of her heart condition she was to be off work due to a dental infection from June 9-20.)
T-Mobile argues that this evidence does not establish an issue of fact regarding whether Mayhew's termination was causally related to protected absences because Mayhew did not tell T-Mobile that she wanted these absences designated as FMLA leave. I do not find this argument persuasive. Specifically, T-Mobile asserts that all disciplinary action, such as termination, is based on information given to coaches, and Mayhew reported to her coach that she was absent on October 4, 2005 because she was sick, not because of her mother's heart attack. This Circuit has concluded that the FMLA does not require that an employee give notice of a desire to invoke the FMLA. Bachelder, 259 F.3d at 1130-31. Instead, it requires that the employee give notice of the need for FMLA leave. Id. It is the employer's responsibility, not the employee's, to  [*12] determine whether a leave request is likely to be covered by the FMLA. Bailey v. Southwest Gas Co., 275 F.3d 1181, 1185 (9th Cir.2002); Bachelder. 259 F.3d at 1130-31. Taking the evidence in a light most favorable to Mayhew, I find that she has established a factual issue regarding whether T-Mobile considered protected leave in its decision to terminate her. See e.g. Bybee v. Target Corp., 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 85650, 2006 WL 3394477 (D. Idaho November 22, 2006)(holding that an adverse action based in part on FMLA protected absences, even in combination with unprotected absences, may violate FMLA).
Moreover, the disagreement between Mayhew and T-Mobile about whether Mayhew reported to her coach that her mother suffered a heart attack is a factual dispute best resolved by a jury. I cannot conclude, as T-Mobile urged during oral argument, that this dispute is beside the point because considering this leave protected would only have resulted in Mayhew exhausting her FMLA leave 8 hours earlier. Instead the relevant inquiry is whether leave protected under the FMLA was a factor in T-Mobile's decision to terminate Mayhew. Bybee v. Target Corp., 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 85650, 2006 WL 3394477 (D, Idaho November 22, 2006).
T-Mobile also seeks summary  [*13] judgment on Mayhew's claims that T-Mobile violated the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and Oregon's Disability Discrimination statute by failing to reasonably accommodate Mayhew's heart condition and resulting complications and her son's autism, mental retardation, and ADHD disorder and by terminating her because of those issues. To establish an ADA or Oregon Disability Discrimination claim, Mayhew must show that she is a an individual with a disability who, "with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of [a T-Mobile customer care representative]." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8); Humphrey v. Memorial Hosp. Accoc., 239 F.3d 1128, 1135-36 (9th Cir. 2001). For the purposes of this motion, T-Mobile concedes that Mayhew is a person with a disability.
At the onset, I note that ADA and Oregon Disability Discrimination claims must be based on a claimant's own disability, Cooper v. Neiman Marcus Group, 125 F.3d 786, 790 (1997). Mayhew's counsel conceded this during the September 2, 2009 oral argument. Therefore, I find that Mayhew cannot establish a violation of these laws based on T-Mobile's failure to accommodate her son's disability. I recommend that summary  [*14] judgment be granted on Mayhew's claim that T-Mobile violated the ADA and Oregon Disability Discrimination statute by failing to accommodate her son's disabilities and by terminating her based on her son's disabilities.
T-Mobile argues that Mayhew was not "qualified" for the customer care representative position within the meaning of the ADA. As noted above, a qualified individual is "an individual with a disability who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds or desires." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). It is undisputed that Mayhew had the skills, training, and experience to be a customer care representative; she even won a performance award just before her termination. However, to accommodate her heart condition, Mayhew needed the flexibility to be completely absent, arrive late, or leave early, and she was unable to predict when that might happen. T-Mobile argues that Mayhew's inability to regularly attend work and unpredictability of absences, lateness, or needing to leave early renders her not qualified under the ADA or Oregon's disability discrimination statute because regular and predicable attendance  [*15] is an essential function for a customer care representative. In short, T-Mobile argues that Mayhew's proposed accommodation which would allow her to be absent for her heart condition without advance notice is unreasonable.
Mayhew counters that, due to the unique nature of the customer service representative position, attendance is less significant than in other jobs. She presents evidence that T-Mobile suffered no problems due to her unpredictable absences and that her team was easily able to absorb her workload. (Doc. 46, p. 28.) She notes that no evidence in the record establishes that she was not up to date on company policies due to her absences and points out that the impact of her absence on T-Mobile's call center overall call volume, customer wait times, or call quality was negligible because the aspects of the call center workload were measured on a nationwide basis. (Id. pp. 28-29.)
I note that the Ninth Circuit has held that "where a leave of absence would reasonably accommodate an employee's disability and permit him, upon his return, to perform the essential functions of the job, that employee is otherwise qualified under the ADA." Humphrey, 239 F.3d at 1136 (citing Nunes v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 164 F.3d 1243, 1247 (9th Cir. 1999);  [*16] see also Kimbro v. Atlantic Richfield Co., 889 F.2d 869 (9th Cir. 1990)(holding a leave of absence for employee with cluster migraine headaches was reasonable accommodation). I find that there is at least a triable issue of fact concerning whether Mayhew would have been able to perform the essential duties of her job with the accommodation of a work-when-able schedule. I Find also that there exist issues of fact regarding whether T-Mobile engaged in the interactive process after Mayhew expressly requested a work-when-able accommodation. The record shows that Mayhew made this request, but it is unclear whether T-Mobile communicated and made a good faith exploration of this possibility. Barnett, 228 F.3d at 1114. Accordingly, I recommend that summary judgment on Mayhew's claim that T-Mobile violated the ADA by failing to accommodate her disability and by terminating her based on her disability be denied.
3. Mayhew's Motion For Partial Summary Judgment
Mayhew moves for partial summary judgment asserting that it is undisputed that her leave from work on October 4, 2005 and from October 20 through 22, 2005 was protected leave under the FMLA and the OFLA and, as such, T-Mobile's consideration  [*17] of these dates in its decision to terminate her violates the FMLA and the OFLA.
In support of her summary judgment motion, Mayhew contends that it is undisputed that she reported to T-Mobile that she was absent on October 4, 2005 due to her mother's heart attack. She also asserts that there is no dispute that from October 20 to 22, 2005, she was incapacitated due to the flu, under a doctor's care, and had reported such to T-Mobile. T-Mobile disputes that Mayhew properly notified her supervisor that the October absences qualified for FMLA and OFLA coverage.
As discussed above, there exists a triable issue of fact regarding Mayhew's report of her mother's heart attack. The record establishes that T-Mobile's planning resource department noted that Mayhew's October 4, 2005 absence stemmed from her mother's illness; however, T-Mobile asserts that Mayhew only reported to her supervisor that she herself was sick. T-Mobile states that only reports to the supervisors are considered when determining whether to discipline an employee and stated at oral argument that there was no "cross pollination" between the planning resource data base and the discipline database.
Further, an issue of fact exists  [*18] regarding whether T-Mobile was on notice that Mayhew was incapacitated by the flu such that FMLA leave was triggered. Mayhew contends that her reports to T-Mobile that she was absent due to flu and under a doctor's care dictate a conclusion that these days were FMLA leave. T-Mobile contends that Mayhew never described complications to T-Mobile. A review of the record shows that the absences were logged as out because ill and only the notation on the 22nd described a doctor's visit. (Doc. 37-6, p. 31.) I recognize that is the employer's responsibility, not the employee's to determine whether a leave request is likely to be covered by the FMLA. Bailey, 275 F.3d at 1185 (9th Cir.2002); Bachelder, 259 F.3d at 1130-31. However, from the record as it exists, I find that it is not clear whether T-Mobile had enough information to make a determination that the October leave was covered by the FMLA and OFLA.
I find that summary judgment is not appropriate at this time. Instead, it is more appropriate for Mayhew to wait to make a motion for judgment at the close of evidence during trial. This will allow more development of the record to better establish what information Mayhew conveyed to T-Mobile  [*19] regarding the October absences. Accordingly, I recommend that Mayhew's motion for partial summary judgment be denied.

Conclusion
T-Mobile's motion to strike the excess pages in Mayhew's concise statement of fact in opposition to summary judgment is DENIED. T-Mobile's motion to strike certain deposition transcript excerpts and affidavits offered in support of Mayhew's opposition to summary judgment (doc. 62) is DENIED.
I recommend that T-Mobile's motion for summary judgment be GRANTED with respect to Mayhew's claim that T-Mobile violated the ADA and Oregon Disability Discrimination statute by failing to accommodate her son's disabilities. I recommend that T-Mobile's motion be DENIED as to Mayhew's FMLA and OFLA claims and her failure to accommodate claim based on her heart problem.
I recommend that Mayhew's motion for partial summary judgment be DENIED.
The above Findings and Recommendation will be referred to a United States District Judge for review. Objections, if any, are due no later than June 10, 2009. The parties are advised that the failure to file objections within the specified time may waive the right to appeal the District Court's order. See Martinez v. Ylst, 951 F.2d 1153 (9th Cir. 1991).  [*20] If no objections are filed, review of the Findings and Recommendation will go under advisement on that date. If objections are filed, any party may file a response within fourteen days after the date the objections are filed. Review of the Findings and Recommendation will go under advisement when the response is due or filed, whichever date is earlier.
Dated this 14th day of Sept, 2009
/s/ Thomas M. Coffin
THOMAS M. COFFIN
United States Magistrate Judge


End of Document

