McMillian v. Golden State FC LLC
United States District Court for the Central District of California
July 20, 2020, Decided; July 20, 2020, Filed
Case No. CV 19-2121 MWF (JCx)

Reporter
2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 190418 *
Marcellus McMillian v. Golden State FC LLC et al.
Subsequent History: Motion granted by, in part, Motion denied by, in part, Without prejudice, Request denied by, Decision reached on appeal by McMillian v. Golden State FC LLC, 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 236926, 2020 WL 8483770 (C.D. Cal., Dec. 14, 2020)
Later proceeding at McMillian v. Golden State FC LLC, 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 237913 (C.D. Cal., Dec. 16, 2020)
Counsel:  [*1] For Amazon.com Services Inc., Amazon.com Inc., Doe 1, Amazon.com Inc., formerly known as, Defendants: Robert Jon Hendricks, LEAD ATTORNEY, Morgan Lewis and Bockius LLP, San Francisco, CA; Barbara A Fitzgerald, LEAD ATTORNEY, Morgan Lewis and Bockius LLP, Los Angeles, CA.
For Marcellus McMillian, an individual, Plaintiff: Griselda S Rodriguez, LEAD ATTORNEY, G-Rod Law A.P.C., Westlake Village, CA; Duc Truyen Tran, Rodriguez and Tran LLP, Los Angeles, CA; Anthony Nguyen, LEAD ATTORNEY, Shegerian and Associates, Los Angeles, CA; Carney R Shegerian, LEAD ATTORNEY, Shegerian and Associates Inc, Los Angeles, CA.
For Amazon Fulfillment Services Inc., Defendant: Barbara A Fitzgerald, LEAD ATTORNEY, Morgan Lewis and Bockius LLP, Los Angeles, CA; Robert Jon Hendricks, LEAD ATTORNEY, Morgan Lewis and Bockius LLP, San Francisco, CA.
For Mark Lemke, Mediator (ADR Panel): Mark Anthony Lemke, LEAD ATTORNEY, Lemke Mediation, Los Angeles, CA.
For Golden State FC LLC, Defendant: Robert Jon Hendricks, LEAD ATTORNEY, Morgan Lewis and Bockius LLP, San Francisco, CA; Barbara A Fitzgerald, LEAD ATTORNEY, Morgan Lewis and Bockius LLP, Los Angeles, CA; Alexander L Grodan, Morgan Lewis and Bockius LLP, Costa Mesa, [*2]  CA.
Judges: Honorable MICHAEL W. FITZGERALD, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: MICHAEL W. FITZGERALD
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES—GENERAL

Proceedings (In Chambers): ORDER RE: DEFENDANTS' MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT [31]
Before the Court is Defendants Amazon Fulfillment Services, Inc., Amazon.com Services, Inc., Amazon.com, Inc., and Golden State FC LLC's Motion for Summary Judgment (the "Motion"), filed on February 14, 2020. (Docket Nos. 31, 31-1). On February 24, 2020, Plaintiff Marcellus McMillan filed an Opposition. (Docket No. 33). On May 8, 2020, Defendants filed their Reply. (Docket No. 40).
The Motion was set to be heard on May 18, 2020. The Court read and considered the papers on the Motion and deemed the matter appropriate for decision without oral argument. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 78(b); Local Rule 7-15. The hearing was therefore VACATED and removed from the Court's calendar. Vacating the hearing was further required by the Continuity of Operations Plan arising from the COVID-19 emergency.
For the reasons set forth below, the Motion is GRANTED in part and DENIED in part as follows: the Motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's Second, Third, Sixth, and Tenth Claims for Relief, and as to Plaintiff's ability to recover punitive damages; and Defendants' [*3]  Motion is DENIED as to Plaintiff's First, Fourth, Fifth, Seventh, Eighth, and Ninth Claims for Relief, and as to Plaintiff's ability to recover economic damages.

I. BACKGROUND
The following facts are based on the evidence, as viewed in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, the non-moving party. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986) (On a motion for summary judgment, "[t]he evidence of the nonmovant is to be believed, and all justifiable inferences are to be drawn in his [her, or its] favor."). Unless otherwise noted by the Court, the facts are undisputed.
Defendants employed Plaintiff as a warehouse associate. (Defendants' Statement of Uncontroverted Facts ("DSUF") ¶ 1 (Docket No. 31-2); Plaintiff's Statement of Genuine Disputes ("PSGD") ¶ 1 (Docket No. 33-1); Defendants' Reply to PSGD ¶ 1 (Docket No. 40-1)).
Following an injury sustained in an automobile accident, Plaintiff took an approved leave of absence from August 3, 2017 through August 31, 2017. (Defendants' Reply to PSGD ¶¶ 3, 5). Plaintiff returned to work on September 2, 2017 and continued working through October 2017. (Id. ¶¶ 5-6).
On November 3, 2017, Plaintiff requested a second leave of absence through November 19, 2017. (Id. ¶¶ 9, 11). His request was approved. [*4]  (Id. ¶ 14). From November 2017 through February 2018, Plaintiff requested a total of eight extensions of his second leave. (Id. ¶¶ 15, 48). While each of the first seven extensions was approved, or at least ultimately approved, his eighth request was denied. (Id. ¶¶ 24, 28, 35, 38, 46, 52).
The factual dispute centers on whether Plaintiff's requests were reasonable and whether they were timely submitted to the appropriate entity. Plaintiff argues his requests were reasonable and that his doctor placed on him on repetitive periods of two weeks of disability because his situation was progressing, and it was difficult to predict exactly when he would be able to return to work without pain. (Opposition at 2-3; PSGD ¶¶ 4, 21-23). Defendants argue Plaintiff knew he was unable to work and was essentially requesting an uncertain and possibly permanent leave of absence. (Motion at 18; DSUF ¶¶ 4, 16, 21, 23).
Plaintiff also argues the system for requesting leave and submitting supportive documentation was confusing. (PSGD ¶ 3). Plaintiff argues it was never clear how his leave was approved, who was approving it, and what the correct submission methods were because there were different, nonoverlapping processes [*5]  for different types of leave requests. (See e.g., id. ¶¶ 3, 10, 14, 18, 66). Plaintiff argues this confusion contributed to several of his requests being deemed untimely by Defendants. (Opposition at 2-4; PSGD ¶¶ 18, 19). Defendants, on the other hand, argue that they attempted to clarify their systems to Plaintiff by: allowing human resources to be a secondary communication method, directing him to submit his leave requests to their third party, leave-processing vendor, and making available to Plaintiff the Leave of Absence and Accommodation Guide. (DSUF ¶¶ 31-34).
Defendants argue Plaintiff's eighth request was denied for lack of proper documentation and he was terminated for job abandonment. (DSUF ¶¶ 52, 62). Plaintiff argues he was submitting supportive documentation from his doctor as soon as he had it and that he did eventually submit supportive documentation for his eighth request that should have been processed to prevent his termination. (PSGD ¶¶ 52-54, 58, 62).
More than a month after Plaintiff's termination, Defendants' Accommodation Manager conducted an inquiry on Plaintiff's termination and determined Plaintiff did eventually provide documentation that should have excused his absence for his eighth extension [*6]  request. (PSGD ¶ 63; Defendants' Reply to PSGD ¶ 63). Defendants maintain Plaintiff's termination was still proper because the documentation was not received until after his request had been denied. (DSUF ¶ 65).
Eight months after his termination, and almost one month after Plaintiff filed this lawsuit, Defendants offered to reinstate Plaintiff. (Defendants' Reply to PSGD ¶ 69). While the parties disagree about why, Plaintiff did not accept. (Id. ¶ 73).

II. LEGAL STANDARD
In deciding a motion for summary judgment under Rule 56, the Court applies Anderson, Celotex, and their Ninth Circuit progeny. Anderson, 477 U.S. 242, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202; Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). "The court shall grant summary judgment if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a).
The Ninth Circuit has defined the shifting burden of proof governing motions for summary judgment where the non-moving party bears the burden of proof at trial:
The moving party initially bears the burden of proving the absence of a genuine issue of material fact. Where the non-moving party bears the burden of proof at trial, the moving party need only prove that there is an absence of evidence to support the non-moving party's [*7]  case. Where the moving party meets that burden, the burden then shifts to the non-moving party to designate specific facts demonstrating the existence of genuine issues for trial. This burden is not a light one. The non-moving party must show more than the mere existence of a scintilla of evidence. The non-moving party must do more than show there is some "metaphysical doubt" as to the material facts at issue. In fact, the non-moving party must come forth with evidence from which a jury could reasonably render a verdict in the non-moving party's favor.
Coomes v. Edmonds Sch. Dist. No. 15, 816 F.3d 1255, 1259 n.2 (9th Cir. 2016) (quoting In re Oracle Corp. Sec. Litig., 627 F.3d 376, 387 (9th Cir. 2010)). "A motion for summary judgment may not be defeated, however, by evidence that is 'merely colorable' or 'is not significantly probative.'" Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249-50.
"When the party moving for summary judgment would bear the burden of proof at trial, 'it must come forward with evidence which would entitle it to a directed verdict if the evidence went uncontroverted at trial.'" C.A.R. Transp. Brokerage Co. v. Darden Restaurants, Inc., 213 F.3d 474, 480 (9th Cir. 2000) (quoting Houghton v. South, 965 F.2d 1532, 1536 (9th Cir. 1992)).

III. DISCUSSION
Defendants move for summary judgment as to each of Plaintiff's ten claims as well as Plaintiff's economic damages and punitive damages theories. (See generally Motion). The claims are addressed in the same order presented in the briefs, which is more [*8]  logical than the order in the Second Amended Complaint.

A. Plaintiff's Fourth Claim: Failure to Accommodate
California's Fair Employment and Housing Act ("FEHA") prohibits "an employer or other entity covered by this part to fail to make reasonable accommodation for the known physical or mental disability of an applicant or employee." Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(m). "Where a necessary accommodation is obvious, where the employee requests a specific and available reasonable accommodation that the employer fails to provide, or where an employer participates in a good faith interactive process and identifies a reasonable accommodation but fails to provide it, a plaintiff may sue under section 12940(m)." Nadaf-Rahrov v. Neiman Marcus Group, Inc., 166 Cal. App. 4th 952, 983, 83 Cal. Rptr. 3d 190 (2008). To establish a prima facie case for failure to accommodate, a plaintiff must show that: (1) she suffers from a disability covered by FEHA; (2) she is otherwise qualified to do her job; and (3) the defendant failed to reasonably accommodate her disability. See Jensen v. Wells Fargo Bank, 85 Cal. App. 4th 245, 263, 102 Cal. Rptr. 2d 55 (2000).
Defendants argue Plaintiff's Failure to Accommodate Claim fails as a matter of law for four reasons. (Motion at 18-23).
First, Defendants argue Plaintiff's leave request was tantamount to indefinite leave that is per se unreasonable and not entitled to accommodation. (Motion [*9]  at 18-19). The Court disagrees. It is true that an indefinite leave could well amount to an unreasonable accommodation. See, e.g., Samper v. Providence St. Vincent Med. Ctr., 675 F.3d 1233, 1240 (9th Cir. 2012) ("An accommodation that would allow Samper to 'simply . . . miss work whenever she felt she needed to and apparently for so long as she felt she needed to [a]s a matter of law . . . [is] not reasonable' on its face.") (alterations in original) (quoting Waggoner v. Olin Corp., 169 F.3d 481, 485 (7th Cir. 1999)).
A jury could find, however, that Defendants were not justified in assuming that the requested leave would have been indefinite. Besides the fact that the leave was previously extended, there is no evidence supporting Defendants' hunch that Plaintiff would not have ever been able to return to work. It could have been plausible that only an additional two-week extension was necessary for Plaintiff to return to his position. See Kimbro v. Atl. Richfield Co., 889 F.2d 869, 879 (9th Cir. 1989) (holding that an employer was liable for disability discrimination because it was "plausible" that the employee would return to work after a leave of absence); Nadaf-Rahrov v. Neiman Marcus Grp., Inc., 166 Cal. App. 4th 952, 988-89, 83 Cal. Rptr. 3d 190 (2008) ("Although an employer need not provide repeated leaves of absence for an employee who has a poor prognosis of recovery, the mere fact that a medical leave has been repeatedly extended does not necessarily establish that it [*10]  would continue indefinitely."). A jury could determine, therefore, that Defendants acted prematurely when they simply assumed that Plaintiff would not have ever returned to work.
Second, Defendants argue that Plaintiff's eight extensions are beyond the point of reasonableness as a matter of law. (Motion at 19-20). But as courts have repeatedly emphasized, what constitutes a reasonable accommodation is a fact-specific inquiry that is not subject to bright-line rules. See Wong v. Regents of Univ. of California, 192 F.3d 807, 818 (9th Cir. 1999) ("Because the issue of reasonableness depends on the individual circumstances of each case, this determination requires a fact-specific, individualized analysis of the disabled individual's circumstances and the accommodations that might allow him to meet the program's standards."); Joseph v. Target Corp., No. 2:12-CV-01962-KJM, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 8130, 2015 WL 351444, at *12 (E.D. Cal. Jan. 23, 2015) ("Determining whether reasonable accommodation has been made is a fact-specific individualized inquiry that takes into account the totality of the circumstances.") (citing Hanson v. Lucky Stores, Inc., 74 Cal. App. 4th 215, 228 n.11, 87 Cal. Rptr. 2d 487 (1999) (stating that "the reasonableness of an accommodation is generally a factual question")).
Here, the Court cannot determine as a matter of law that an eighth extension was unreasonable as a jury could determine that the eighth [*11]  extension was reasonable depending on the specific facts available to Defendants. See Nunes v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 164 F.3d 1243, 1247 (9th Cir. 1999) (stating that "[e]ven an extended medical leave, or an extension of an existing leave period, may be a reasonable accommodation if it does not pose an undue hardship on the employer," and holding that whether a nine-month leave constituted a reasonable accommodation is an issue of fact that should be left to the jury). Again, Defendants' hunch that Plaintiff would not have ever been able to return to work is insufficient to prove as a matter of law the extension was not reasonable. A reasonable jury could determine that based on the facts of this case, an additional extension would not have imposed an undue hardship on Defendants and was a reasonable accommodation.
Third, Defendants argue they were entitled to deny leave when Plaintiff failed to submit timely supporting documentation. (Motion at 21-22). Unlike the cases cited by Defendants, however, Plaintiff had not only provided proper supportive documentation for seven prior requests but also ultimately did provide supportive documentation for his eighth extension request. Whether Plaintiff's failure to submit the documentation timely for his eighth [*12]  extension request constitutes a failure to engage in the interactive process is a question of fact for the jury to decide. Jensen, 85 Cal. App. 4th at 266 (holding that an employer failed to meet its burden on summary judgment that an employee did not engage in the interactive process even where the employer had evidence that the employee was not cooperating with reasonable efforts made by the employer).
Fourth and finally, Defendants argue Plaintiff failed to participate in good faith in the accommodations process by giving return to work dates that were only guesses. (Motion at 22-23). Again, whether guessing when Plaintiff could return to work constitutes a failure to participate in good faith in the accommodations process is a question of fact for the jury to decide.
Accordingly, Defendants' Motion is DENIED as to Plaintiff's Fourth Claim for failure to accommodate.

B. Plaintiff's Fifth Claim: Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process
"Under FEHA, an employer must engage in a good faith interactive process with the disabled employee to explore the alternatives to accommodate the disability." Nealy v. City of Santa Monica, 234 Cal. App. 4th 359, 379, 184 Cal. Rptr. 3d 9 (2015) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted); Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(n) (providing liability for "an employer . . . [that] fail[s] to engage [*13]  in a timely, good faith, interactive process with the employee or applicant to determine effective reasonable accommodations").
Defendants repackage their arguments addressed above regarding Plaintiff's failure to engage in the interactive process by not timely submitting documentation and by only guessing when he would be able to return to work instead of providing a date certain. (Motion at 22-23). For the same reasons these arguments failed with respect to Plaintiff's Fourth Claim, they fail here: this is an intensive factual inquiry that cannot be determined as a matter of law. A reasonable jury could find Plaintiff did engage in good faith in the interactive process by providing documentation when it was available to him and by attempting to estimate when he could return to work to the best of his abilities.
Accordingly, Defendants' Motion is DENIED as to Plaintiff's Fifth Claim for failure to engage in the interactive process.

C. Plaintiff's First Claim: Disability Discrimination
In a disability discrimination claim under FEHA, "the prima facie case requires the plaintiff to show he or she (1) suffered from a disability, or was regarded as suffering from a disability; (2) could perform [*14]  the essential duties of the job with or without reasonable accommodations, and (3) was subjected to an adverse employment action because of the disability or perceived disability." Wills v. Super. Ct., 195 Cal. App. 4th 143, 159-60, 125 Cal. Rptr. 3d 1 (2011). Especially at the summary judgment phase where the plaintiff is not the moving party, "[t]he prima facie burden is light; the evidence necessary to sustain the burden is minimal." Sandell v. Taylor-Listug, Inc., 188 Cal. App. 4th 297, 310, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 453 (2010). "[A]n employee need only offer sufficient circumstantial evidence to give rise to a reasonable inference of discrimination." Id.
Defendants argue Plaintiff cannot make out a prima facie case because he cannot show he was terminated because of a discriminatory motive. (Motion at 25-26). The evidence presented at this stage, however, construed in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, indicates Plaintiff was disabled following a car accident, was taking an extended leave of absence from his employer, and that Defendants were unsure about whether Plaintiff would be able to return to work without further accommodation. Accordingly, the Court cannot say that no reasonable jury could conclude that Defendants terminated Plaintiff because of his disability. Accordingly, Plaintiff has made a prima facie showing of disability discrimination [*15]  sufficient at this stage in the proceedings. See Diaz v. Fed. Express Corp., 373 F. Supp. 2d 1034, 1064 (C.D. Cal. 2005) ("Although Defendant may have fired Plaintiff because of his absences, Plaintiff alleges that his absences were caused by his mental condition. Thus, if the trier of fact finds that Plaintiff's condition constituted a disability for purposes of the FEHA, and if the trier of fact believes that Plaintiff's absences were caused by that disability, Plaintiff will have established that Defendant's termination of Plaintiff was an adverse employment action taken because of Plaintiff's disability.")
Because Plaintiff has met his prima facie burden, Defendants must now demonstrate that "'there was a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its decision to terminate plaintiff's employment.'" Dep't of Fair Employment & Hous. v. Lucent Techs., Inc., 642 F.3d 728, 745 (9th Cir. 2011) (quoting Avila v. Cont'l Airlines, Inc., 165 Cal. App. 4th 1237, 82 Cal. Rptr. 3d 440 (2008)).
Defendants argue their legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for terminating Plaintiff was that he was not on an approved leave and was not coming to work. (Motion at 26). Plaintiff argues that a reasonable jury could find that not only was terminating an employee who was communicating with his employer about additional leave requests not a legitimate, nondiscriminatory decision but doing so was simply a pretext. (Opposition at 18). The Court agrees with Plaintiff [*16]  that regardless of whether Defendants' reason may have been legitimate, a reasonable jury could find it was pretextual.
The parties agree that many of Plaintiff's requests were received by Defendants beyond his expected return to work date; i.e., that at certain points across Plaintiff's additional requests for extension of leave, Plaintiff was (from Defendants' perspective) not on leave and not coming to work. (PSGD ¶¶ 19, 38). Yet in none of the prior instances did Defendants terminate Plaintiff for this behavior. Plaintiff also disputes Defendants' assertion that they never received his supporting documentation and testified that he sent the supporting documentation for his eighth leave request timely and was in ongoing communications with Defendants about his medical situation. (PSGD ¶ 49). Accordingly, the Court cannot determine as a matter of law that Defendants' stated reason for Plaintiff's termination was legitimate and not pretextual.
Additionally, "conduct resulting from a disability is considered to be part of the disability, rather than a separate basis for termination." Humphrey v. Mem'l Hospitals Ass'n, 239 F.3d 1128, 1139-40 (9th Cir. 2001). Here, it is undisputed that Plaintiff's absence from work resulted from his disability. "By citing [*17]  his absences as a basis for termination, Defendants ipso facto cited his disability." McInteer v. Ashley Distribution Servs., Ltd., 40 F. Supp. 3d 1269, 1286 (C.D. Cal. 2014). Accordingly, construed in a light most favorable to Plaintiff, there is sufficient evidence of pretext.
Defendants' Motion is DENIED as to Plaintiff's First Claim for disability discrimination under FEHA.

D. Plaintiff's Eighth Claim: Retaliation
"To establish a prima facie case of retaliation [under FEHA] a plaintiff must show (1) she engaged in a protected activity, (2) her employer subjected her to an adverse employment action, and (3) there is a causal link between the two." Haberman v. Cengage Learning, Inc., 180 Cal. App. 4th 365, 386-87, 103 Cal. Rptr. 3d 19 (2009) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). The necessary connection "may be established by an inference derived from circumstantial evidence, such as the employer's knowledge that the employee engaged in protected activities and the proximity in time between the protected action and allegedly retaliatory employment decision." Morgan v. Regents of Univ. of Cal., 88 Cal. App. 4th 52, 69, 105 Cal. Rptr. 2d 652 (2000) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). Once an employee establishes a prima facie case of retaliation, the burden shifts to the employer to show that its conduct was based on legitimate, non-retaliatory reasons. See Guz v. Bechtel Nat. Inc., 24 Cal. 4th 317, 354-55, 100 Cal. Rptr. 2d 352, 8 P.3d 1089 (2000) (describing the burden-shifting test).
Defendants challenge Plaintiff's [*18]  ability to establish a prima facie case of retaliation, again arguing that he cannot prove he was terminated because of his disability. (Motion at 27-28). Defendants also argue their legitimate, non-retaliatory reason for terminating Plaintiff was his absence from work without being on an approved leave. (Id.). For the same reasons described above, Defendants have failed to prove this Claim fails as a matter of law. A reasonable jury could find that Plaintiff was retaliated against for requesting and/or taking a leave of absence and that Defendants' claim that he failed to submit timely documentation was simply pretextual.
Accordingly, Defendants' Motion is DENIED as to Plaintiff's Eighth Claim for retaliation under FEHA.

E. Plaintiff's Ninth Claim: Wrongful Termination
Defendants only move for summary judgment on this claim insofar as it is dependent on Plaintiff's FEHA claims, which Defendants believe fail as a matter of law. (Motion at 28). Because the Court determines that Plaintiff's FEHA claims survive, so too does Plaintiff's wrongful termination claim.
Accordingly, Defendants' Motion is DENIED as to Plaintiff's Ninth Claim for wrongful termination.

F. Plaintiff's Second Claim: Disability-Based [*19]  Harassment
California law draws a sharp distinction between discrimination and harassment claims. See Janken v. GM Hughes Electronics, 46 Cal. App. 4th 55, 62-63, 53 Cal. Rptr. 2d 741 (1996); see also Reno v. Baird, 18 Cal. 4th 640, 645-47, 76 Cal. Rptr. 2d 499, 957 P.2d 1333 (1998) (summarizing Janken with approval and affirming the delineation between harassment and discrimination). A claim for harassment cannot be based on supervisory actions, such as "hiring and firing, job or project assignments, promotion or demotion, performance evaluations, the provision of support, the assignment or non-assignment of supervisory functions, [etc.]" Janken, 46 Cal. App. 4th at 63. Rather, "harassment consists of conduct outside of the scope of necessary job performance, conduct presumably engaged in for personal gratification, because of meanness or bigotry, or for other personal motives." Id. Importantly, a harassment claim based on managerial functions fails "even if improper motivation is alleged." Id. (emphasis added). According to Janken, "[i]f personnel management decisions are improperly motivated, the remedy is a suit against the employer for discrimination." Id.
Plaintiff's only purported foundation for his harassment claim is that he was "subjected" to a "confusing accommodation process" and that "Defendants callously ignored him." (Opposition at 20). However, confusion about the accommodation process, [*20]  even if intentional on the part of Defendants, is not enough to rise to the level of harassment. Plaintiff does not point to any allegations, let alone demonstrate genuine disputes of material fact, regarding any particular interactions that would constitute severe or pervasive harassment.
Accordingly, Defendants' Motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's Second Claim for disability-based harassment.

G. Plaintiff's Third Claim: Failure to Prevent Discrimination and Harassment
FEHA makes it unlawful for an employer "to fail to take all reasonable steps necessary to prevent discrimination and harassment from occurring." Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(k). "The employer's duty to prevent harassment and discrimination is affirmative and mandatory." Northrop Grumman Corp. v. Workers' Comp. Appeals Bd., 103 Cal. App. 4th 1021, 1035, 127 Cal. Rptr. 2d 285 (2002).
"A plaintiff seeking to recover on a failure to prevent discrimination claim under FEHA must show that (1) [he] was subjected to discrimination; (2) defendant failed to take all reasonable steps to prevent discrimination; and (3) this failure caused plaintiff to suffer injury, damage, loss or harm." Achal v. Gate Gourmet, Inc., 114 F. Supp. 3d 781, 804 (N.D. Cal. 2015). "Termination from employment is an injury sufficient to support recovery under a section 12940(k) failure to prevent discrimination claim." Id.
Defendants argue they took reasonable steps to prevent discrimination [*21]  in the workplace generally, including policies allowing reasonable accommodations, prohibiting discrimination, and encouraging employees to report discrimination. (Motion at 30). Plaintiff argues that Defendants' failure to prevent his specific discrimination is evidence that the "reasonable steps" Defendants have in place are insufficient. (Opposition at 21). Plaintiff, however, gives no additional reasoning or explanation for why Defendants' policies would be unreasonable. In effect, Plaintiff is asking the Court to hold that the existence of the first element—that Defendants discriminated against him—is sufficient to prove the second element—that Defendants failed to take all reasonable steps to prevent it. Plaintiff's argument fails as a matter of law. Plaintiff raises no genuine disputes of material fact as to the sufficiency of Defendants' anti-discrimination policies and whether Defendants could have or should have taken additional steps to prevent discrimination.
Accordingly, Defendants' Motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's Third Claim for failure to prevent discrimination and harassment.

H. Plaintiff's Seventh Claim: Negligent Supervision
Defendants only move for summary judgment on this claim [*22]  insofar as Plaintiff's foundational predicate of harassment or discrimination does not exist. (Motion at 30-31). Although their Motion lays out the legal standard, which includes that a plaintiff must prove "the employer breached an owed duty to use due care," the two sentences devoted to this argument that follow do not articulate why Plaintiff's claim would fail as a matter of law except that the claim is derivative. (Id.). Plaintiff's Opposition then only argues that his underlying claims survive and so too should his negligent supervision claim. (Opposition at 22). Defendants then passingly assert in the three sentences dedicated to this argument in their Reply that the claim would also fail because "[i]njury alone does not give rise to liability for negligence." (Reply at 26).
Because it is Defendants' burden on a motion for summary judgment to prove that the claim fails as a matter of law, and because Defendants cite no case law for their proposition and otherwise fail to expound on this argument in their Motion, the Court will not accept the Reply brief's passing assertion that Plaintiff's claim fails. Defendants have not shown that there is no triable issue of fact regarding Plaintiff's negligent [*23]  supervision claim.
Accordingly, Defendants' Motion is DENIED as to Plaintiff's Seventh Claim for negligent supervision.

I. Plaintiff's Tenth Claim: Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress
A claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress is based on four elements: (1) extreme and outrageous conduct; (2) intention to cause, or reckless disregard of the probability of causing, emotional distress; (3) severe emotional suffering; and (4) actual and proximate causation of emotional distress. Cole v. Fair Oaks Fire Protection Dist., 43 Cal. 3d 148, 155, 233 Cal. Rptr. 308, 729 P.2d 743 (1987) (footnote omitted). At issue here is only the first element, which requires allegations of conduct that is "beyond the bounds of human decency," Janken, 46 Cal. App. 4th at 80, and "so extreme as to exceed all bounds of that usually tolerated in a civilized community." Cervantez v. J.C. Penny Co., 24 Cal. 3d 579, 156 Cal. Rptr. 198 (1979) (superseded by statute on other grounds).
Defendants argue Plaintiff's termination, even without cause, cannot constitute extreme or outrageous conduct. (Motion at 31-32). Plaintiff argues his claim should survive summary judgment because he was "discriminated against, harassed, and retaliated against" and because he "effectively communicated with Defendants" while Defendants' interactions with Plaintiff "were outrageous." (Opposition at 22-23).
Defendants' conduct in terminating [*24]  Plaintiff, however, even if improperly motivated, would be insufficient to support a claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress. Walker v. Boeing Corp., 218 F. Supp. 2d 1177, 1190 (C.D. Cal. 2002) ("Terminating an employee for improper or discriminatory reasons, like many adverse personnel management decisions, is insufficiently extreme or outrageous to give rise to a claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress."); Bartalini v. Blockbuster Entm't, Inc., No. C-98-3943-SC, 1999 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 17359, 1999 WL 1012383, at *10 (N.D. Cal. Nov.8, 1999) ("[C]ourts have generally refused to extend liability for emotional distress to terminations based upon discriminatory motives unless accompanied by aggravating factors . . . .").
Accordingly, Defendants' Motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's Tenth Claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress.

J. Plaintiff's Sixth Claim: Breach of Contract
Defendants argue that Plaintiff was an at-will employee, terminable at will by either himself or Defendants. (Motion at 32).
"An employment, having no specified term, may be terminated at the will of either party on notice to the other." Cal. Lab. Code § 2922. While parties are of course free to contract for different employment relationships, if the employment relationship is at will, it "may be ended by either party at any time without cause, [*25]  for any or no reason, and subject to no procedure except the statutory requirement of notice." Guz, 24 Cal. 4th at 335 (internal quotations omitted).
Plaintiff's only argument in defense of his claim is that the at-will language in the employee handbook does not necessarily mean the employment is at will. (Opposition at 23). Plaintiff, however, does not present any genuine dispute of material fact that would suggest otherwise—no contrary language in another document, no allegations of conversations with Defendants to the contrary, no argument that there was another implied agreement, etc. In fact, Plaintiff's Opposition fails to point to any contract, implied or otherwise, in support of his breach of contract claim. Plaintiff also does not raise a triable issue of fact about any breach that occurred.
Accordingly, Defendants' Motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's Sixth Claim for breach of contract.

K. Economic and Punitive Damages
Defendants argue that Plaintiff cannot recover economic damages for the time period after Defendants offered to reinstate him and that he cannot recover punitive damages because Plaintiff cannot show Defendants are guilty of oppression, fraud, or malice. (Motion at 32-34).
First, the parties agree that [*26]  Plaintiff would not be entitled to recover economic damages if he unreasonably refused an unconditional offer of employment. Plaintiff argues, however, that the offer Defendants made was contingent and that because Defendants only made the offer after Plaintiff filed this lawsuit, he had justifiable concerns in taking the offer. (Opposition at 23-24). That issue is not properly resolved at the summary judgment phase. Whether Plaintiff reasonably refused and whether the offer was conditional are questions of fact best suited for the jury. Defendants' Motion is therefore DENIED as to Plaintiff's economic damages after Defendants' reinstatement offer.
Second, the parties also agree that Plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages only he can demonstrate Defendants are guilty of oppression, fraud, or malice. Plaintiff argues that he has demonstrated this because Defendants "have had a problem of terminating employees prematurely." (Opposition at 24-25). Plaintiff has not, however, presented any evidence or otherwise raised a triable issue as to whether Defendants do in fact have that problem more broadly than his case and, more importantly, as to whether Defendants acted with oppression, fraud, or malice. See Taylor v. Superior Court, 24 Cal. 3d 890, 894, 157 Cal. Rptr. 693, 598 P.2d 854 (1979) ("Something more [*27]  than the mere commission of a tort is always required for punitive damages."). Defendants' Motion is therefore GRANTED as to Plaintiff's ability to claim punitive damages.

IV. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, the Motion is GRANTED in part and DENIED in part as follows: Defendants' Motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's Second, Third, Sixth, and Tenth Claims for Relief, and as to Plaintiff's ability to recover punitive damages; and Defendants' Motion is DENIED as to Plaintiff's First, Fourth, Fifth, Seventh, Eighth, and Ninth Claims for Relief, and as to Plaintiff's ability to recover economic damages.
IT IS SO ORDERED.


End of Document

