Mohl v. Cty. of Lebanon
United States District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania
February 27, 2013, Decided; February 27, 2013, Filed
No. 1:12-CV-00019

Reporter
2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 204490 *; 2013 WL 12410275
WILLIAM F. MOHL, Plaintiff, v. COUNTY OF LEBANON, et al., Defendants.
Subsequent History: Motion granted by, Dismissed by Mohl v. County of Lebanon, 939 F. Supp. 2d 504, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 53444 (M.D. Pa., Apr. 15, 2013)
Motion denied by Mohl v. Cty. of Lebanon, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 202845, 2014 WL 12891990 (M.D. Pa., Oct. 22, 2014)
Counsel:  [*1] For William Mohl, Plaintiff: Lisa Matukaitis, Matukaitis Law LLC, Harrisburg, PA USA.
For County of Lebanon, Michael Deleo, Individually, Desiree J. Nguyen, Individually, Melissa Light, Individually, Defendants: Alex M. Hvizda, Charles E. Wasilefski, Peters & Wasilefski, Harrisburg, PA USA.
For Mediator, Mediator: Matthew Chabal, III, James, Smith, Dietterick & Connelly LLP, Hershey, PA USA.
Judges: Hon. John E. Jones III, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: John E. Jones III
Opinion



MEMORANDUM & ORDER
Pending before the Court in this employment discrimination and civil rights action is the Defendants' Motion to Dismiss the Plaintiff's Amended Complaint. (Doc. 27). The Motion has been fully briefed and is ripe for our review. For the reasons that follow, we will grant in part and deny in part the said Motion, as more fully articulated herein.

I. STANDARD OF REVIEW
In considering a motion to dismiss pursuant to Rule 12(b)(6), courts "accept all factual allegations as true, construe the complaint in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, and determine whether, under any reasonable reading of the complaint, the plaintiff may be entitled to relief." Phillips v. County of Allegheny, 515 F.3d 224, 231 (3d Cir. 2008) (quoting Pinker v. Roche Holdings, Ltd., 292 F.3d 361, 374 n.7 (3d Cir. 2002)). In resolving a motion to dismiss pursuant to Rule 12(b)(6), a court generally [*2]  should consider only the allegations in the complaint, as well as "documents that are attached or submitted with the complaint, . . . and any matters incorporated by reference or integral to the claim, items subject to judicial notice, matters of public record, orders, [and] items appearing in the record of the case." Buck v. Hampton Twp. Sch. Dist., 452 F.3d 256, 260 (3d Cir. 2006).
A Rule 12(b)(6) motion tests the sufficiency of the complaint against the pleading requirements of Rule 8(a). Rule 8(a)(2) requires that a complaint contain a short and plain statement of the claim showing that the pleader is entitled to relief, "in order to give the defendant fair notice of what the claim is and the grounds upon which it rests." Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 555, 127 S. Ct. 1955, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929 (2007) (quoting Conley v. Gibson, 355 U.S. 41, 47, 78 S. Ct. 99, 2 L. Ed. 2d 80 (1957)). While a complaint attacked by a Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss need not contain detailed factual allegations, it must contain "sufficient factual matter, accepted as true, to 'state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face.'" Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 129 S. Ct. 1937, 1949, 173 L. Ed. 2d 868 (2009). To survive a motion to dismiss, a civil plaintiff must allege facts that "raise a right to relief above the speculative level . . . ." Victaulic Co. v. TIeman, 499 F.3d 227, 235 (3d Cir. 2007) (quoting Twombly, 550 U.S. at 555). Accordingly, to satisfy the plausibility standard, the complaint must indicate that defendant's liability is more than a "sheer possibility." Iqbal, 129 S. Ct. at 1949. "Where a complaint pleads facts that [*3]  are 'merely consistent with' a defendant's liability, it 'stops short of the line between possibility and plausibility of entitlement to relief.'" Id. (quoting Twombly, 550 U.S. at 557).
Under the two-pronged approach articulated in Twombly and later expounded upon and formalized in Iqbal, a district court must first identify all factual allegations that constitute nothing more than "legal conclusions" or "naked assertions." Twombly, 550 U.S. at 555, 557. Such allegations are "not entitled to the assumption of truth" and must be disregarded for purposes of resolving a Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss. Iqbal, 129 S. Ct. at 1950. Next, the district court must identify "the 'nub' of the . . . complaint — the well-pleaded, nonconclusory factual allegation[s]." Id. Taking these allegations as true, the district judge must then determine whether the complaint states a plausible claim for relief. See id.
However, "a complaint may not be dismissed merely because it appears unlikely that the plaintiff can prove those facts or will ultimately prevail on the merits." Phillips, 515 F.3d at 231 (citing Twombly, 550 U.S. at 556-57). Rule 8 "does not impose a probability requirement at the pleading stage, but instead simply calls for enough facts to raise a reasonable expectation that discovery will reveal evidence of the necessary element." Id. at 234.

II. [*4]  FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
In accordance with the standard of review applicable to a Motion to Dismiss, the following facts are derived from the Plaintiff's Amended Complaint (doc. 23) and viewed in a light most favorable to the Plaintiff. The Plaintiff is William F. Mohl ("Plaintiff"), a fifty-six (56) year old man who was employed by the Defendant County of Lebanon ("County") as a deputy sheriff at all relevant times. Plaintiff was hired by the County in December as a part-time deputy sheriff in December of 1999 and was promoted to full-time deputy sheriff in April of 2002. The Plaintiff performed satisfactorily throughout his career with the County.
In January of 2008, the Plaintiff was diagnosed with myositis, a systemic disease which causes muscle inflammation, muscle weakness and pain, general and fatigue and tiredness. Notwithstanding this condition, the Plaintiff was able to perform the essential functions of his job without an accommodation. In April of 2009, the Plaintiff suffered a heart attack and underwent surgery; as a result, he was hospitalized and out of work for approximately four (4) weeks.1 The Plaintiff used Family and Medical Leave Act ("FMLA") leave for this [*5]  absence. When he returned to work, he was "treated differently and retaliated against for needing to leave to care for his serious health condition."
Soon after his return to work in August of 2009, Defendant Michael DeLeo ("DeLeo"), the County Sheriff and Plaintiff's supervisor, cursed at the Plaintiff and began threatening to "get rid of" him. In October of 2009, the DeLeo denied the Plaintiff an opportunity to attend a work-related training and continued to voice his desire to "get rid of" the Plaintiff. In January of 2010, DeLeo issued unfair discipline to the Plaintiff, threatening to "take him down." The Plaintiff was thereafter denied several more training opportunities. The Plaintiff believes that this treatment was directed at him, and only at him, because of his disability.
On June 6, 2010, the Plaintiff filed a grievance with his union against the County, alleging that he had been denied a training program. On July 2, 2010, DeLeo posted the Plaintiff's FMLA leave form on a public bulletin board in the Sheriff's office. The form, in addition to Plaintiff's name, title, and Social Security number, contained the Plaintiff's handwritten notation that he suffered from a "serious [*6]  heart condition." DeLeo also talked publicly about Plaintiff's disability with his coworkers. In August of 2010, DeLeo berated the Plaintiff for two hours for not replacing the gas cap on a county van, despite the fact that it was another deputy sheriff responsible for the error. On August 16, 2010, DeLeo issued a disciplinary memo to the Plaintiff for allegedly neglecting his duties. No other deputy sheriff was treated this way by DeLeo, and no other deputy sheriff was disabled.
On August 23, 2010, the Plaintiff filed a grievance against the County, alleging that the County had violated the FMLA and HIPAA by posting Plaintiff's leave form on the office bulletin board. The County responded that there will be no more posting of any FMLA related documents or documents deemed to be confidential. The Plaintiff also filed a grievance with respect to the August 16, 2010 disciplinary memo, requesting its removal from his record. Throughout the late summer and early fall of 2010, the Plaintiff repeatedly informed Defendants, including Defendants Desiree Nguyen and Melissa Light, the County's Director and Assistant Director of Human Resources, respectively, that DeLeo's conduct had Plaintiff [*7]  concerned for his personal safety; the Plaintiff was told that nothing could be done because DeLeo was an elected official. The Plaintiff asked to be transferred, even to a part-time or janitorial position, but Nguyen informed him that there was a hiring freeze and that a transfer was not possible. DeLeo's threats toward the Plaintiff continued throughout this time, with DeLeo at one point stating that "I'll do what I want to him." The Plaintiff complained from January 2010 through November 2010 to Nguyen and DeLeo that he believed that he was being discriminated against as a result of his disability.
During an October 27, 2010 hearing, DeLeo denied posting the Plaintiff's medical information and denied knowledge of who had posted it, stating that he would investigate the matter. The Plaintiff and all Defendants again attended a grievance hearing on November 30, 2010. During that hearing, DeLeo verbally attacked the Plaintiff, admitting that he posted the FMLA form and stating: "I did it. So what. I am an elected official. I can do what I want to him. I can even put his HIPAA report in the Daily News if I want to." Immediately after that hearing, the Plaintiff suffered a panic attack [*8]  and was taken by ambulance to the hospital. He was diagnosed with anxiety and depression and prescribed medication to control those disorders.
The Plaintiff's treating physician advised him that the stress of his work environment under the supervision of DeLeo could cause him to suffer another heart attack. On or about January 19, 2011, the Plaintiff filed a pro se complaint of disability discrimination with the Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission ("PHRC"). The Defendants had knowledge of the complaint. On March 16, 2011, the Plaintiff's treating physician completed an FMLA certification which stated as follows: "The entire problem is caused by a hostile work environment due to [the Plaintiff's] boss. The patient has gone through all available channels to deal with it. He cannot escape the threats and intimidation so he is disabled by anxiety." The form went on to state that the Plaintiff is only disabled when he is in the sheriff's office under the supervision of DeLeo. After receiving this form, the Defendants "failed to engage in an interactive process" with the Plaintiff to determine whether reasonable accommodations for his disability could be made.
On April 25, 2011, the Plaintiff [*9]  provided the Defendants with a note from his physician which advised that the Plaintiff remained under the care of a doctor and could not work through June 30, 2011. On June 10, 2011, Plaintiff submitted another doctor's note to the Defendants, which provided as follows:
This letter will serve to verify the situation for which I have been treating [the Plaintiff]. He is totally disabled by anxiety and depression that result solely from a hostile work environment. He is being persecuted by his boss. The boss has posted private health information (FMLA forms) and his Social Security number publicly in order to belittle and embarrass him in his place of work.
When [the Plaintiff] approached his boss about these events in an effort to have him cease doing it, his boss's response was that [the Plaintiff] had no recourse because the boss is a political appointee and therefore cannot be fired. However, he indicated [the Plaintiff] can be fired. Indeed he has threatened to fire him as soon as he returns to work.
Until and unless the hostile work environment is eliminated, [the Plaintiff] will be totally unable to work in this particular place of business.
Despite this letter, the Defendants did [*10]  discuss accommodations with the Plaintiff. The Defendants sent a letter to the Plaintiff on July 5, 2011, which indicated that the letters from his doctor did state that the Plaintiff needed an accommodation and that Plaintiff had never requested one. The Plaintiff notes that the Defendants did not provide him with a form to request an accommodation. On July 14, 2011, the Plaintiff received a letter from the Defendants terminating his employment, stating as their reason that he had failed to return to work after expiration of his FMLA leave of absence, despite having been provided due notice.
The Plaintiff thereafter pursued administrative remedies by filing a second complaint with the PHRC/EEOC on August 22, 2011, alleging that the Defendants had engaged in discrimination and retaliation in violation of several federal and state statutes. The EEOC issued a Right to Sue Letter to the Plaintiff on or about August 15, 2012. However, neither agency took any action on the Plaintiff's second complaint in the one-year period following its filing, and thus the Plaintiff is deemed to have exhausted his administrative remedies.
On January 1, 2012, the Plaintiff initiated this action by filing [*11]  a Complaint (doc. 1) against the County and Defendants DeLeo, Nguyen, and Light. The collective Defendants moved to dismiss the Complaint (doc. 6), but that motion was mooted by the filing of the Plaintiff's First Amended Complaint (doc. 23). On September 24, 2012, the Defendants filed the instant Motion to Dismiss (doc. 27) the Amended Complaint and supporting brief (doc. 28). After several extensions of the Court's usual briefing deadlines, Plaintiff filed a responsive submission (doc. 36) on December 3, 2012, and the Defendants filed a reply brief (doc. 37) on December 10, 2012. Thus, this Motion, long pending on our docket, is thus ripe for our review.

III. DISCUSSION
In the Amended Complaint, the Plaintiff asserts that the Defendants have failed to accommodate him and discriminated against him in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq. (Count I) and the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act ("PHRA"), 43 PA. CONS. STAT. § 951 (Count II); willfully interfered with leave protected by and retaliated in violation of the Family and Medical Leave Act ("FMLA"), 29 U.S.C. §§ 2601, et seq. (Count III); and intentionally violated his constitutional right to privacy pursuant to the Fourteenth Amendment and 42 U.S.C. § 1983 (Count IV). The Defendants assert that [*12]  each count fails to state a claim for which relief can be granted. We address the Plaintiff's claims seriatim.

A. ADA Discrimination Claim
The Plaintiff contends that his employer, the Defendant County of Lebanon, has discriminated against him as a result of his disability in violation of the ADA. The ADA protects "qualified individuals" from discrimination on the basis of their disability in the employment context. See 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). In order to state a valid claim for discrimination under the ADA, a plaintiff must plead facts which establish that: "(1) he is a disabled person within the meaning of the ADA; (2) he is otherwise qualified to perform the essential functions of the job, with or without reasonable accommodations by the employer; and (3) he has suffered an otherwise adverse employment decision as a result of discrimination." Williams v. Phila. Hous. Auth. Police Dep't, 380 F.3d 751, 761 (3d Cir. 2004); Gaul v. Lucent Techs., Inc., 134 F.3d 576, 580 (3d Cir. 1998). Often, it may be necessary for an employer to engage in an interactive process with employees to identify potential reasonable accommodations. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3).
The Defendants assert that there was no duty to engage in this interactive process here because the Plaintiff is not a qualified individual with a disability pursuant to Gaul and its progeny. In his opposition papers, [*13]  the Plaintiff does not directly respond to this argument and instead contends that the failure to engage in the interactive process whatsoever is in essence a per se violation of the ADA, noting that he could have been reasonably accommodated but for the Defendants' lack of good faith and refusal to engage in this process. As noted, the Defendants counter, with reliance on Gaul, that the Plaintiff is not a qualified individual under the ADA and that the County thus had no duty to engage in the interactive process with the Plaintiff. After a thorough reading of Gaul, we agree with the Defendants that the Plaintiff has failed to plead that his proposed accommodation was reasonable and that he is a "qualified individual" within the meaning of the ADA.
Federal regulations establish a two-part test for determining whether an employee is a "qualified individual with a disability" subject to the protections of the ADA. Gaul, 134 F.3d at 580. We must consider whether the employee satisfies the requirements of the position, "such as possessing the appropriate educational background, employment experience, skills, licenses, etc.," and "whether or not the individual can perform the essential functions of the position [*14]  held or desired with or without reasonable accommodation." Id. Here, the employer does not challenge Plaintiff's qualifications and Plaintiff does not contend that he is able to perform the essential functions of his job without a reasonable accommodation. Thus, our only inquiry is whether the Plaintiff has pled facts which support that he was able to perform the functions of his job with a reasonable accommodation.
As a threshold matter, we note that the Plaintiff does not allege in the Amended Complaint, nor can it be inferred therefrom, that he has ever expressly advised the Defendants that he required an ADA accommodation because of his alleged disability. However, a reasonable inference can be drawn from Plaintiff's allegations that by advising the Defendants that "the stress and hostile work environment in the Defendants' workplace under the supervision of Defendant DeLeo could cause . . . another heart attack," he was requesting an accommodation which removed him from Defendant DeLeo's supervision since his disability was triggered by Defendant DeLeo's conduct. (Doc. 23, ¶ 80). The Plaintiff did request a transfer, "even to a part-time and/or janitor position," but was told that [*15]  there was currently a hiring freeze. (Id. ¶ 60). As the Defendants observe, however, the Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit has rejected such a request as an unreasonable accommodation not required by the ADA.
In Gaul, the plaintiff employee brought suit against his employer alleging violations of the ADA and the New Jersey Law Against Discrimination when his employer denied his "request to be transferred away from individuals causing him prolonged and inordinate stress," despite his diagnosed and documented anxiety disorder and severe depression, concluding that the request was "unreasonable as a matter of law under the ADA." Id. at 580-81. The court held that an employer does not violate the ADA by rejecting an employee's request "to be transferred away from individuals who cause [that employee] prolonged and inordinate stress." Id. at 581. The facts here are decidedly analogous: the Plaintiff contends that his depression and stress are triggered by the actions of his supervisor and that the only reasonable accommodation is a transfer away from Defendant DeLeo. The facts as pled fall squarely within the holding of Gaul, and the Plaintiff has failed to respond to its application or argue otherwise. We [*16]  thus must conclude that the Plaintiff has failed to plead that he was capable of performing the essential functions of his job with a reasonable accommodation and must dismiss his ADA claims.
Even if the Plaintiff had acknowledged this argument and persuaded the Court that Gaul was either bad law or factually distinguishable, his ADA claim fails for yet another, and perhaps more critical, reason: the Plaintiff has not pled that he is "disabled" as contemplated by the ADA. The statute provides that an individual can establish that he is disabled by demonstrating any one of three sets of circumstances: (1) that he has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of his major life activities, (2) that he has a record of such an impairment, or (3) that he is perceived as having such an impairment. See 42 U.S.C. § 12102(2). The Plaintiff does allege that he is diagnosed with myositis, but that condition does not form the basis for his ADA claim. Instead, Plaintiff asserts that his disability is his severe anxiety and depression, conditions which only occur in the presence of Defendant DeLeo.
In Gaul, the court did not reach the employer's arguments that the plaintiff was not disabled [*17]  within the meaning of the ADA because it concluded that the requested accommodation was unreasonable. Nonetheless, the court noted that "we strongly suspect that a plaintiff who is unable to work with individuals who cause him 'prolonged and inordinate stress' cannot be said to be incapable of performing a 'class of jobs or a broad range of jobs in various classes,'" as required to establish disability. Gaul, 134 F.3d at 580 n.3. The court based this supposition on the Seventh Circuit's decision in Weiler v. Household Finance Corp., 101 F.3d 519 (7th Cir. 1996), where that court held that the "major life activity of working is not 'substantially limited' if a plaintiff merely cannot work under a certain supervisor because of anxiety or stress." Id. at 524. The Third Circuit again relied on Weiler in Amiot v. Kemper Insurance Company, 122 Fed. Appx. 577, 580 (3d Cir. 2004) (nonprecedential), holding that anxiety, exhaustion, and depression triggered by a certain supervisor, absent more specific facts, do not constitute a disability under the ADA.
The Plaintiff again fails to oppose this argument in his responsive papers. Nonetheless, we agree with the rationales stated in Gaul, Amiot, and Weiler and find their application here appropriate. As noted by the Defendants and confirmed by our own review of the Amended Complaint, the Plaintiff has pled no facts to establish [*18]  that his ability to perform a particular type of job or task is impaired by his alleged disability. At best, the Plaintiff has pled that he is unable to work with a certain supervisor whose rude deportment causes stress, anxiety, and depression in the Plaintiff. This alone is insufficient to establish that the Plaintiff meets any one of the three categories of "disability" under the ADA. Accordingly, for all of the reasons stated herein, we conclude that the Plaintiff has failed to state a claim for discrimination in violation of the ADA.2

B. ADA Retaliation Claim
The Plaintiff also asserts a claim for unlawful retaliation in violation of the ADA. In order to state a valid claim for retaliation, a plaintiff must show: "(1) protected employee activity; (2) adverse action by the employer either after or contemporaneous with the employee's protected activity; and (3) a causal connection between the employee's protected activity and the employer's adverse action." Williams, 380 F.3d at 759. The Plaintiff again entirely fails to respond to the Defendants' arguments in his opposition papers, leaving both the Court and the Defendants to hypothesize as to what protected activity he purports to have engaged in. As [*19]  best we can discern from the Amended Complaint, the activity that forms the basis of the Plaintiff's retaliation claim is his purported request for an accommodation. For the reasons that follow, this claim fails.
The Third Circuit has cogently explained that unlike a discrimination claim,
[a]n ADA retaliation claim based upon an employee having requested an accommodation does not require that a plaintiff show that he or she is "disabled" within the meaning of the ADA. "The right to request an accommodation in good faith is no less a guarantee under the ADA than the right to file a complaint with the EEOC, and we have already explained that the ADA protects one who engages in the latter activity without regard to whether the complainant is 'disabled.' Thus, as opposed to showing disability, a plaintiff need only show that [he] had a reasonable, good faith belief that [he] was entitled to request the reasonable accommodation that [he] requested.
Id. at 759 n.2. Requesting an accommodation and filing a complaint with the EEOC and/or the PHRC are thus indisputably protected activities under the ADA.
The Defendants assert that even assuming that the Plaintiff did in fact request an accommodation, that activity [*20]  is so far removed from the Plaintiff's termination that any inference of a causal link between the two would be entirely unreasonable. In retaliation cases, causation can be established in two ways. Id. at 760. Suggestive temporal proximity is one means of establishing the requisite causal link in retaliation cases, and courts have held that where the timing of the allegedly retaliatory conduct is not unusually suggestive, the plaintiff must show suggestive timing plus other evidence of animosity or retaliatory animus in order to state a valid retaliation claim. See id.
Here, the Plaintiff has pled no facts which tend to prove that DeLeo or any of the other Defendants retaliated against him for requesting an accommodation for his disability. Importantly, as we have noted above, the Plaintiff has not pled that he ever actually requested an accommodation from any of the Defendants. At best, the Plaintiff has pled that the Defendants should have known that he needed an accommodation and made arrangements for the same on their own initiative when they were made aware of his disability through submitted doctor's notes. This apparent pleading deficiency aside, we nonetheless conclude that Plaintiff [*21]  has otherwise failed to plead the requisite elements of a retaliation claim. The Plaintiff has pled no facts causally linking his ultimate termination to his submission of notes advising the Defendants of his anxiety and depression disorders. Further, and importantly, the Plaintiff has neither offered any opposition to the Defendants' arguments nor pointed the Court to facts which he believes support the element of causation.3 Accordingly, we will dismiss the Plaintiff's ADA retaliation claim against the Defendant County.4

C. FMLA Claims
In Count III of the Amended Complaint, the Plaintiff asserts that the Defendants, in their individual and official capacities, willfully interfered with leave authorized by the FMLA and retaliated against him for exercising rights protected thereby. The Defendants assert that the Plaintiff has failed to state a claim for interference or retaliation, that Defendants DeLeo, Nguyen, and Light are improper FMLA defendants, and that, in any event, the Plaintiff has failed to establish that the alleged violations prejudiced him as defined by the FMLA and decisional law interpreting its provisions. We first address the Plaintiff's claim for willful interference [*22]  with FMLA leave.
The FMLA recognizes a cause of action against employers who willfully interfere with leave authorized by the FMLA. See 29 U.S.C. § 2617. Specifically, the FMLA makes it unlawful for an employer "to interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of or the attempt to exercise, any right provided" thereunder. Id. § 2615(a)(1). Federal regulations do not specifically define "interference," but provide that it can include "refusing to authorize FMLA leave," "discouraging an employee from using such leave," and "manipulation by a covered employer to avoid responsibilities under the FMLA." 29 C.F.R. § 825.220(b). The Third Circuit has held that interference does not look for discriminatory conduct or animus but only queries "whether the employer provided the employee with the entitlements guaranteed by the FMLA." Callison v. City of Phila., 430 F.3d 117, 120 (3d Cir. 2005). Thus, to prevail on an unlawful interference claim, a plaintiff must show that (1) he was entitled to a benefit under the FMLA and (2) the employer denied that benefit. See Sarnowski v. Air Brooke Limousine, 510 F.3d 398, 401 (3d Cir. 2007); see also Johnson v. Res. for Human Dev., Inc., 789 F. Supp. 2d 595, 604 (E.D. Pa. May 16, 2011).
Assuming the facts pled in the Plaintiff's Amended Complaint to be true and drawing every reasonable inference therefrom in his favor, the Plaintiff has nonetheless failed to establish either of the elements of an interference claim [*23]  as articulated in Sarnowski. The Plaintiff has not pled that he was entitled to FMLA benefits in the summer of 2011 or that he had remaining leave available under the FMLA. He has also not pled that he requested leave or that he was denied that request by the Defendants. In his opposition papers, Plaintiff asserts broadly that he has "alleged sufficient facts and reasonable inferences" that he was an employee eligible for FMLA leave and that the Defendants denied him FMLA benefits to which he was entitled, but his pleading is entirely devoid of factual support for these conclusory assertions. In the face of such a deficient pleading, we cannot permit the Plaintiff to proceed on a theory of FMLA interference.5
We thus turn to the Plaintiff's FMLA retaliation claim. As with most anti-retaliation statutes, a plaintiff pursuing an FMLA retaliation claim must prove the following elements: that he invoked an FMLA right, that he suffered an adverse employment action, and that the adverse action was causally linked to his exercise of the FMLA right. See Sarnowski, 510 F.3d at 401. The Plaintiff's retaliation claim is premised on DeLeo's tyrannical conduct, which apparently commenced immediately upon the [*24]  Plaintiff's return to work in 2009. According to the Plaintiff, DeLeo began to deny him training opportunities and issue meritless discipline as soon as the Plaintiff returned from authorized FMLA leave. Thus, the Plaintiff has pled sufficient facts to establish the first two elements of this retaliation claim. It appears, however, that these actions were taken by DeLeo only and that Nguyen and Light did not participate in the allegedly meritless discipline, the denial of training opportunities, or the threatening or intimidating conduct. Accordingly, Plaintiff has failed to establish that either Nguyen or Light unlawfully retaliated against him for exercising his right to FMLA leave, and thus the balance of our analysis will involve only DeLeo and Plaintiff's employer, the County.
We turn then to the final element of the Plaintiff's retaliation claim. The Defendants assert that the Plaintiff has failed to plead facts establishing a causal link between his FMLA leave and DeLeo's actions. We disagree. We again consider two factors in determining whether a causal connection exists: timing and evidence of ongoing antagonism. Abramson v. William Paterson Coll. of N.J., 260 F.3d 265, 288 (3d Cir. 2001). The Plaintiff has pled that prior to taking FMLA leave in 2009, [*25]  he was a superior employee. He alleges that immediately upon his return from leave, DeLeo engaged in a campaign of hostile threats, animosity, intimidation, and adverse employment actions against him, denying him training opportunities, issuing meritless discipline, and belittling him in the presence of coworkers. As with all anti-retaliation statutes, unusually suggestive temporal proximity between the protected activity and the allegedly retaliatory conduct can, in and of itself, establish causation, and the immediacy of DeLeo's actions alone would thus sufficiently support the Plaintiff's prima facie case. See Williams, 380 F.3d at 760. Here, however, the Plaintiff has pled both unusually suggestive timing and ongoing antagonism. On these facts, we must find that the Plaintiff has stated a valid claim for FMLA retaliation against DeLeo and the County.
The Defendants also contend that DeLeo cannot be named individually as a Defendant because he is not an "employer" as defined by the FMLA. We disagree. The Third Circuit held that an individual supervisor in a public agency is an employer for purposes of FMLA liability if he acts directly or indirectly in the interest of the public agency in relation to employees [*26]  and has sufficient control over those employees' conditions and terms of employment. See Haybarger v. Lawrence Cnty. Adult Prob. & Parole, 667 F.3d 408, 412 (3d Cir. 2012). In Haybarger, an employee's supervisor lacked final authority to terminate the employee, but exercised significant control over the conditions of the employee's employment prior to her termination and had the authority to issue formal discipline, as DeLeo allegedly did here. Id. at 418-19. The Court concluded that the supervisor could be considered an employer despite not having final authority to terminate the Plaintiff. Under the sound rationale of Haybarger, which we will adopt for our purposes here, we conclude at this juncture that the Plaintiff has pled sufficient facts to establish that DeLeo is an employer subject to FMLA liability.
Finally, we reject the Defendants' contention that DeLeo is entitled to qualified immunity on this claim. In considering whether a municipal actor is entitled to qualified immunity, the Court must query whether the facts alleged show that a constitutional or federal statutory right was violated and whether that constitutional or federal statutory right was clearly established. See Pearson v. Callahan, 555 U.S. 223, 129 S. Ct. 808, 172 L. Ed. 2d 565 (2009). If either inquiry is answered in the negative, the defendant is entitled to qualified immunity. [*27]  Here, however, the facts asserted establish that DeLeo retaliated against the Plaintiff in violation of the FMLA, and there is no question that retaliation in violation of the FMLA has long been unlawful and thus is clearly established. E.g., Sarnowski, 510 F.3d at 401. Thus, we conclude that the doctrine of qualified immunity cannot shield DeLeo from liability.

D. Section 1983 Claim
Lastly, the Plaintiff asserts a Section 1983 claim against all Defendants in their individual and official capacities for violation of his Fourteenth Amendment right to privacy. Specifically, the Plaintiff asserts that by posting his FMLA form on a workplace bulletin board, DeLeo publicly disclosed personal and confidential medical information in addition to the Plaintiff's Social Security number, in violation of his right to privacy. The Defendants contend that the FMLA form did not contain any medical information in which the Plaintiff had a constitutional right to privacy, attaching the FMLA form to their brief in support and urging the Court to consider it. The Defendants further argue that the Plaintiff does not have a constitutional right to privacy in his Social Security number. The Plaintiff in response cites generally to right to privacy cases, largely avoiding the [*28]  Defendants' pointed arguments.
As a threshold matter, we note that the Amended Complaint as it pertains to this claim is again devoid of allegations with respect to Defendants Nguyen and Light, and we are thus compelled to dismiss the constitutional claim against those Defendants. Further, nothing in the pleading establishes or reasonably tends to establish that any municipal custom or policy existed which caused the alleged constitutional violation, thus requiring dismissal of the claim pursuant to Monell v. Department of Social Services of the City of New York, 436 U.S. 658, 98 S. Ct. 2018, 56 L. Ed. 2d 611 (1978), which sets the standard for municipal liability on Section 1983 claims. Thus, we will dismiss the constitutional claim against the County and Defendants Nguyen and Light and consider this claim with respect to Defendant DeLeo only.
We first note that the Court has the authority to consider the FMLA form and its contents as attached to the Defendants' brief in connection with a Rule 12(b)(6) motion, notwithstanding the fact that the form is not attached to the Amended Complaint itself. See Buck v. Hampton Twp. Sch. Dist., 452 F.3d 256, 260 (3d Cir. 2006) (holding that in ruling on a Rule 12(b)(6) motion, court should consider the allegations of the complaint, any documents "incorporated by reference or integral to the claim," and "items appearing in the record of the case"). That form contains [*29]  the following information: the Plaintiff's name and title, the number of hours worked per week, the reason for the requested leave, to which the Plaintiff responded "serious heart condition," and the number of days being requested, to which the Plaintiff responded "30." (Doc. 28, Ex. 11). The form also contained the signatures of the Plaintiff and DeLeo. (Id.).
We recognize that the Fourteenth Amendment protects individuals from the disclosure of "medical records," which the Third Circuit has explained "may contain intimate facts of a personal nature" and are thus "well within the ambit of materials entitled to privacy protection." Doe v. Delie, 257 F.3d 309, 315 (3d Cir. 1980) (recognizing right to privacy in medical records that contained sensitive information and HIV diagnosis); see also Doe v. SEPTA, 72 F.3d 1133, 1138 (3d Cir. 1995) (extending right from protection of medical records to protection of pharmaceutical records). Here, however, the Plaintiff simply has not alleged that either medical or prescription records have been disclosed, and the Plaintiff has offered no response to the Defendants' contention that this alone is dispositive of his claims. Further, the Plaintiff has offered no argument, compelling or otherwise, toward an extension of these cases to the instant circumstances. [*30]  Instead, Plaintiff cites broadly to the cases as supporting the notion, with which we agree, that medical and pharmacy records are entitled to constitutional privacy protections. However, the Plaintiff has simply not pled that medical records or otherwise constitutionally protected information was disclosed by DeLeo.
Similarly, while the Plaintiff asserts that DeLeo's disclosure of his Social Security number was a constitutional violation, case law simply does not support that position. See McCauley v. Computer Aid, Inc., 242 Fed. Appx. 810, 813 (3d Cir. 2007) (nonprecedential opinion). Although McCauley is a nonprecedential opinion, it has widely been adopted by the district courts of this Circuit, and the Plaintiff makes no argument in opposition to its application here. See Ingerman v. Del. River Port Auth., 630 F. Supp. 2d 426, 446 (D.N.J. June 30, 2009); Warner v. Twp. of S. Harrison, 885 F. Supp. 2d 725, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 89083, *23 (D.N.J. June 26, 2012); see also Hackett v. New Jersey, 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 116956, *9 (D.N.J. Nov. 3, 2010) (right to privacy in social security number is not clearly established); Stollenwerk v. Miller, 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 7048, *10 n.10 (E.D. Pa. Feb. 27, 2006) ("A Social Security number is not within one of the 'zones of privacy' recognized as 'fundamental' or 'implicit in the concept of ordered liberty.'"). We are in full agreement with the reasoning of the Third Circuit in McCauley and that of the courts adopting it, and thus find no merit in the Plaintiff's assertion that one has a privacy interest in a Social Security number.
While we recognize [*31]  that disclosure of the FMLA form might have personally offended the Plaintiff, and we are not unsympathetic to his personal privacy concerns, there is simply no support in the decisional law of this Circuit for the Plaintiff's argument that disclosure of the FMLA form was constitutionally offensive.6 Accordingly, because the Plaintiff has failed to establish that DeLeo's conduct violated a clearly established constitutional right, we find that DeLeo is entitled to qualified immunity on the Section 1983 claims and will dismiss Count IV in its entirety.

IV. CONCLUSION
For the reasons we have stated, we will grant in part and deny in part the Defendants' Motion to Dismiss (doc. 27) as follows. After much consideration, it is the opinion of this Court that nothing in an amended pleading could save the Plaintiff's civil rights claims, and that granting leave to amend would thus be a futile exercise. See Fletcher v. Harlee Corp. v. Pote Concrete Contractors, Inc., 482 F.3d 247, 251-52 (3d Cir. 2007) ("Our precedent supports the notion that in civil rights cases district courts must offer amendment — irrespective of whether it is requested — when dismissing a case for failure to state a claim unless doing so would be inequitable or futile."). Accordingly, leave to amend the claims dismissed [*32]  herein will not be granted.
NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED THAT:
1. The Defendants' Motion to Dismiss is GRANTED in part and DENIED in part to the following extents:
a. The Motion is GRANTED to the extent it seeks dismissal of Counts I, II, and IV in their entirety. The Motion is further GRANTED to the extent it seeks dismissal of the unlawful interference claim in Count III against all Defendants and the retaliation claim in Count III against Defendants Nguyen and Light.
b. The Motion is DENIED to the extent it seeks dismissal of the FMLA retaliation claim against the Defendant County and Defendant DeLeo in Count III.
2. The parties SHALL, within fourteen (14) days of today's date, file a stipulation on the docket adopting a new trial term.
/s/ John E. Jones III
John E. Jones III
United States District Judge


End of Document

