Moore v. Computer Assocs. Int'l
United States District Court for the District of Arizona
September 3, 2010, Decided; September 7, 2010, Filed
No. CV-07-01483-PHX-ROS

Reporter
2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 151847 *; 2010 WL 11515202
Dylan Moore, Plaintiff, vs. Computer Associates International, Inc., Defendant.
Prior History: Moore v. Computer Assocs. Int'l, 653 F. Supp. 2d 955, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 79242 (D. Ariz., Sept. 1, 2009)
Counsel:  [*1] For Dylan Moore, Plaintiff: Patricia Kirtley Wells, LEAD ATTORNEY, Kirtley Wells Law Office, Phoenix, AZ USA.
For Computer Associates International Incorporated, Defendant: Erica K Rocush, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart PC, Tucson, AZ USA; Tibor Nagy, Jr., Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart PC - Tucson, AZ, Tucson, AZ USA.
Judges: Roslyn O. Silver, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Roslyn O. Silver
Opinion



ORDER
Before the Court is Defendant's Motion for Reconsideration (Doc. 92) of the Court's Order resolving the parties' cross-motions for summary judgment, which will be granted.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Plaintiff filed a Complaint alleging he was discriminated against because of his mental disabilities in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), and because of race, in violation of 42 U.S.C. § 1981. The parties filed cross-motions for summary judgment. The Court denied Plaintiff's motion for summary judgment, and granted Defendant's motion for summary judgment in part. The Court granted Defendant summary judgment on all Plaintiff's claims, except for a claim that Defendant violated the ADA by failing to reassign Plaintiff to a Scheduling Coordinator position.

BACKGROUND
Plaintiff Dylan Moore was hired by [*2]  Defendant Computer Associates International, Inc., in November 1999 as an Instructional Consultant. As an Instructional Consultant, Plaintiff trained customers on the use of Defendant's products, both through in-person sessions throughout the country and through online classes. In July or August 2003, Plaintiff began experiencing mental problems that impaired his ability to teach. On August 12, 2003, Plaintiff applied for reassignment to a Scheduling Coordinator position, which arguably required less mental ability than the Instructional Consultant position. Plaintiff began seeing a psychologist and was diagnosed with major depression, paranoid schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder. Plaintiff went on leave pursuant to the Family and Medical Leave Act until January 16, 2004. On January 19, 2004, Plaintiff was terminated, purportedly because of his inability to perform the functions of his employment.

STANDARD
Local Rule of Civil Procedure 7.2(g) authorizes motions for reconsideration of a court order and instructs the Court to deny reconsideration "absent a showing of manifest error or a showing of new facts or legal authority that could not have been brought to [the Court's] attention [*3]  earlier with reasonable diligence." Local Rule of Civil Procedure 7.2(g)(1) requires a party moving for reconsideration to "point out with specificity the matters that the movant believes were overlooked or misapprehended by the Court, any new matters being brought to the Court's attention earlier for the first time and the reasons they were not presented earlier, and any specific modifications being sought in the Court's Order."

DISCUSSION
The only claim that survived summary judgment was that Defendant violated the ADA by failing to reasonably accommodate his mental disability when it denied his request for reassignment to a Scheduling Coordinator position. Defendant moves the Court to reconsider its denial of summary judgment on that claim.
In moving for summary judgment, Defendant argued it was not liable for failing to accommodate Plaintiff because it: (1) engaged in the interactive process with Plaintiff, and (2) no reasonable accommodations were available because Plaintiff was completely unable to work in any capacity. Defendant cited medical evaluations from Dr. Nowlin and Dr. Drake, suggesting that Plaintiff could not perform many basic work functions, and was seriously limited [*4]  in his ability to think, interact with others, concentrate, and read. Plaintiff conceded the Scheduling Coordinator position required excellent communication and analytical skills, and the ability to work in a team as well as independently. But Plaintiff argued he would nevertheless have been able to perform the duties of the position. As evidence of that ability, Plaintiff cited his own affidavit, in which he averred that the position would have been a perfect job for him. In denying summary judgment, the Court found that there was a genuine issue of material fact whether Plaintiff was capable of performing the Scheduling Coordinator position, and whether Defendant made a good faith effort to accommodate Plaintiff's disability through the interactive process.
Defendant argues the Court committed manifest error by citing Plaintiff's self-assessment of his ability to perform the job, when the opinions of mental health experts evidenced that Plaintiff was incapable of working in any capacity. Defendant argues Plaintiff's self-assessment of his capacity was uncorroborated, self-serving, and beyond his personal knowledge. Defendant contends the extent to which Plaintiff's mental disability [*5]  interfered with his ability to work was a question beyond the common knowledge of a layperson, and expert testimony was necessary. Defendant further argues that under the ADA it was required to rely on documentation from Plaintiff's treating physicians. Defendant contends the Court's ruling would undermine the ADA's reasonable accommodation framework by preventing an employer from being able to rely on the opinions of an employee's treating physicians.
Under the ADA, if an employee is unable to perform the essential functions of his current job, reassignment to a vacant position that the employee is qualified to perform may be a reasonable accommodation. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(2)(ii). To establish a prima facie case of discrimination under the ADA for failure to accommodate a disabled employee, a plaintiff has the burden of showing he is qualified for the position for which he seeks reassignment. See Allen v. Pac Bell, 348 F.3d 1113, 1114 (9th Cir. 2003); 42 U.S.C. §§ 12112(a), (b)(5)(A). To be "qualified," the plaintiff must be capable of performing the essential functions of the employment position. 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8).
Plaintiff argues Defendant is precluded from moving for reconsideration on the ground that he was not qualified for the Scheduling Coordinator position, because Defendant did not assert this [*6]  argument in its motion for summary judgment. Plaintiff notes that the motion for summary judgment did not mention the Scheduling Coordinator position. The fact that Defendant did not specifically mention the Scheduling Coordinator position is not controlling, because Defendant did expressly argue Plaintiff "could not return to work in any capacity." (Doc. 58 at 11, emphasis in original). Plaintiff had a burden of responding to this argument by presenting sufficient evidence he was qualified for the Scheduling Coordinator position. The only evidence Plaintiff presented before the motion for reconsideration that he was qualified was his own affidavit, in which he averred he was capable of performing the position.
The case law found by the Court indicates Plaintiff's own testimony regarding his ability to perform the position is not sufficient to create a genuine issue of material fact regarding such ability, when Defendant cited medical evaluations strongly suggesting Plaintiff could not perform the position. See Myers v. Sodexo, Inc., 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 21282, 2010 WL 914642, *6 (C.D. Ill. 2010) ("Where a plaintiff presents only her own self-serving testimony and fails to provide medical evidence to support the claim that the requested accommodation would have allowed [*7]  her to perform the essential functions of her position, 'that is just not sufficient for a reasonable jury to find that she is qualified with a disability under the ADA.'") (quoting McPhaul v. Board of Commissioners of Madison County, 226 F.3d 558, 564 (7th Cir. 2000)).
Plaintiff argues there was other evidence, in addition to his own statements, which showed he was able to perform the position. Plaintiff points to the fact that Dr. Nowlin did not state Plaintiff could not work at all, but only that he could not work full time. On a questionnaire, Dr. Nowlin was asked whether Plaintiff would be required to work less than a full schedule, to which Dr. Nowlin responded, "Yes - cannot perform full time work at this time." (Doc. 59-2, Ex. 14). This statement only provides evidence that Plaintiff could not work full time; it does not provide evidence Plaintiff could work part-time. Dr. Nowlin's statement was responsive to the question posed and did not affirmatively indicate Plaintiff's ability to work part-time. On a subsequent question, moreover, Dr. Nowlin stated Plaintiff was not able to perform work of "any" kind. (Doc. 59-2, Exs. 13 at 29-30, 14). Dr. Nowlin's evaluation thus only supports Defendant's contention that Plaintiff was unable to work as a Scheduling Coordinator. [*8]  Plaintiff also cites a return to work form filled out by a neurologist, dated September 3, 2002, which he argues indicates he was able to return work. The return to work form cited by Plaintiff does not provide evidence that Plaintiff was able to work. Nowhere on the form did the neurologist state that Plaintiff was able to return to work. (Doc. 61-5, Ex. 20). The doctor who filled out the form left the date that Plaintiff could return to work blank, and stated that Plaintiff needed to come back for follow up because testing was not complete. (Doc. 61-5, Ex. 20). Finally, Plaintiff cites a deposition from Defendant's 30(b)(6) representative, in which the representative said Plaintiff was "overqualified" for the position. This evidence suggests Defendant may have subjectively believed Plaintiff was capable of performing the Scheduling Coordinator position. In order to make a prima facie case, however, Plaintiff must submit evidence that he was in fact capable of performing the position, not simply that Defendant believed he was capable. See Allen v. Pac Bell, 348 F.3d 1113 (9th Cir. 2003).1
Defendant cited evidence that Plaintiff was not capable. Plaintiff presented no controverting evidence, other than his own self-assessment and [*9]  the other evidence discussed. After considering the medical evaluations cited by Defendant, a reasonable juror could not conclude Plaintiff was capable of performing the position based merely on his self-assessment that he was capable, nor does the other evidence offered by Plaintiff create an issue of fact to go to a jury. Plaintiff thus did not meet his burden of presenting evidence sufficient to sustain a genuine issue of material fact that he was capable of performing the Scheduling Coordinator position. He therefore did not make a prima facie case of discrimination under the ADA, and Defendant should have been granted summary judgment.
Accordingly,
IT IS ORDERED Defendant's Motion for Reconsideration (Doc. 92) IS GRANTED.
FURTHER ORDERED Defendant is granted summary judgment on Plaintiff's remaining claim. The Clerk shall terminate this case.
DATED this 3rd day of September, 2010.
/s/ Roslyn O. Silver
Roslyn O. Silver
United States District Judge


End of Document

