Munoz v. Amtrak
United States District Court for the Central District of California
August 26, 2016, Decided; August 26, 2016, Filed
Case No. CV 15-6309-DMG (JEMx)

Reporter
2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 203617 *
ELIAS MUNOZ, Plaintiff, v. NATIONAL RAILROAD PASSENGER CORP. d/b/a AMTRAK, Defendant.
Prior History: Munoz v. Amtrak, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 203616 (C.D. Cal., Aug. 26, 2016)
Counsel:  [*1] For Elias Munoz, Plaintiff: Mark Weidmann, Sheryl Lyn Maccarone, LEAD ATTORNEY, Lindsey Chessum, Candace W Rodriguez, Weidmann and Associates PC, Los Angeles, CA; Kim F Farrar, Weidmann & Farrar PC, Los Angeles, CA.
For National Railroad Passenger Corporation, Amtrack, National Railroad Passenger Corporation, doing business as, Defendants: Billie Desiree Wenter, Theodora R Lee, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Littler Mendelson PC, Walnut Creek, CA; Emily A Glunz, Kevin Gaffney, Ross H Friedman, PRO HAC VICE, Morgan Lewis and Bockius LLP, Chicago, IL; Rebecca L Jensen, Morgan Lewis and Bockius LLP, Los Angeles, CA.
Judges: DOLLY M. GEE, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: DOLLY M. GEE
Opinion



ORDER RE DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT [41]

I.

PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
On July 8, 2015, Plaintiff Elias Munoz filed a complaint ("Compl.") in Superior Court for the County of Los Angeles against Defendant National Railroad Passenger Corporation, d/b/a Amtrak ("Amtrak") for: (1) age discrimination in violation of the Fair Employment and Housing Act ("FEHA"), Cal. Gov't Code § 12940 et seq., (2) age discrimination in violation of public policy, (3) disability discrimination in violation of FEHA, (4) disability discrimination in violation of public policy, (5) retaliation for requests for accommodation, complaints [*2]  of disability discrimination, and/or harassment in violation of FEHA, (6) retaliation for requests for accommodation, complaints of disability discrimination, and/or harassment in violation of public policy, (7) failure to accommodate in violation of FEHA, (8) family and medical leave discrimination/interference in violation of FEHA, (9) family and medical leave discrimination/interference in violation of public policy, (10) retaliation for requests for family and medical leave, complaints of family and medical leave discrimination, and/or harassment in violation of FEHA, (11) retaliation for requests for family and medical leave, complaints of family and medical leave discrimination, and/or harassment in violation of public policy, (12) failure to engage in the interactive process in violation of FEHA, (13) failure to prevent discrimination, harassment, and retaliation in violation of FEHA, (14) wrongful termination in violation of public policy, and (15) retaliation for opposing practices forbidden by FEHA. [Doc. # 1-1.] On August 19, 2015, Amtrak removed the case to this Court. [Doc. # 1.]
On July 15, 2016, Amtrak filed a motion for summary judgment ("MSJ") as to Plaintiff's complaint. [*3]  [Doc. # 41.] On August 5, 2016, Munoz filed an opposition ("Opp."). [Doc. # 50.] On August 12, 2016, Amtrak filed a reply ("Reply"). [Doc. # 57.]

II.

EVIDENTIARY OBJECTIONS
Amtrak objects to Munoz's Declaration, and requests that the Court disregard it in its entirety on the grounds that (1) it contains speculative and conclusory allegations, (2) self-serving statements which are uncorroborated by other evidence, (3) it is frequently inconsistent with other admissible evidence and Munoz's own deposition testimony, and (4) many of the facts asserted in the Declaration are without foundation or personal knowledge. (Defendant's Evidentiary Objections ("Def. Obj. Evid.") at 5-7 [Doc. # 58-1].)
The Court notes that "declarations are often self-serving, and this is properly so because the party submitting it would use the declaration to support his or her position." Nigro v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 784 F.3d 495, 497 (9th Cir. 2015). "[A] self-serving declaration does not always create a genuine issue of material fact for summary judgment" as "[t]he district court can disregard a self-serving declaration that states only conclusions and not facts that would be admissible evidence." Id. at 497-98 (citing Villiarimo v. Aloha Island Air, Inc., 281 F.3d 1054, 1059 n. 5 (9th Cir. 2002); F.T.C. v. Publ'g Clearing House, Inc., 104 F.3d 1168, 1171 (9th Cir. 1997)). Generally, however, "the district court may not disregard a piece [*4]  of evidence at the summary judgment stage solely based on its self-serving nature." Id.
In the Ninth Circuit, a "sham declaration" may be disregarded where it contradicts the party's prior deposition testimony, but this rule "does not automatically dispose of every case in which a contradictory affidavit is introduced to explain portions of earlier deposition testimony." Kennedy v. Allied Mut. Ins. Co., 952 F.2d 262, 266-67 (9th Cir. 1991). Rather, the declaration should not be disregarded unless "the district court . . . make[s] a factual determination that the contradiction was actually a 'sham.'" Id. at 267.
The Court will not disregard Munoz's declaration in its entirety, but, rather, assess the admissibility of each fact or piece of evidence as it relies on them in making its determination, with an eye toward the more relaxed evidentiary standard at the summary judgment stage. See JL Beverage Co., LLC v. Jim Beam Brands Co., 828 F.3d 1098, No. 13-17382, 2016 WL 3770484, at *8 (9th Cir. July 14, 2016) ("at summary judgment a district court may consider hearsay evidence submitted in an inadmissible form, so long as the underlying evidence could be provided in an admissible form at trial, such as by live testimony. . . ."); Fraser v. Goodale, 342 F.3d 1032, 1036-37 (9th Cir. 2003) ("At the summary judgment stage, we do not focus on the admissibility of the evidence's form. We instead focus on the admissibility of its contents.") (citing [*5]  Block v. City of Los Angeles, 253 F.3d 410, 418-19 (9th Cir. 2001) ("To survive summary judgment, a party does not necessarily have to produce evidence in a form that would be admissible at trial"). Amtrak's objections to Munoz's Declaration in its entirety are overruled, but the Court will rule on specific objections, as necessary, if it relies upon the evidence.

III.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND
The Court sets forth the material facts, many of which are disputed, and draws all reasonable inferences in favor of Munoz, the non-moving party.

A. Munoz's Age and Medical Condition
Munoz worked for Amtrak in Los Angeles, California, from February 1, 2001, until he was terminated on May 21, 2014. (Plaintiff Elias Munoz's Statement of Genuine Disputes of Material Facts ("SGDMF") ¶ 1 [Doc. # 51].) Munoz was born on February 10, 1952 and was sixty-two years old when he was terminated. (Plaintiff's Additional Statement of Uncontroverted Facts ("ASUF") ¶¶ 1-3 [Doc. # 50-2].)
Munoz was diagnosed with diabetes around 2010 or 2011. (Id. ¶ 4.) As a result, he suffers from diabetic neuropathy, which causes nerve damage to his feet. (Id.) Munoz's diabetes causes him circulation problems, which makes it difficult for him to walk, causes pain in his legs and feet, impedes his mobility [*6]  and ability to sit for long periods, and interferes with his sleep and thinking. (Id.) Munoz is on four or five medications for his diabetes. (Id.) The diabetes makes Munoz light-headed, nervous, and anxious, and causes him to experience high blood sugar two to three times per week. (Id.)

B. Work History with Amtrak
Munoz began his employment with Amtrak in the Equal Employment Opportunity ("EEO") Group of Amtrak's Law Department as a salaried EEO Compliance Manager for the Western Region under the direct supervision of Theodore Campbell, Senior Manager of EEO Compliance, who reported to Managing Deputy General Counsel, William Herrmann. (SGDMF ¶ 3.)
Starting on September 16, 2005, Munoz began working as an Amtrak Labor Relations Officer. (Id. ¶ 4.) Munoz returned to his former role as EEO Compliance Manager on February 16, 2006. (Id. ¶ 5.) In 2006, Munoz's title changed to EEO Compliance Officer, with no change in his duties. (Id. ¶ 6.)
In May, 2011, Amtrak dissolved its Dispute Resolution Office ("DRO"), which had been responsible for addressing passenger complaints and internal complaints of discrimination based on protected characteristics. (Id. ¶ 7.) Some of the responsibilities of [*7]  the DRO were transferred to the EEO Group, resulting in Amtrak informing all existing EEO Officers, including Munoz, that they could re-apply and interview for the newly established EEO Officer positions. (Id. ¶ 8.) The new EEO Officer positions were open to any internal candidate. (Id. ¶ 9.) On May 23, 2011, Amtrak rehired Munoz as an EEO Officer in the restructured EEO Group. (Id. ¶ 10.) The May 23, 2011 decision to rehire Munoz was made by Campbell and subsequently approved by Hermann. (Id. ¶ 12.)
As EEO Officer, Munoz was responsible for (1) investigating employee and passenger complaints of discrimination filed internally with Amtrak and preparing investigative reports, (2) investigating employee and passenger charges of discrimination filed externally with state and federal agencies, such as the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC"), preparing position statements in response, and (3) conducting sexual harassment training and other EEO training for Amtrak employees. (Id. ¶ 13.)
The description for the position of EEO Officer from May, 2009, states that an "[a]bility to work independently and ensure EEO investigations are completed within appropriate government guidelines, [*8]  as required" is a minimum qualification for the position, "[e]xcellent writing skills are required, as are excellent verbal communication skills," and "attention to detail and deadlines [are] key." (Id. ¶ 14.)

C. 2008-2012 Performance Reviews
Starting around 2006 or 2007, Campbell supervised Munoz's investigative reports for internal complaints, and Denyse Nelson-Burney, then an Associate General Counsel of the EEO Group, conducted final review of Munoz's position statements for external complaints. (Id. ¶¶ 15-16.) As of April, 2010, Nelson-Burney replaced Hermann as the EEO Group's second-level supervisor. (Id. ¶ 17.) At that point, Campbell started to report to Nelson-Burney and continued to directly supervise Munoz. (Id. ¶ 18.)
Around 2008, Amtrak required EEO Group employees to begin using a computer system called CaseTrack, or eCaseTrack, to enter and update information relating to internal and external complaints. (Id. ¶ 19.) Nelson-Burney's final review of position statements sometimes involved review of related entries in CaseTrack. (Id. ¶ 20.)
Munoz's 2008 Performance Review rated his work as satisfactory, and most comments about his work, skills, attitude, and performance were [*9]  positive. (ASUF ¶ 41; see also Declaration of Denyse Nelson-Burney in Support of Amtrak's Motion for Summary Judgment ("Nelson-Burney Decl."), Ex. 2-G [Doc. # 41-5 at 24].)1 He received feedback that he needed to communicate the status of critical issues in a more timely manner. (SGDMF ¶ 23.)
Munoz's 2011 Performance Review rated his work as satisfactory, and most comments were positive. (ASUF ¶ 41; Nelson-Burney Decl., Ex. 2-H.) The summary states that he is a "good investigator," "knowledgeable in the subject matter, responsive to customers and produces a good product[, and] makes a valuable contribution to the team." (Id.) In terms of areas for improvement, the review states that Munoz sometimes "fails to go deeper to get the less obvious points," "must be careful about using the proper tone when delivering training," "must be careful to be authoritative while not appearing condescending," and "sometimes needs to be more thorough." (Id.)
Munoz's 2012 Performance Review also rated his work as satisfactory, and he was rated as having exceeded goals in three areas and met goals in two areas. (ASUF ¶ 41; Nelson-Burney Decl., Ex. 2-I.) The comments state that he "must pay closer attention [*10]  to his written produce and to his work in the Case Track System" but that "[h]e is a valuable member of the Team." (Id.) On areas for improvement, the review states that Munoz has done "a poor job of updating Case Track this year. Many 'Summary' entries simply indicate that the matter was assigned and closed with little information regarding the claim. There must be a sustained improvement in this regard." (Id.) The review states that some of Munoz's investigations were completed beyond the 90-day timeline with no cited reason for the delay, and that, while his communication was "generally good," "a few of his complaints appeared rushed and not polished." (Id.) The review stated that Munoz "must pay closer attention to his written product and to his work with Case track." (Id.) Munoz received positive or satisfactory comments in several areas, including that he "continue[d] to be very valuable for special projects" and was "a valuable member of the team." (Id.)

D. 2012 Medical Leave
Munoz asserts that he submitted Family and Medical Leave Act ("FMLA") paperwork to Amtrak for medical leave in December of 2012, and the leave was approved as protected medical leave. (ASUF ¶¶ 5, 27.)2 He states that he obtained approval [*11]  from Campbell and Nelson-Burney to take approximately one week off in December of 2012. (Id. ¶ 5.) In his deposition, when Campbell was asked if he remembered if Munoz needed any time off for his medical condition, he responded: "I believe he did." (Weidmann Decl., Ex. H ("Campbell Depo.") at 28:20-21 [Doc. # 55 at 65].) Campbell also testified that he kept Nelson-Burney informed that Munoz needed time off for his medical conditions. (ASUF ¶ 29.)3 Campbell retired on May 31, 2013. (SGDMF ¶ 31.) Amtrak asserts that it has no record that Munoz submitted FMLA paperwork for medical leave in 2012 or that the medical leave was approved. (Def. Obj. Evid. ¶ 5.)
There is a genuine dispute regarding whether Munoz sought, or was granted, medical leave in December 2012.

E. March 21, 2013 Formal Counseling Letter
On March 21, 2013, Campbell issued Munoz a letter of "formal counseling regarding [Munoz's] failure to meet work expectations. (SGDMF ¶ 29.) The letter stated:
This is in reference to the Charge of Discrimination . . . sent to you for investigation on December 14, 2012. The Albuquerque, NM EEOC Investigator contacted [Amtrak's] General Counsel Eleanor Acheson on March 15, 2013 [*12]  to inquire about the status of Amtrak's response which was due on December 25, 2012. When questioned about your failure to provide a response to the EEOC, you communicated that the Charge had been received prior to your vacation and that, upon your return to work, you had forgotten about it. . . . The manner in which you have performed your duties in this instance falls well short of the standards this department has set and must be improved.
(Id.) The letter instructed Munoz to improve his use of the CaseTrack system and to complete his work in a timely fashion "to improve your performance." (Id. ¶ 30.) Munoz claims that Campbell told him that he didn't believe that the issue warranted a write-up, but that Nelson-Burney insisted. (Id. ¶¶ 29-30.)
Munoz contends that, upon his return to work after his surgery in December 2012, he was "provided with a large stack of work that had built up while he had been on leave." (ASUF ¶ 30.) He states that, in February 2012, Campbell followed up with Munoz regarding one of those items, which Munoz had not gotten around to yet as a result of the pile-up of work. (Id.)4 Munoz contends that he obtained an extension to respond, and the response to the [*13]  government entity was timely under the extension. (Id.)
Campbell attests that during the entire time he supervised Munoz, from 2005 until May 31, 2013, Munoz's performance was "competent, satisfactory" and that there was no review on which Munoz "performed less than satisfactory." (Campbell Depo. at 11:1-3, 23:4-6.)

F. 2013 Conversations with Nelson-Burney
On May 31, 2013, Campbell retired, and Lisa Coleman, another EEO Officer, became the Interim Director of EEO Compliance, working under the supervision of Nelson-Burney. (SGDMF ¶ 31.) Munoz began submitting his internal investigation reports to Coleman for review, and continued submitting position statements to Nelson-Burney for review. (Id. ¶ 34.)
Munoz testified in his deposition that, just prior to Campbell leaving, he and Nelson-Burney had a conversation in which she asked him how old he was. (SGDMF ¶ 32.) Munoz told her that he was 62, and she acted extremely surprised and told him that he should seriously think about retiring. (ASUF ¶ 50.)5 She told him that she was surprised Campbell had worked until 67, as she was not going to work past 60, and it was "ridiculous" for people to work that long. (Id.) She said she thought people [*14]  should retire by 60. (Id.) Nelson-Burney followed up after that with a number of similar conversations about when Munoz would retire, because "who wanted to be so old and working so long" and "Amtrak had already offered one buyout." (Id.) These conversations took place throughout the rest of 2013. (Id.)
Munoz has also testified that Nelson-Burney started explaining in late 2011 or early 2012 that the Department of Transportation ("DOT") had stated that Amtrak needed to cut costs. (ASUF ¶ 49.)6 The DOT "put out an audit from Amtrak" around 2012 or 2013, telling Amtrak it needed to manage its aging workforce, reduce benefits, and reduce healthcare costs. (ASUF ¶ 164.)7
Nelson-Burney explained that one of the ways they were trying to cut costs was to reduce the expense of older employees who had a lot of medical leave and medical expenses. (Id.) Nelson-Burney stated that Amtrak had designed a retirement package that would be attractive to these individuals, and that Amtrak was trying to offer early retirement or buyouts to older, higher-paid employees with double pensions, and people who were using FMLA and ADA medical benefits in order to induce them to leave. (Id.) Munoz objected, saying [*15]  to Nelson-Burney that it would look like age discrimination, disability discrimination, and medical leave discrimination. (Id.) Nelson-Burney responded that Munoz, as an EEO Compliance Officer, didn't need to worry about that, because Amtrak and outside counsel Morgan Lewis had already evaluated that they would be able to evade these kinds of complaints, because they would go through documented procedures such as Performance Improvement Plans ("PIPs"), and all Munoz needed to do was let them know when the complaints came in, and to process them through. (Id.)
Former EEO Officer Jacci Clay, who was part of the EEO Group while Munoz worked there, was terminated at some point after 2013, and has a similar suit pending against Amtrak. See ASUF ¶¶ 69, 107, 126, 162. Clay testified that Nelson-Burney told her that "they were offering retirement benefits, and expecting about 1,100 to take them, but only got 173, who were close to retiring and most of the people that took the incentive were in fact older employees, so Nelson-Burney said, we are going to have to find a way to get rid of other people." (Id. ¶ 165.)8

G. September 24, 2013 Complaints
In September, 2013, Coleman and Nelson-Burney received [*16]  two complaints against Munoz from Amtrak employees in Riverside, California, both regarding a sexual harassment training that took place on September 23, 2013. (SGDMF ¶ 35.) Both employees complained about Munoz using them as "examples" during the sexual harassment training, making comments about physical appearance, racial epithets, and sexual activity that made them feel "uneasy" and "very uncomfortable." (Id. ¶¶ 35-40.) Both employees complained that Munoz made similar remarks that made them uncomfortable at another training two year prior, in 2011. (Id. ¶¶ 38, 41.) One of the employees stated that this experience made her "dread[] going to training that was presented by Munoz." (Id. ¶ 41.)
While Munoz was at the training, no one complained to him, and everyone seemed satisfied with the training. (ASUF ¶ 45.) He was never shown the complaints, and he is not aware of any investigation of the complaints. (Id. ¶ 44.) Munoz was never informed of any findings that he did anything wrong concerning the training, or that he should do anything differently. (Id. ¶ 46.)
During his employment with Amtrak, Munoz has provided training for all of the employees of Amtrak West of the Mississippi. [*17]  (Id. ¶ 42.) Munoz trained about three hundred people a year, in groups of ten to twenty. (Id.) The employees provided feedback on the trainings, and Munoz was consistently told by his supervisors that he did a good job at trainings. (Id. ¶¶ 42-43.)

H. EEO Strategic Plan Implementation
Nelson-Burney drafted and implemented the EEO Compliance Unit Strategic Plan ("EEO Plan"), which was initially distributed to the EEO Officers in an EEO Group meeting in Washington, D.C. in August 2013. (SGDMF ¶ 42.) The EEO Plan stated that:
• Amtrak was "moving towards a competency-based performance system";
• There was "room for improvement in all areas" of the EEO Group;
• The transition would be difficult because "every aspect of your duties will be inspected, possibly recalibrated and measured";
• EEO Officers' performance would be "vigorously measured";
• The EEO Group Management would specifically focus on "increasing the quality of position statements"; and
• Each EEO Group member would be expected to "continue to grow and to improve the quality of [his or her] work."
(Id. ¶ 43.)
Around this time, Nelson-Burney had conversations with EEO Officers regarding increased expectations for the overall quality [*18]  of the work in the EEO Group. (Id. ¶ 45.) Former EEO Compliance Officer Steven Siebert, who worked alongside Munoz until 2014, states that Nelson-Burney "specifically mentioned improving the quality of written work product, and that she should not be doing extensive re-writes of EEO Compliance Officer's written work." (Id. ¶ 46.)
Nelson-Burney states that the standard of work against which Munoz's performance was rated was changed in 2013, "after [Amtrak] rolled out the strategic plan and the company changed direction in terms of performance management." (Id. ¶ 47.) Hermann testified that he was not aware of any changes to Amtrak's written policies regarding evaluating the performance of employees. (Weidmann Decl., Ex E ("Herrmann Depo.") at 37:3-8 [Doc. # 54 at 108].) Munoz states that he was never provided with any written or verbal changes to performance management before his medical leave in October 2013, or after. (SGDMF ¶ 47.)

I. April 2013 Fung Charge
In April 2013, Munoz received the "Fung Charge,"9 but did not open a matter for it in eCaseTrack or otherwise notify anyone at Amtrak about the charge until August 29, 2013. (SGDMF ¶ 142.) Munoz contends that the Fung case was a "no [*19]  action required case" that was not supposed to be entered into CaseTrack, and that he notified Campbell, who told him not to enter the case into CaseTrack because there was no action required. (Id.) Fung was terminated shortly after his EEOC charge was filed and dismissed. (Id. ¶ 143.) Because there was no record of the charge in eCaseTrack, the Amtrak lawyer who was consulted prior to Fung's termination had no knowledge of the EEOC charge when advising on the termination. (Id.) Fung later filed a lawsuit claiming that his termination was in retaliation for filing his charge. (Id. ¶ 144.) The parties dispute whether Munoz engaged in conduct that amounted to "backdating" in order to attempt to conceal his purported delay in opening the matter. (Id. ¶ 145.)

J. 2013 Medical Leave
In October 2013, Munoz requested FMLA leave for eight to ten weeks in anticipation of a surgery to be performed on a vein in his leg. (SGDMF ¶ 49.) Amtrak granted Munoz's FMLA request for a leave beginning on October 8, 2013 and ending on November 18, 2013. (Id. ¶¶ 50-51.) Munoz was granted an extended leave until December 2, 2013, after which he returned to work. (Id. ¶ 51.)
During this leave, Munoz received "calls [*20]  from [Coleman] and [Nelson-Burney] about pending cases." (Id. ¶ 52.) On October 22, 2013, during his leave, Munoz forwarded Nelson-Burney and Coleman his response to an email address to the entire EEO Group regarding computer hardware updates. (Id. ¶ 53.) In response, Coleman stated, "Step away from the email, [Munoz]." (Id.) Munoz replied, "So sorry but I am so booorrrrd [sic]." (Id.) Munoz testified that, while on leave during these two months, he was asked to attend one or two staff conference calls. (Id. ¶ 54.) While on leave, Munoz was "criticized [by Nelson-Burney] in one case for not submitting a response that was due while [he] was on leave." (Id. ¶ 55.) Nelson-Burney contacted Munoz to say that the response was "due last week." (Id.) He reminded her that he was out on medical leave, and she told him "don't worry about it." (Id.)

K. 2013 Performance Reviews
On October 29, 2013, a "Calibration" session was held with Herrmann, Coleman, Nelson-Burney, and Human Capital Business Partner Juanita Thorne, in which the overall evaluation ratings of the EEO Officers for the 2013 fiscal year were decided. (Id. ¶ 57.) This was the first year that Amtrak used a Calibration session to determine [*21]  the end of fiscal year performance rating of the EEO Officers. (Id. ¶ 58.)
On October 23, 2013, in anticipation of the Calibration session, Nelson-Burney drafted some initial thoughts on the performance of the EEO Officers and EEO Specialist Beth Genshaft, in which she rated that Munoz "meets expectations." (Id. ¶ 59.) Nelson-Burney wrote: "Cons — [Munoz]'s writing needs improvement; sometimes does not exhibit a clear understanding of developments in the law; still have complaints about his training style; bad CaseTrack entries or no entries." (Id. ¶ 60.) At the Calibration session, Herrmann "[b]rought up the issue that . . . if everything that was in the narrative [of Munoz's performance evaluation] was correct then [Munoz] probably didn't meet expectations." (Id. ¶ 61.)
Coleman testified that, at that time, she thought Munoz's performance, including his writing, was inferior to that of three of the four other EEO Officers: Siebert, Erick Mitchell, and herself. (Id. ¶ 64.) Coleman did not believe, however, that Munoz needed to be put on a PIP at that time. (ASUF ¶ 55.) She testified that the reason he was given an unsatisfactory performance review for 2013 was "[b]ecause in comparison [*22]  to his peers he wasn't—I guess he wasn't deemed to be as good as the rest of his peers and if they met expectations then kind of by default he didn't meet expectations." (Weidmann Decl., Ex. G ("Coleman Depo.") at 26:11-14 [Doc. # 55 at 26].) She testified that at the time she thought that "[i]t didn't make sense that people were compared against other people who had different backgrounds, experience, you know, but that's the way it was and I couldn't object to it certainly." (Id. at 19-22.)
As a result of the discussion at the October 29, 2013 Calibration session, the consensus was that Munoz "does not meet expectations." (SGDMF ¶ 65.) The notes from the Calibration session stated that Munoz had "some difficulty with new topics and ideas", "did not go far enough to discover facts not immediately evident", and that his "writing skills [were] below appropriate standards." (Id. ¶ 66.) Nothing Munoz had actually written was reviewed at the Calibration meeting. (Id. ¶ 62.)
On December 5, 2013, three days after he returned from medical leave, Coleman and Nelson-Burney presented Munoz with his 2013 performance review ("Performance Conversation") with an overall rating of 1, meaning that Munoz [*23]  did not meet expectations. (Id. ¶ 67.) The review contained a mix of positive and negative comments, including that "[Munoz's] writing skills continue to fall below appropriate standards in composition, organization and sophistication"; "Position papers sometimes require significant revision"; "rarely integrates EEOC guidance and advanced EEO tenets beyond basic levels"; "investigative skills can be improved"; and "sometimes . . . miss[es] deadlines and [does] not complete his own assignments satisfactorily." (Id. ¶ 68.)
On December 5, 2013, Amtrak placed Munoz on a 90-day PIP identifying three "areas of concern": (1) inadequate, incomplete, and unsatisfactory investigative reports and position statements, (2) missed deadlines without adequate reason, and (3) inadequate document tracking and management. (Id. ¶ 69.) The PIP identified three "expected results": (1) position statements and investigate reports completed within deadlines, (2) improved investigations utilizing best practices, and (3) improved written product "that shows the level of maturity of [Munoz's] position and experience." (Id. ¶ 70.) The PIP stated that failure to demonstrate immediate improvement would result in [*24]  further disciplinary action, "up to and including termination prior to 90 days." (Id. ¶ 71.) The Manager Comments stated that Munoz "is a team player who is always willing to assist his team and the Law Department" and that "[h]is knowledge of Amtrak and his willingness to improve will go a long way in taking his work to the appropriate level." (Nelson-Burney Decl., Ex. 2-Q at 5.)
On December 5, 2013, Nelson-Burney emailed Hermann to tell him that she had conducted Munoz's Performance Conversation. (Id. ¶ 72.) She stated in the email that she thought that Munoz "expected it," and that she "reminded [Munoz] that he had a written counseling this year and we hadn't seen much improvement." (Id.) Nelson-Burney also stated that Munoz expressed concern for his job during the meeting, and "[w]e assured him that we were not simply 'papering' his file; that [he] needed to improve but we were fully confident that he could do it and would not be in that category next year[;] and that we were looking forward to helping [him] through the process." (Id. ¶ 73.)
On December 11, 2013, Munoz submitted rebuttals to his 2013 Performance Conversation and PIP. (Id. ¶ 74.) Munoz's main criticisms were that: [*25]  (1) despite his request for specificity, and specific examples of where he fell short, he was not provided any specific examples or specific criticisms, (2) despite his requests for training, models, formats, best practices, and specific examples of where he fell short and what would be an example of work that met the standard, he was never provided with any of these things. (ASUF ¶ 75.)
Munoz also discussed his medical issues, stating that he missed nine weeks of work in 2013 due to two surgeries and had cases assigned to him while he was on leave and was criticized for things that occurred during those leaves. He also pointed out that he was given certain complex, high profile assignments that required him to "drop everything" and focus only on those matters. (Id.) Munoz also noted that he trained 246 people and taught 32 classes, out of which only one person complained, and that he was not informed of the specifics of that complaint. (Id.)
Munoz did not receive any response to his rebuttals, any specific examples of poor performance, or any education, models, or formats to use as a basis for improvement. (ASUF ¶¶ 84-85.)

L. Rabin's January 23, 2014 Email
On January 23, 2014, Keren Rabin, [*26]  Senior Associate General Counsel, emailed Munoz regarding an EEOC charge that she believed was still open. (SGDMF ¶ 83.) She stated that, according to her emails, she checked in with Munoz on the case in both September 2012 and March 2013. (Id.) She stated that, although he had not updated eCaseTrack in either instance, he had told her that the case was still open, and that he would check with the EEOC investigator as to its status. (Id. ¶ 84.) It appeared to Rabin that Munoz had closed the matter in eCaseTrack the day before on the basis of other emails discussing the case, but, in fact, there were dismissals of two other EEOC charges filed by the same complainant, not this case. (Id.) Rabin fixed the errors she noted in Munoz's eCaseTrack updates, and noted that the files for this complainant "were all mixed together and not segregated by charge number, and that has made it difficult to be sure what we have received on what case." (Id. ¶ 85.)
According to Munoz, "[o]nly one case was Mr. Munoz's and that case was up to date and there were no errors. Ms. Rabin asked Mr. Munoz for assistance in straightening out and updating the other files which were not Mr. Munoz's, which Mr. Munoz [*27]  did, and M[s]. Rabin thanked him for that." (Id. ¶ 85.)
Around February, 2014, Rabin assumed Nelson-Burney's role as the supervisor of the entire EEO Group, including Interim Director Coleman, replacing Nelson-Burney as Munoz's second-level supervisor. (Id. ¶ 82.)

M. 2014 New EEO Group Strategy
On January 7, 2014, the EEO Group met to discuss the group's Fiscal Year 2014 goal, which emphasized the need to mitigate Amtrak's exposure from lawsuits by, among other things, "[c]reating strategies aimed at decreasing the number of complaints that are investigated by EEO and then proceed on to an administrative complaint," "[c]reating strategies aimed at increasing the number of complainants utilizing the internal EEO process before moving on to a federal/state agency," "[c]onducting more targeted training of supervisors, based on complaint metrics," "[i]nitiating a process to consider agency mediations as a resolution option," and "[r]educe retaliation complaints by implementing a formalized process to follow up on 30% of internal complainants/managers within 1 year following case resolution." (SGDMF ¶ 86.)
Munoz contends that Nelson-Burney told the group that "they were to go out and convince [*28]  employees that they didn't need to file external, or even internal complaints" and told Munoz that he "was to convince them he would fix their problems, even if he couldn't." (ASUF ¶ 100.)10 Nelson-Burney told Munoz that he was "supposed to attempt to delay people who wanted to make complaints, in the hopes that the statute would run. She said one of the ways to delay people is to refuse . . . to allow [them] to walk in anymore, and require them to set appointments, and set the appointments out for quite a way, to get the time running on when they had to make a complaint." (Id.) Nelson-Burney said that "if there was a violation, you needed to hide the truth from any violation from the EEOC and DFEH, ADA or any other governmental regulatory agency[.]" (Id.)
Fellow EEO Compliance Officer Mitchell testified that, around January or February of 2014, the EEO Group was given a goal of lowering the number of complaints and deterring individuals from filing externally before filing internally. (ASUF ¶ 103.) Mitchell recalled Munoz speaking up, saying that he believed that these policies about limiting the complaints that were being filed was not in conformity with the law. (Id.; see also [*29]  Weidmann Decl., Ex. F ("Mitchell Depo.") at 26:13-19 [Doc. # 55 at 1].) Mitchell stated that he "shared the same perspective as [Munoz]" regarding the instructions to discourage employees from filing complaints with state and federal agencies, but he "wasn't as vocal about it as [Munoz] was." (Id. at 29:11-17.) Mitchell testified that he "certainly ha[d] concerns with what could come from that type of handling our work in that manner." (Id. at 29:17-19.)
Clay was also concerned about the new strategy to reduce the number of complaints, and believed it was illegal to discourage employees from filing charges. (ASUF ¶ 104; see also Weidmann Decl., Ex. I ("Clay Depo.") at 23:1-23:22 [Doc. # 55 at 81].) Clay expressed this belief to Nelson-Burney, Rabin, and Donna Peterkin, the Director of EEO Compliance. (ASUF ¶ 104; Clay Depo. at 23:23-24:2.)
Nelson-Burney denies that she ever instructed EEO Officers to dissuade or impede employees from using external complaint processes. (Nelson-Burney Decl. ¶ 31.) Siebert states that no one at Amtrak ever told him to approach employees who had filed external charges and discourage them from pursuing charges, or to discourage employees from filing external [*30]  complaints. (Siebert Decl. ¶¶ 11-12.) Coleman testified that she did not remember specifically what Nelson-Burney said to the EEO Officers, but that "it rubbed people the wrong way that she was suggesting we would discourage people from filing externally." (Glunz Decl., Ex. 1-E ("Coleman Depo.") at 92:6-9 [Doc. # 41-4 at 114].) Coleman did not remember whether Nelson-Burney ever told EEO Officers to approach employees who had already filed external complaints, but did testify that Nelson-Burney "never said" that EEO Officers should tell employees not to use the external process. (Id. at 92:10-93:2.)

N. The Storbakken Case
In or around January 2014, Munoz wrote a position statement to the State of Washington Human Rights Commission ("WHRC") in response to a complaint by an Amtrak employee, Paul Storbakken, and submitted it to Nelson-Burney for approval. (SGDMF ¶ 103.) Munoz's draft of the statement said that Amtrak denied the allegations, there had been no violation of federal or state laws, and the complaint should be dismissed in its entirety. (Id. ¶ 104.) The statement said that "at no time has [Storbakken] submitted a claim, or request, for a reasonable accommodation under the ADA" [*31]  and "[s]hould [he] be cleared to return to work by his physicians [Amtrak] stands ready and willing to engage in the interactive process to determine whether an accommodation can be granted." (Id. ¶ 107.)
Munoz states that "Amtrak knew Mr. Storbakken was injured and entitled to reasonable accommodation, and Amtrak was not providing accommodation." (Id.) Munoz states that Nelson-Burney told him that "the way he wrote the position statement made Amtrak look guilty and that Mr. Munoz needed to change the testimony of the witnesses from the truth—which was that the witnesses knew of the disability and there were no accommodations provided—to a false testimony, stating that they didn't know of the disability and accommodations were possibly available, if they had known." (Id.) Munoz testified at his deposition that Nelson-Burney told him that they could not file the response because "she said it made us look guilty" and "like we didn't engage in the interactive process[.]" (Id. ¶ 105.) Munoz testified that he responded: "[W]ell, that's because we didn't, we didn't engage in the interactive process, and we are—to use the term properly, we are guilty, we did violate the law, and we violated [*32]  our policy. We've known for three years." (Id. ¶ 106.)
Munoz asserts that he included the conclusion to the summary that no laws had been violated and the complaint should be dismissed because he was "following Ms. Nelson-Burney's instructions not to put admissions in the position statement, but . . . Nelson-Burney also went further and requested that Mr. Munoz change the facts present, from true facts to false facts." (Id. ¶ 104.)
Nelson-Burney has testified that the Storbakken case was an example of Munoz's work that "had some deficiencies[.]" (Nelson-Burney Depo at 55:14-56:2.) Nelson-Burney stated that "[w]e had issues with Mr. Munoz's writing in general [as well as] with his attention to detail with regard to processing his claims" and "Storbakken was one example." (Id. at 56:7-10.) Nelson-Burney testified that she made some revisions to the Storbakken complaint, and that her concerns with Munoz's position on that case were "one of the reasons Mr. Munoz was terminated." (Id. at 179:11-20.)

O. March 2014 PIP Extension
Rabin asserts that, during a meeting on March 6, 2014, she and Nelson-Burney provided Munoz with a progress report on his PIP, explaining that he had shown some improvement, [*33]  but was not yet meeting expectations. (SGDMF ¶ 113.) Amtrak has provided a document entitled Performance Feedback Meeting, dated March 6, 2014, for "Employee: Elias Munoz." (Rabin Decl., Ex. 5-C.) The notes state that Munoz's written work product still needed to be improved to meet the department's expectations, citing the Ish, Barfield, and Storbakken cases. (Id. at 2.) The update states that Munoz needed to improve in the areas of: "inappropriate paragraph construction," "run-on sentences and overall sloppy sentence construction," and "vague language." (Id. at 1, 2.)
Munoz contends that, while he met with Rabin and Nelson-Burney in March of 2014, they did not provide him with any progress update on his PIP, or communicate to him that he was not meeting expectations. (SGDMF ¶ 113.)
Munoz testified that, in anticipation of this meeting, Nelson-Burney and Rabin sent him their respective feedback on the Storbakken and Devylder cases. (Id. at 125: 15-25.) Munoz wrote comments back on Nelson-Burney's version of the Storbakken case and indicated "lack of evidence, not true, false" and other "stuff like that" and sent it back to her. (Id. at 126:14-17.) Munoz testified that when he sent it [*34]  back, he stated in his email that he was "fearful of retaliation" but that he had to respond. (Id. at 17-19.)
During the meeting, Munoz complained of disability discrimination. (SGDMF ¶ 175.) An Amtrak Employee Relations representative named Julia subsequently followed up with Munoz regarding this complaint. (Id. ¶ 176.) Munoz told her that he did not want to file a formal complaint because "they're already lying, do I honestly think filing a complaint is going to make any difference" and "why should I give you more information so [Nelson-Burney] can prepare [to terminate me]." (Munoz Depo. at 129:1-7.) He stated that there was therefore "absolutely no reason that I can see to file a formal complaint" and that "if they proceed and it ends up being what I suspect it's going to be, then I'll proceed as appropriate" and "I will file my complaint in the proper places because filing it internally will be a waste of time." (Id. at 129:6-13.) Munoz claims that, when he explained that he had sent back a marked-up version of the Storbakken case to Nelson-Burney, Julia said "that is not very smart, you don't want to piss off your boss" and "[y]ou don't tell your boss they have done these things [*35]  . . . you don't do it." (ASUF ¶ 74.)
On March 8, 2014, Rabin and Nelson-Burney extended Munoz's PIP until June 6, 2014. (SGDMF ¶ 114.)

P. Peterkin Promotion and Supervision
On March 10, 2014, Peterkin became the Director of EEO Compliance, replacing Interim Director Coleman, and became Munoz's direct supervisor. (Id. ¶ 119.) Throughout the spring of 2014, Peterkin sent numerous emails to the EEO Group regarding heightened performance expectations in line with the Amtrak Strategic Plan issued in 2013. (Id. ¶¶ 120, 121.)
Herrmann has testified that, during this time period, he was aware that Amtrak was having "problems" with Peterkin's "bad management style" and "poor communication skills." (ASUF ¶ 124.) Coleman has testified that Peterkin "was not the kind of person that could effectively lead anybody" and was "erratic in almost everything she did." (Coleman Depo. at 48:19-20, 56:17-18.) Coleman complained to Nelson-Burney and Human Resources about Peterkin's management style. (Id. at 48:22-49:3.) Peterkin was ultimately terminated from her employment with Amtrak. (ASUF ¶ 123.)
Peterkin asserts that during the two-and-a-half months that she was Munoz's supervisor prior to his termination [*36]  on May 23, 2014, she had weekly discussions with him pursuant to the PIP, and held case status update meetings. (SGDMF ¶ 124; see also Glunz Decl., Ex. 1-G ("Peterkin Depo.") at 23:13-18, 25:12-14 [Doc. # 41-4 at 153].) Munoz denies this, stating that Peterkin had some meetings with him regarding case status updates but did not have any discussions with him regarding his performance pursuant to the PIP. (SGDMF ¶ 124.) During his deposition, however, Munoz testified that in terms of "criticism that [he] got after the PIP . . . it was primarily [Peterkin], other than the general—continued general criticisms by [Nelson-Burney] and, on occasion, [Rabin]." (Munoz Depo. at 237:11-15.) Munoz also testified that "Peterkin on more than one occasion said that, you know, maybe I was just too old to learn the new way of doing things." (SGDMF ¶ 123.)
On April 1 and 8, 2014, Peterkin reviewed Munoz's CaseTrack report and emailed him about 18 of his CaseTrack entries containing errors or needing status updates. (Id. ¶ 131.) Around April 10, 2014, Peterkin provided additional feedback to Munoz on one of his investigative reports, noting typographical errors, changes needed to its organization, a lack [*37]  of detail, areas in which additional testimony and further investigation were needed, and insufficient analysis to support the conclusion. (Id. ¶ 132.)
Munoz contends that, during 2013 and 2014, he had the largest case load of any EEO Compliance Officer and no clerical assistance, and Peterkin unreasonably shortened his deadlines and unreasonably denied Munoz's requested extensions. (Id. ¶ 136.) He also contends that during this period: (1) he was not provided with written feedback on all written work, (2) his supervisors did not discuss his investigations and investigation report at the close of every investigation, (3) his supervisors did not discuss each complaint after he completed the investigation in order to make sure that the scope and direction of the investigation was clear, (4) he was not provided with training opportunities or suggestions, and (5) he was provided with some samples to follow, but they were contradictory and conflict, and Peterkin would frequently change her mind about the way she wanted them done. (ASUF ¶ 112.)
Around May 13, 2014, Peterkin drafted a mid-year review for Munoz, which informed him that he was not on track to meeting performance expectations. [*38]  (Id. ¶ 138.)
Also around May 13, 2014, Peterkin drafted a memorandum regarding "Elias Munoz FY14 Mid-Year Performance Discussions." (Id. ¶ 139.) The memorandum stated that Munoz was "not on track to meeting performance expectations," as he had exhibited deficient performance since October of 2013 in his investigative skills, case management skills, writing skills, analytical reasoning, judgment, and time management, among other areas. (Id. ¶¶ 139-140.) The memorandum also discussed deficiencies in Munoz's handling of the Fung matter. (Id. ¶ 146.)
On May 16, 2014, Peterkin drafted a "Performance Improvement Plan Status Update," in which she detailed Munoz's performance during the period of his extended PIP. (Id. ¶ 148.) Perkins stated in the update that Munoz's performance had not significantly improved, his productivity was low, he had inadequate case management skills, exhibited poor business behaviors, and continued to submit work that did not meet baseline standards. (Id. ¶ 149.) Peterkin concluded that any marked improvement during the PIP period was unlikely. (Id.)

Q. Termination
Rabin, Peterkin, and Nelson-Burney made the decision to terminate Munoz. (Id. ¶ 152.) Herrmann testified [*39]  that he was the one who "accepted" the recommendation. (Herrmann Depo. at 132:14-25.) Herrmann testified that, at the time, he was aware of the "problems Amtrak was having with Ms. Peterkin and her bad management style" but this did not overcome her termination recommendation, because it had also been made by Rabin and Nelson-Burney. (Id. at 132:14-25.)
On May 21, 2014, Peterkin and Paul Ho, Human Capital Business Partner, advised Munoz that his employment was being terminated due to his poor performance. (SGDMF ¶ 151.)

R. Requests for Accommodation
Munoz did not get a written medical restriction from his doctors relating to the health problems caused by his diabetes. (Id. ¶ 168.) Munoz contends that this was because he "certainly didn't want to feed into Amtrak's desire to get rid of me because of it." (Id.)
On January 17, 2014, Nelson-Burney emailed Munoz to ask if he could attend an investigative hearing the following Friday. (Nelson-Burney Decl., Ex. 2-Y at 2.) Munoz responded that he could attend the hearing, but that "it is very painful in both of my feet if I sit for more than ten minutes" and therefore "I have to stop and walk around for a few minutes after 8-10 miles or ten minutes." [*40]  (Id. at 1.) He stated that, given the distance, it would probably take about 90 minutes each way without stopping and walking around. (Id.) He stated that "if need be, I can attend, but frankly would prefer not to for the two above noted reasons." (Id.) Nelson-Burney responded: "I appreciate your candor and I'm sorry to hear that you're having some difficulties. I will make other arrangements." (Id.) She followed up later that day, asking "[is] there anything else you need from us in terms of your working environment?" (Id.) Munoz replied: "Not at the present. I can stand and walk around when need be, and since I have a private office I can apply pain creams if needed. Thank you for asking." (Id.)
Munoz states that, while Nelson-Burney sounded accommodating in her emails, she communicated very differently when she spoke to him in person or on the phone. (ASUF ¶ 86.) When Munoz indicated verbally that he would need to leave early or come late to an event so that he could walk around for his legs in 2014, Nelson-Burney "got mad" and said "don't bother, we can't depend on you, we need someone we can depend on." (Id.)11
Munoz communicated to Nelson-Burney, Rabin, and Coleman that he needed [*41]  accommodations for taking days off or partial days off for additional doctor's exams, and told them that he might need more time off for additional surgeries, a vein replacement, tests, and implantation of a stint. (Id. ¶ 87.)12 This time off was taken intermittently from December 2013 to June 2014.13 (Id.) On January 22, 2014, Munoz emailed Warner, copying Coleman and Nelson-Burney, stating that there was a very high probability that he would need to undergo surgery again the following week, and that he anticipated a two-to-four-week recovery period. (ASUF ¶ 88.)
Munoz contends that around this time Nelson-Burney made statements to the team regarding requests for time off, tell them that "if you can't work 40 hours or more at this job, you will not succeed", "[i]f you can't be present when we need you, you will not succeed at this job. You will have to leave", and "[i]f you are taking time off or you're not being around when we need you, you will not succeed at this job." (Id. ¶ 89.) The last time Nelson-Burney made statements of this kind was during a staff meeting in May of 2014. (Id.)
Munoz contends that Nelson-Burney told him in approximately May 2014, regarding a training, that [*42]  "I don't want to hear some bullshit medical reason that you can't come. I don't want to hear that the doctor doesn't want you flying on a plane or some other bullshit medical reason you can't come, you better be here." (Id. ¶ 90.)14

IV.

LEGAL STANDARD
Summary judgment should be granted "if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a); accord Wash. Mut. Inc. v. United States, 636 F.3d 1207, 1216 (9th Cir. 2011). Material facts are those that may affect the outcome of the case. Nat'l Ass'n of Optometrists & Opticians v. Harris, 682 F.3d 1144, 1147 (9th Cir. 2012) (citing Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986)). A dispute is genuine "if the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248.
The moving party bears the initial burden of establishing the absence of a genuine issue of material fact. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). Once the moving party has met its initial burden, Rule 56(c) requires the nonmoving party to "go beyond the pleadings and by her own affidavits, or by the 'depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file,' designate 'specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial.'" Id. at 324 (quoting Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c), (e)); see also Norse v. City of Santa Cruz, 629 F.3d 966, 973 (9th Cir. 2010) (en banc) ("Rule 56 requires the parties to set out facts they will be able to prove at trial."). "In judging evidence at the summary judgment stage, the court [*43]  does not make credibility determinations or weigh conflicting evidence." Soremekun v. Thrifty Payless, Inc., 509 F.3d 978, 984 (9th Cir. 2007). "Rather, it draws all inferences in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party." Id.

V.

DISCUSSION

A. Discrimination Claims
Both state and federal law analyze disability discrimination claims under a three-step framework first set forth by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 802, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). Brundage v. Hahn, 57 Cal. App. 4th 228, 236, 66 Cal. Rptr. 2d 830 (1997) (citations omitted). Under this framework, the plaintiff bears the burden of establishing a prima facie case of discrimination. Id. If he does so, the employer must offer a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse employment action. Id. The plaintiff then bears the burden of proving that the employer's proffered reason is merely a pretext for discrimination. Id. The same framework applies to age discrimination. Guz v. Bechtel Nat. Inc., 24 Cal. 4th 317, 384, 100 Cal. Rptr. 2d 352, 8 P.3d 1089 (2000). A plaintiff establishes a prima facie case of discrimination by proving that: (1) he is part of a protected class; (2) he is a qualified individual; and (3) he was subjected to an adverse employment action because of the protected characteristic. Brundage, 57 Cal. App. 4th at 236 (citation omitted).
An employer's motion for summary judgment "slightly modifies the order of these showings." Scotch v. Art Inst. of California-Orange Cty., Inc., 173 Cal. App. 4th 986, 1005, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d 338 (2009). If the summary judgment motion relies in whole or in part on a showing [*44]  of nondiscriminatory reasons for the adverse action, "the employer satisfies its burden as moving party if it presents evidence of such nondiscriminatory reasons that would permit a trier of fact to find it more likely than not that they were the basis for the termination." Id. (citations omitted). "To defeat the motion, the employee then must adduce or point to evidence raising a triable issue, that would permit a trier of fact to find by a preponderance [of the evidence] that intentional discrimination occurred." Id. Of course, "[i]n determining whether these burdens [are] met, [the court] must view the evidence in the light most favorable to plaintiff, as the nonmoving party, liberally construing her evidence while strictly scrutinizing defendant[']s." Id. (citations and quotation marks omitted); see also Nadaf-Rahrov v. Neiman Marcus Grp., Inc., 166 Cal. App. 4th 952, 962, 83 Cal. Rptr. 3d 190 (2008) ("From commencement to conclusion, the party moving for summary judgment bears the burden of persuasion that there is no triable issue of material fact and that he is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.") (citation and brackets omitted).

1. Prima Facie Case

a. Member of a Protected Class
Munoz is disabled by his diabetes. Colmenares v. Braemar Country Club, Inc., 29 Cal. 4th 1019, 1023, 130 Cal. Rptr. 2d 662, 63 P.3d 220, (2003) (FEHA defines disability as an impairment that "limits" [*45]  a "major life activity"). He also is a member of a class protected from age discrimination, Guz, 24 Cal. 4th at 355 (protected class for age discrimination is aged 40 and above).

b. Subjected to Adverse Employment Action
Munoz's termination and negative performance reviews constitute adverse employment actions. Brooks v. City of San Mateo, 229 F.3d 917, 928 (9th Cir. 2000) ("Among those employment decisions that can constitute an adverse employment action are termination [and] issuance of an undeserved negative performance review[.]").

c. Qualified Individual
Munoz must put forth evidence that he is a "qualified individual," meaning that "with or without reasonable accommodation, [he] can perform the essential functions of the employment position[.]" Smith v. Clark Cty. Sch. Dist., 727 F.3d 950, 955 (9th Cir. 2013). The EEOC has defined a "qualified individual" as one "who satisfies the requisite skills, experience, education and other job-related requirements of the employment position[.]" Johnson v. Bd. of Trustees of Boundary Cty. Sch. Dist. No. 101, 666 F.3d 561, 565 (9th Cir. 2011) (internal citation and quotation marks omitted).
Munoz need only adduce evidence sufficient to establish that a reasonable trier of fact could find that he is a qualified individual. Kaplan v. City of N. Las Vegas, 323 F.3d 1226, 1230, n. 2 (9th Cir. 2003) (summary judgment appropriate only if no reasonable trier of fact could find that plaintiff was a qualified individual). "To prevail on summary adjudication [an employer] [*46]  must show there is no triable issue of fact about [plaintiff's] ability, with or without accommodation, to perform the essential functions of [the position]." Nadaf-Rahrov, 166 Cal. App. 4th at 963.
As an EEO Officer, Munoz's core functions were (1) investigating employee and passenger complaints of discrimination filed internally with Amtrak, (2) preparing investigative reports, (3) investigating employee and passenger complaints filed externally with state and federal agencies, (4) preparing position statements in response to external complaints, and (5) conducting sexual harassment trainings. The position description states that an EEO Officer must have an ability to work independently and ensure that all investigations are completed within appropriate guidelines, excellent writing skills, attention to detail and deadlines, and excellent verbal communication skills.
Amtrak has put forth evidence that Munoz was not performing up to standards at certain aspects of his job during 2013 and the beginning of 2014, including: (1) the March 21, 2013 formal counseling letter about a charge he received around the time he was out on what he claims was medical leave in 2012 and failed to respond to in a timely manner, (2) two complaints [*47]  about his tone in sexual harassment trainings in 2011 and 2013, (3) his alleged mishandling of the Fung Charge, (4) his rating of "does not meet expectations" after the October 23, 2013 Calibration session, (5) Rabin's January 23, 2014 email regarding a case that she thought Munoz had mishandled, (6) Nelson-Burney's assessment of his writing and analysis in the Storbakken case, (7) Rabin and Nelson-Burney's March 2014 assessment that Munoz had made some progress, but was not yet meeting expectations, and criticizing his writing, and (8) Peterkin's 2014 mid-year review critiquing Munoz's investigative skills, case management skills, analytical reasoning, judgment, and time management. Amtrak contends that this evidence of Munoz's sub-standard performance establishes that he was not qualified to perform the essential functions of his job, and therefore has not stated a prima facie case.
Munoz, however, has presented evidence that could allow a reasonable trier of fact to find that he was able to perform his essential job functions of investigating complaints, writing reports and position papers, and conducting trainings. Although he received a formal counseling letter on March 21, 2013, [*48]  the letter focused on only one charge he had allegedly mishandled, as well as his need to be more diligent about his use of CaseTrack. There is a triable issue, however, regarding whether Munoz was on medical leave during the time that he received this assignment, and Munoz asserts that he received an extension from the EEOC on the response to this charge, and that the response was therefore not untimely. Campbell, the supervisor who issued the counseling letter, has also testified that at no point during the time he supervised Munoz was his performance less than competent or satisfactory.
Munoz received two complaints about his handling of sexual harassment trainings in 2011 and 2013, and both complaints indicated that Munoz was insensitive and made these attendees feel uncomfortable. On the other hand, Munoz conducted trainings for over 300 people a year, in groups of ten to twenty, and generally received positive feedback. Amtrak has identified only two complaints out the hundreds of training sessions Munoz conducted.
The parties dispute whether or not Munoz mishandled the Fung Charge. Munoz contends that he was told by Campbell that he need not enter the case into CaseTrack, and [*49]  believed that it did not need to be entered because it was a "no action" case. Peterkin contends that this explanation is "disingenuous" as he had recently been counseled about the need for timely CaseTrack entries, and because the circumstances under which he opened the matter for this case four months later indicated to her that he was attempting to "backdate" the matter in order to hide the fact that he had mishandled it.
Munoz received a rating of "does not meet expectations" after the October 23, 2013 Calibration session. In anticipation of the meeting, however, Nelson-Burney's notes rated Munoz as "meets expectations," and this rating changed after the meeting took place. Coleman has confirmed that nothing that Munoz had actually written was reviewed during this meeting. Munoz's direct supervisor, Coleman, has also testified that she did not believe that Munoz needed to be put on a performance improvement plan at that time, and that she did not think it "made sense" to rate him as not meeting expectations only because his writing was not as strong as that of his peers.
Munoz also wrote a detailed rebuttal of that performance evaluation and his PIP at the time he received them, [*50]  contending that he had not received specific examples of where he fell short, and was not provided with any training or examples of how he could meet Amtrak's standards.
Munoz disputes the validity of Nelson-Burney's critique of his writing and analysis in the Storbakken case, as he contends that she asked him to alter the facts in order to make Amtrak appear less culpable, and he refused to do so. In response to Peterkin's criticisms, Munoz has provided evidence that she was considered a bad manager, incapable of leading employees, behaved erratically, and had constantly shifting expectations. Munoz has also asserted that he had the largest case load of any EEO Officer during 2013 and 2014. This gives rise to an inference that, if the quality of his work was unsatisfactory, it may have been the result of unreasonable time pressures or poor management by his supervisors, particularly considering his many years of positive performance reviews prior to 2013.
A reasonable trier of fact could conclude from this evidence that Munoz was at least minimally qualified to perform the essential function of his job. Moreover, the Court must draw all reasonable inferences in favor of Munoz and view [*51]  the evidence in the light most favorable to him. In sum, there is a triable issue as to whether Munoz was a "qualified individual."

d. Adverse Action Because of Protected Characteristic
As discussed above, an employer's motion for summary judgment "slightly modifies the order" the analysis of the three-part framework in discrimination cases. Scotch, 173 Cal. App. 4th at 1005. Therefore, the Court will proceed to address whether Amtrak has put forth sufficient evidence of a non-discriminatory reason for the adverse employment action and, if so, assess whether Munoz has adduced sufficient evidence to create a triable issue regarding whether this reason is pretextual, and the adverse action was instead motivated by discriminatory animus.

2. Non-Discriminatory Reason
Amtrak has presented evidence of a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the adverse employment actions. Amtrak has provided a number of performance reviews with critical comments, testimony from supervisors regarding Munoz's performance issues, and documentation of specific instances of complaints of sub-standard performance. This is sufficient to permit a reasonable finder of fact to find that Munoz's purportedly deficient performance was more likely than [*52]  not the reason for his poor performance reviews and termination. The burden therefore shifts to Munoz to produce evidence raising a triable issue as to whether this reason was a pretext for intentional discrimination.

3. Intentional Discrimination
In order to rebut Amtrak's showing of a nondiscriminatory reason for his termination, Munoz must present evidence that "the employer[']s stated reason is either false or pretextual, or evidence that the employer acted with discriminatory animus, or evidence of each which would permit a reasonable trier of fact to conclude the employer intentionally discriminated." Scotch, 173 Cal. App. 4th at 1007. "[A] complainant need not prove that discriminatory animus was the sole motivation behind the challenged action, [but] he must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that there was a 'causal connection' between the employee[']s protected status and the adverse employment decision." Id.; see also Guz, 24 Cal. 4th at 384 (plaintiff must provide "evidence from which a rational factfinder could conclude that the employer's proffered explanation for its actions was false.")
"Federal and California courts have acknowledged the difficulty of proving intentional discrimination[.]" Arteaga v. Brink's, Inc., 163 Cal. App. 4th 327, 342, 77 Cal. Rptr. 3d 654 (2008). Courts may therefore "consider [*53]  . . . circumstantial (as well as direct) evidence from which a reasonable jury could conclude that the employee's disability actually motivated the [adverse employment decision]." Hernandez v. Hughes Missile Sys. Co., 362 F.3d 564, 568 (9th Cir. 2004). Such circumstantial evidence may include the fact that the employer knew of the employee's disability at the time the decision was made, Brundage, 57 Cal. App. 4th at 236, temporal proximity between disclosure of the disability and the decision, Arteaga, 163 Cal. App. 4th at 354, disparate treatment of similarly situated employees who are not part of the protected class, Nadaf-Rahrov v. Neiman Marcus Grp., Inc., 166 Cal. App. 4th 952, 991, 83 Cal. Rptr. 3d 190 (2008), or "weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, incoherencies or contradictions in the employer's proffered legitimate reasons for its action [such] that a reasonable factfinder could rationally find them unworthy of credence[.]" Morgan v. Regents of Univ. of Cal., 88 Cal. App. 4th 52, 75, 105 Cal. Rptr. 2d 652 (2000) (emphasis in original); see also Hersant v. Dep't of Soc. Servs., 57 Cal. App. 4th 997, 1002 (1997) (an employee alleging age discrimination must "offer circumstantial evidence such that a reasonable inference of age discrimination arises.")
As outlined in detail in the statement of facts, supra, Munoz has provided ample evidence to create a triable issue of fact as to whether Amtrak's stated non-discriminatory reason for its termination decision was pretextual.
"Because proof of discriminatory intent often depends on inferences rather [*54]  than on direct evidence, very little evidence of such intent is necessary to defeat summary judgment." Nadaf-Rahrov, 166 Cal. App. 4th at 991. While Amtrak has provided considerable evidence in support of its purported non-discriminatory reason for terminating Munoz, Munoz has adduced sufficient evidence, both circumstantial and direct, to permit a reasonable trier of fact to conclude that Amtrak's reason for the adverse employments was at least partly pretextual.

B. Retaliation
Retaliation claims follow the same three-step burden-shifting framework as discrimination claims at the summary judgment stage. Chuang v. Univ. of Cal. Davis, Bd. of Trustees, 225 F.3d 1115, 1124 (9th Cir. 2000). A plaintiff states a prima facie case of retaliation by showing that: (1) she engaged in a protected activity; (2) she suffered an adverse employment decision; and (3) there was a causal link between the protected activity and the adverse employment decision. Villiarimo, 281 F.3d at 1064. "The causal link can be inferred from circumstantial evidence such as the employer's knowledge of the protected activities and the proximity in time between the protected activity and the adverse action." Dawson v. Entek Int'l, 630 F.3d 928, 936 (9th Cir. 2011).

1. Protected Activity
Munoz contends that he was subject to retaliation for his requests for disability accommodation, his complaints of disability discrimination, [*55]  his requests for FMLA leave, and for opposing practices that he believed were forbidden by FEHA.
California courts and the Ninth Circuit have generally held that in order to qualify as a "protected activity" an employee's conduct must "demonstrate some degree of opposition to or protest of the employer's conduct or practice based on the employee's reasonable belief that the employer's action or practice is unlawful." Moore v. Regents of the Univ. of California, 248 Cal. App. 4th 216, 246, 206 Cal. Rptr. 3d 841 (2016); see also Aranda v. Renown S. Meadows Med. Ctr., 534 F. App'x 675, 676 (9th Cir. 2013) ("[Plaintiff's] request was not a 'protected activity' because she did not oppose an unlawful practice."); Yanowitz v. L'Oreal USA, Inc., 36 Cal. 4th 1028, 1047, 32 Cal. Rptr. 3d 436, 116 P.3d 1123 (2005) (protected activity must express "recognizable opposition to an employment practice that the claimant reasonably believes to be unlawful").
Munoz's complaint of discrimination and opposition to an employer's practices which he believed to be discriminatory and illegal are paradigmatic protected activities. See Aranda, 534 F. App'x at 676 (citing Raad v. Fairbanks N. Star Borough Sch. Dist., 323 F.3d 1185, 1196-97 (9th Cir. 2003)) ("protected activities include filing charge or complaint, providing testimony regarding employer's alleged unlawful practices, and engaging in activity intended to oppose employer's discriminatory practices"). Munoz has therefore established that he engaged in protected activity.
Before 2016, California courts generally held that requesting [*56]  accommodations or taking medical leave were not protected activities, because they did not demonstrate opposition to or protest against the employer's conduct or practices. See Moore v. Regents of the Univ. of Cal., 248 Cal. App. 4th 216, 246, 206 Cal. Rptr. 3d 841 (2016) (citing Rope v. Auto-Chlor System of Wash., Inc., 220 Cal. App. 4th 635, 652, 163 Cal. Rptr. 3d 392 (2013) ("[There is] no support in the regulations or case law for the proposition that a mere request—or even repeated requests—for an accommodation, without more, constitutes a protected activity sufficient to support a claim for retaliation in violation of FEHA."); Gardner v. City of Berkeley, 838 F. Supp. 2d 910, 925 (N.D. Cal. 2012) ("The act of receiving a medical retirement is not a 'protected activity' as required by the statute, as it does not involve complaining of or opposing any discriminatory conduct.") (citation and quotation marks omitted)).
Moore discusses the fact that, as newly amended, effective January 1, 2016, FEHA makes it unlawful "[f]or an employer . . . to retaliate or otherwise discriminate against a person for requesting accommodation . . . regardless of whether the request was granted." 248 Cal. App. 4th at 246 (citing Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(h) (2016)). Reasoning that statutes generally operate prospectively, and there was no statement in the legislation suggesting that the California Legislature intended to "clarify" what constitutes protected activity, rather than amending it, the Moore court found [*57]  that the statute should not apply retroactively to the defendant's conduct that occurred before 2016. Id. at 247 ("[Plaintiff] cannot base her claim for retaliation under FEHA on her alleged request for an accommodation [as] at the time of the relevant events, a request for accommodation, without more, was insufficient to constitute 'protected activity' . . . and such activity thus could not support a claim for retaliation[.]").
Munoz's requests for leave and accommodation all occurred before 2014 and therefore cannot serve as the basis for his retaliation claim. Because Munoz has engaged in recognized forms of protected activity, however, including his discrimination complaint and vocal opposition to practices that he believed were unlawful, he has satisfied the first element of a prima facie case for retaliation.

2. Causal Link
In this case, Munoz contends that, in early 2014, he expressed his concern to Nelson-Burney and others that the EEO Group's new strategy to reduce the number of complaints would run afoul of anti-discrimination laws. Other employees have testified that they had the same concerns, and remember Munoz speaking out about the issue.
Munoz contends that, in the Storbakken case, [*58]  he rejected Nelson-Burney's feedback on his draft, and informed her that he believed that her suggestions were false and unlawful. Munoz cites this as a specific example of an instance in which he believed that the EEO Group's new strategy was being implemented in an unlawful manner. Nelson-Burney has specifically stated that Munoz's handling of the Storbakken case was among the reasons he was terminated.
Munoz's informal discrimination complaint to Rabin and Nelson-Burney occurred shortly before the decision to terminate him, and around the same time that Nelson-Burney purportedly made other harsh and inflammatory remarks about his requests for medical leave and accommodation.
Taken together, this evidence is sufficient to give rise to a triable issue regarding the existence of a causal link between Munoz's protected activity and the adverse employment actions taken against him.

C. Failure to Prevent Discrimination and Retaliation
It is an unlawful for an employer to fail to take all reasonable steps necessary to prevent discrimination and harassment from occurring. Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(k). A claim for failure to prevent discrimination or harassment includes three elements: (1) plaintiff was subjected to discrimination, [*59]  harassment, or retaliation, (2) defendant failed to take all reasonable steps to prevent discrimination, harassment, or retaliation, and (3) this failure caused injury to the plaintiff. Lelaind v. City & Cty. of San Francisco, 576 F. Supp. 2d 1079, 1103 (N.D. Cal. 2008).
Munoz has raised triable issues as to his discrimination and retaliation claims. Therefore, a triable issue exists regarding what reasonable steps, if any, Amtrak failed to take that could have prevented the alleged retaliation and discrimination.

C. Wrongful Termination
California law recognizes a claim for wrongful termination in violation of a public policy reflected in a statute or constitutional provision." Day v. Sears Holdings Corp., 930 F. Supp. 2d 1146, 1189 (C.D. Cal. 2013) (citing Tameny v. Atlantic Richfield Co., 27 Cal.3d 167, 172, 164 Cal. Rptr. 839, 610 P.2d 1330 (1980)); see also Montag v. Aerospace Corp., 94 F.3d 652 (9th Cir. 1996) ("California restricts an employer's right to discharge its employees when such discharge is prohibited by statute or violates public policy."); Lagatree v. Luce, Forward, Hamilton & Scripps, 74 Cal. App. 4th 1105, 1111, 88 Cal. Rptr. 2d 664 (1999) (providing that while an employer may terminate an at-will employee for "no reason, or for an arbitrary or irrational reason," there is no right to terminate "for an unlawful reason or a purpose that contravenes fundamental public policy").
As discussed above, Munoz has raised triable issues as to whether his termination was motivated by discriminatory animus or retaliation. His wrongful termination claim therefore survives.

D. CFRA [*60]  Interference
It is unlawful "for an employer to interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of, or the attempt to exercise, any right provided under" the CFRA. Cal. Gov't Code § 12945.2(t). The CFRA is the state counterpart to the FMLA. See Xin Liu v. Amway Corp., 347 F.3d 1125, 1132 (9th Cir. 2003). To state a claim for interference with the CFRA, Munoz must show that (1) he "is eligible for protection under CFRA," (2) Amtrak is "a covered employer under [the] CFRA," (3) Munoz is "eligible for leave under CFRA," (4) Munoz "provided sufficient notice of the need for leave," and (5) Amtrak "denied or interfered with [his] taking leave." Dayton v. Sears Roebuck and Co., No. CV-01945-TLN(CKDx), 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 5075, 2015 WL 224775, at *10 (E.D. Cal. Jan. 14, 2015) (citing Sanders v. City of Newport, 657 F.3d 772, 778 (9th Cir. 2011)).
It is undisputed that Munoz took time off under the CFRA. He contends that Nelson-Burney subsequently made comments to him and the rest of the EEO Group discouraging them from taking medical leave if they wanted to succeed at their jobs. He also stated that, in response to his request for an accommodation, Nelson-Burney told him: "[D]on't bother, we can't depend on you, we need someone we can depend on." This is sufficient to establish a triable issue regarding whether Amtrak engaged in activity that would tend to chill Munoz's freedom to exercise his CFRA rights.

E. Failure to Accommodate and Failure to Engage in the Interactive [*61]  Process
"The elements of a failure to accommodate claim are (1) the plaintiff has a disability under FEHA, (2) the plaintiff is qualified to perform the essential functions of the position, and (3) the employer failed to reasonably accommodate the plaintiff's disability." McCarthy v. R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co., 819 F. Supp. 2d 923, 935 (E.D. Cal. 2011) (quoting Scotch, 173 Cal.App.4th at 1009-10 (2009)). It is also an unlawful employment practice
[f]or an employer or other entity covered by this part to fail to engage in a timely, good faith, interactive process with the employee or applicant to determine effective reasonable accommodations, if any, in response to a request for reasonable accommodation by an employee or applicant with a known physical or mental disability or known medical condition.
Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(n).
To establish a failure to accommodate, an employee must have requested an accommodation and been denied that accommodation. McCarthy v. R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co., 819 F. Supp. 2d 923, 937 (E.D. Cal. 2011) (citing Avila v. Cont'l Airlines, Inc., 165 Cal. App. 4th 1237, 1252, 82 Cal. Rptr. 3d 440 (2008)). While Munoz has stated that Nelson-Burney made various inflammatory remarks to him and the EEO Group as a whole regarding requests for medical leave and medical accommodations, he has not identified any actual accommodation that he requested and was denied. He was granted at least one medical leave, and states that he took time off for his medical appointments intermittently [*62]  between late 2013 and May or June of 2014. Although he contends that Nelson-Burney was much harsher in person than over email regarding his request for extra time to drive to a conference, he was ultimately not required to drive to the conference. Because Munoz has not identified an occasion on which he requested and was denied an accommodation, his claim for failure to accommodate fails.
In order for a failure-to-engage-in-the-interactive-process claim to survive summary judgment, "the employee must be able to identify an available accommodation the interactive process should have produced." Scotch, 173 Cal. App. 4th at 1018. The employee bears the burden of proof on this issue because "[a]lthough it would be unfair to require an employee in the workplace to unilaterally identify available accommodations, an employee in litigation can use discovery procedures to do so." Neiman Marcus, 166 Cal. App. 4th at 984; see also Scotch, 173 Cal. App. 4th at 1019 ("[O]nce the parties have engaged in the litigation process, to prevail, the employee must be able to identify an available accommodation the interactive process should have produced.").
Munoz has not identified an accommodation for his disability that would have been available to him if Amtrak had engaged in the good faith interactive process. [*63]  The Court therefore grants the motion for summary judgment as to the claim for failure to engage in the interactive process.

VI.

CONCLUSION
In light of the foregoing, Defendant's motion for summary judgment is DENIED as to Munoz's claims for age discrimination (Claims 1 and 2), disability discrimination (Claims 3 and 4), retaliation (Claims 5, 6, 10, 11, and 15), CFRA interference (Claims 8 and 9), failure to prevent discrimination (Claim 13), and wrongful termination (Claim 14). The motion is GRANTED as to the claims for failure to accommodate (Claim 7) and failure to engage in the interactive process (Claim 12).
IT IS SO ORDERED.
DATED: August 26, 2016
/s/ Dolly M. Gee
DOLLY M. GEE
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

