Mutti v. Rite Aid Corp.
United States District Court for the Central District of California
March 9, 2015, Decided
Case No. CV-14-01593-MWF (Ex)

Reporter
2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 201024 *; 2015 WL 13917164
John F. Mutti -v- Rite Aid Corporation, et al.
Counsel:  [*1] For Rite Aid Corporation, Defendant: Tina Rad, LEAD ATTORNEY, Kading Briggs LLP, Irvine, CA.
For Rite Aid Corporation, Defendant: Beth C Kearney, Glenn L Briggs, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Kading Briggs LLP, Irvine, CA.
For John F. Mutti, Plaintiff: Carney R Shegerian, LEAD ATTORNEY, Shegerian and Associates Inc, Santa Monica, CA.
Judges: Honorable MICHAEL W. FITZGERALD, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: MICHAEL W. FITZGERALD
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES—GENERAL

Proceedings (In Chambers): ORDER GRANTING IN PART AND DENYING IN PART DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT [52]
This matter is before the Court on the Motion for Summary Judgment filed by Defendant Rite Aid Corporation ("Rite Aid") on January 28, 2015. (Docket No. 7). The Court read and considered the papers on this Motion, and held a hearing on March 2, 2015. For the reasons stated below, the Court GRANTS in part and DENIES in part the Motion.

I. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
On January 10, 2014, Plaintiff John F. Mutti initiated this action by filing a Complaint in Los Angeles County Superior Court against Rite Aid and individual defendants Richard Denny, Steve Middleton, Traci Burch, and James Wickens. (Docket No. 1, Ex. A). On March 4, 2014, Rite Aid removed this action to [*2]  federal court. (Docket No. 1). On March 13, 2014, this action was reassigned to this Court for all further proceedings. (Docket No. 9). On March 14, 2014, the Court dismissed Plaintiff's claims against Wickens pursuant to the parties' stipulation. (Docket No. 14). On April 30, 2014 the Court dismissed the claims against the remaining individual Defendants because the Court lacked personal jurisdiction over Denny, Middleton, and Burch. (Docket No. 30). Rite Aid now brings this Motion seeking summary judgment on all of Plaintiff's remaining claims.

II. EVIDENTIARY OBJECTIONS
Both parties filed objections to the evidence submitted by the opposing party. (Docket Nos. 63, 69). Rite Aid also filed a Motion to Strike Plaintiff's Reply to Defendant's Separate Statement in Opposition To Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment (the "Reply to Separate Statement" (Docket No. 62)) complaining that Plaintiff objected to every fact offered in its Statement of Uncontroverted Facts and Conclusions of Law in Support of Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment ("DUSF") but only by listing repetitive string cites, evidence that supports the fact, or irrelevant argument. (Docket No. 68).
Rite Aid is correct [*3]  that Plaintiff's Reply to Separate Statement is little more than a repetition of its briefing, seldom responds directly to each fact presented by Rite Aid, and results in Plaintiff purporting to dispute facts with no basis to do so. Such responses to Rite Aid's offered facts do not assist the Court in determining whether a fact is in dispute. However, the Court declines to strike Plaintiff's Reply to Separate Statement in its entirety.
Rite Aid also objects to the Declaration of Charon McKinley (Docket No. 64-17) for a number of reasons. Rite Aid complains that it is based entirely on Plaintiff's recitation of the facts to McKinley and that McKinley was an HR manager in a position junior to Plaintiff's, so her experience in disciplining store-level and other non-exempt employees is irrelevant to Rite Aid's handling of Plaintiff's case. Further, Plaintiff failed to disclose McKinley as a witness despite submitting an amended Rule 26 disclosure report after McKinley signed her declaration. Plaintiff submitted a Declaration from Heather Conniff, in which she claims that the failure to disclose McKinley was entirely inadvertent. (Docket No. 73).
Pursuant to Rule 37(c)(1), "[i]f a party fails to provide information [*4]  or identify a witness as required by Rule 26(a) or (e), the party is not allowed to use that information or witness to supply evidence on a motion . . . unless the failure was substantially justified or is harmless." See also Yeti by Molly, Ltd. v. Deckers Outdoor Corp., 259 F.3d 1101, 1106 (9th Cir. 2001) ("[E]ven absent a showing in the record of bad faith or willfulness, exclusion is an appropriate remedy for failing to fulfill the required disclosure requirements of Rule 26(a)."). While the Court does not believe that the failure to disclose McKinley was done in bad faith, it was prejudicial to Rite Aid. Therefore, the Court SUSTAINS Rite Aid's objection to McKinley's Declaration.
As to the parties' remaining evidentiary objections, the Court declines to rule individually on the remaining evidentiary objection, as it concludes below that there are sufficient unchallenged or permissible material facts to show a genuine dispute requiring trial. The objections are thus OVERRULED without prejudice to identical challenges being raised in the context of motions in limine or objections at trial.

III. FACTUAL BACKGROUND
This action emerges out of the termination of Plaintiff by Rite Aid after video surveillance apparently showed him taking two sodas from a company cafeteria without paying for [*5]  them. Plaintiff alleges in his Complaint that he was terminated because he is gay, HIV positive, and because he attempted to obtain accommodations to address his disability. Few of the basic facts are in genuine dispute, although the parties argue that different inferences should be drawn from them. The differing inferences are illustrated, as noted above, by Plaintiff's disputing every single fact proposed by Rite Aid in its Statement of Uncontroverted Facts and Conclusions of Law ("DSUF" (Docket No. 52)).
The following is a statement of the facts that are not genuinely in dispute, unless otherwise noted. Mutti is "a homosexual male who is HIV positive." (Plaintiff's Additional Material Facts that Negate Summary Judgment ("PAMF") ¶ 1 (Docket No. 62)). From April 2013 to November 7, 2013 he was employed by Rite Aid as a Director of Human Resources, Supply Chain. (Id.). His responsibilities included reviewing cases related to ethics and compliance with company policy. (Id. ¶ 5). As part of his job he spent a substantial amount of time traveling to Rite Aid's distribution centers. (Id. ¶ 6). This travel constituted approximately 70 percent of his time. (Id.). Plaintiff was also a founding [*6]  member of Rite Aid's LGBT Affinity Group, and a member of the Diversity and Inclusion Committee. (Id. ¶¶ 14, 15). Plaintiff was open about being gay and numerous people, including his managers, knew that he was gay. (Id. ¶¶ 12-13). People at Rite Aid were not aware that Plaintiff was HIV positive with the exception of his supervisor, Richard Denny.
In October 2013 Plaintiff alleges that he told Denny that he was HIV positive and that he made clear that he was concerned that the travel "has put a strain on" him as a result. (Mutti Depo. 24:24-25:4). In response Denny said that "we will be more sensitive" with regard to Plaintiff's travel schedule.
On October 3, 2013 Plaintiff was visiting a Rite Aid distribution center in Wilsonville, Oregon. During that visit Security Officer Ken Shannon was reviewing security video of the cafeteria and believed that he observed Plaintiff fill a self-serve cup with soda, drink the soda and leave the cafeteria without paying. Shannon reported this to his supervisor, Asset Protection District Manager Richard Baxley. After reviewing the video, and being aware of Plaintiff's relatively senior position, he reported the matter to Director of Asset Protection [*7]  Steve Middleton. Middleton told Baxley to further investigate by reviewing the access control log, inspecting the soda machine and signage in the cafeteria, and reviewing all of the video from Plaintiff's visit.
Baxley conducted a month-long investigation at Middleton's direction. In his investigation, Baxley found another video which he believed showed Plaintiff again take soda from the fountain without paying for it. He also determined that the signs on the fountain made clear that payment was required, and that the fountain did not dispense water. Baxley determined that Plaintiff had twice taken a soda from the fountain without paying and so informed Middleton. Middleton reviewed the video and Baxley's findings and agreed. He then advised Traci Burch, Vice President of Labor Relations and Employment Counsel, that Rite Aid's Asset Protection Department was investigating Plaintiff. Burch was the supervisor of Plaintiff's supervisor.
During a regularly scheduled human resources meeting in November 2013, Middleton interviewed Plaintiff. He asked Plaintiff about the events in the cafeteria and showed him the video. Plaintiff said he could not recall the events, nor could he think of why [*8]  he would have taken the soda without paying for it. Plaintiff claims that he explained that he would not steal because he could always expense any food or beverage costs while traveling. (PAMF ¶ 47). At the end of the interview Plaintiff prepared a handwritten statement explaining "On October the third I was in the Wilsonville D[istribution ]C[enter]. I watched a video where it showed that I got a soda and a refill without paying for it." (Mutti Depo. 153:21-156:9, Ex. 13). Middleton concluded from the interview and the investigation that Plaintiff had stolen two sodas. (DSUF ¶ A:15).
Middleton then asked Denny and Burch to discuss the matter with Plaintiff, explaining the investigation, Plaintiff's conduct on the video, and Plaintiff's response to seeing the video. Denny determined that Plaintiff should be terminated after hearing what Middleton had to say. Burch agreed with Denny's decision. Denny offered Plaintiff an opportunity to resign. Plaintiff declined to do so and so was terminated by Denny.
After being terminated, Plaintiff learned that the cafeteria in the video was being investigated for reporting loss incorrectly, the cashier in the video was suspected of purposefully mischarging [*9]  customers, and that there were gaps in the video that raised suspicions. (Compl. ¶ 23). Plaintiff brought this suit alleging that Rite Aid's true reasons for terminating him included his disability, sexual orientation, gender; complaints of this activity; and his requests for accommodation for his disability. (Compl. ¶¶ 24, 27).
The Complaint asserts fourteen claims for relief for: (1) discrimination on the basis of disability (HIV status) in violation of FEHA; (2) harassment on the basis of disability in violation of FEHA; (3) retaliation for complaining of discrimination and harassment on the basis of disability in violation of FEHA; (4) failure to engage in the interactive process in violation of FEHA; (5) failure to accommodate disability in violation of FEHA; (6) wrongful termination on the basis of disability and in retaliation for complaining of discrimination and harassment on the basis of disability; (7) Discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in violation of FEHA; (8) harassment on the basis of sexual orientation in violation of FEHA; (9) retaliation for complaining of harassment on the basis of sexual orientation in violation of FEHA; (10) wrongful termination of [*10]  employment on the basis of sexual orientation and in retaliation for complaining of discrimination and harassment on the basis of sexual orientation; (11) discrimination on the basis of Gender in violation of FEHA; (12) harassment on the basis of gender in violation of FEHA; (13) retaliation for complaining of discrimination and harassment on the basis of gender in violation of FEHA; (14) wrongful termination of employment on the basis of gender and in retaliation for complaining of discrimination and harassment on the basis of gender. Plaintiff also makes a request for punitive damages.
The crux of Plaintiff's claims is that the purported reason for his termination — the theft of soda totaling $1.00 - was a pretext for the real reasons he was terminated: discrimination against him on the basis of sexual orientation, gender and his disability, and his attempts to correct these alleged wrongs. Further, he has suffered harassment on these grounds leading up to his termination. In support of his position, Plaintiff alleges a number of incidents of purported discrimination, and the allegedly improper manner in which Rite Aid handled his termination.
Plaintiff claims that his supervisor, [*11]  Denny, made a number of discriminatory comments to him. Denny invited Plaintiff to come and see his farm, promising to show Plaintiff "a real man's weekend" during which they would ride his tractor and go hunting. (PAMF ¶¶ 22-23). Denny also commented to Plaintiff that "you must have a lot of sex, being two guys are involved since no one says no." (Id. ¶ 24). Plaintiff responded by telling Denny that this "is a terrible stereotype." (Id. ¶ 25). On a third occasion, while out to dinner with Denny, Plaintiff, while eating a salad told Denny that he was going to go home and work out. Denny responded by asking "When are you going to give up this whole game of working out and watching what [you] eat and caring about what [you] look like?" (Id. ¶ 30). When Plaintiff said that he was newly single and wanted to maintain his looks, Denny rolled his eyes and ordered a beer. (Id. ¶ 31).
On another occasion, Plaintiff alleges that while visiting the Harrisburg distribution center, a Rite Aid manager said "I'm sure you'll want to be hitting the only gay bar in Harrisburg while you're here." (PAMF ¶ 26). The employee also offered to join Plaintiff if he went. Plaintiff also alleges that Rite Aid's [*12]  IT manager, William Karper, refused to return Plaintiff's phone calls or speak to him and raised his voice to Plaintiff, such that other employees commented on his treatment of Plaintiff.
In support of his claim that he was terminated because of his disability, and was discriminated and harassed on that basis, Plaintiff claims that Denny offensively commented on HIV. When Plaintiff was discussing a presentation to raise awareness of people with HIV at Rite Aid, Denny asked him "How do you know all about this HIV stuff?" (PAMF ¶ 36). Plaintiff found reference to HIV as "stuff" to be offensive. (PAMF ¶ 37).

IV. DISCUSSION
In deciding motions under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56, the Court applies Anderson, Celotex, and their Ninth Circuit progeny. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242 (1986); Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317 (1986). "The court shall grant summary judgment if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). "Where the non-moving party bears the burden of proof at trial, the moving party need only prove that there is an absence of evidence to support the non-moving party's case." In re Oracle Corp. Secs. Litig., 627 F.3d 376, 387 (9th Cir. 2010). "The evidence of the non-movant is to be believed, and all justifiable inferences are to be drawn in his favor." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 255.

A. [*13]  Plaintiff's Discrimination Claims
California employs the three-stage test established in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973) to resolve discrimination claims. The burden is first on the employee to establish a prima facie case of discrimination, thereby establishing a presumption of discrimination. The burden then shifts to the employer to show that the action was motivated by legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons. If the employer meets this burden, the burden shifts back to the employee to show that the employer's reasons are pretexts for discrimination. See Guz v. Bechtel, 24 Cal. 4th 317, 354-56, 100 Cal. Rptr. 2d 352 (2000) ("the great weight of federal and California authority holds that an employer is entitled to summary judgment if, considering the employer's innocent explanation for its actions, the evidence as a whole is insufficient to permit a rational inference that the employer's actual motive was discriminatory").
Rite Aid does not contest that Plaintiff establishes a prima facie case of discrimination under FEHA and the Court is satisfied with Plaintiff's showing. Generally, to establish a the plaintiff must provide evidence that (1) he was a member of a protected class, (2) he was qualified for the position he sought or was performing competently in the position he held, [*14]  (3) he suffered an adverse employment action, such as termination, demotion, or denial of an available job, and (4) some other circumstance suggests discriminatory motive. Guz, 24 Cal. 4th at 355 (citing Texas Dep't of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981) (holding when employee proved a prima facie case of discrimination, the employer bore only the burden of explaining, not persuading by a preponderance of evidence, that legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for the challenged employment action existed)).
Rite Aid argues that it establishes that its termination of Plaintiff was motivated by the legitimate, non-discriminatory reason of his stealing the soda from the company cafeteria, and that Plaintiff fails to carry his burden in showing that this reason was pretextual. (Mot. at 10-11). Plaintiff contends that Rite Aid cannot establish that the given reason was legitimate and, even if it could, he has made a showing that the reason was a pretext. (Opp. at 13-14).
California has followed the Supreme Court in holding that "the plaintiff must produce evidence sufficient to show that an illegitimate criterion was a substantial factor in the particular employment decision." Harris v. City of Santa Monica, 56 Cal 4th 203, 152 Cal. Rptr. 3d 392 (2013) (holding both direct and circumstantial evidence can be persuasive in discrimination cases [*15]  but standard is that discrimination was a "substantial motivating factor, rather than simply a motivating factor) (emphasis in original) (citing Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, 490 U.S. 228, 278 (1989) (O'Connor, J. concurring)). Where an employer offers evidence of a legitimate reason, the burden ultimately shifts back to the plaintiff to offer "substantial evidence" (1) that the employer's cited reason was untrue or pretextual such that the actual reason for the adverse employment action was discrimination; (2) that the employer acted with a discriminatory animus; or (3) a combination of the two showing that the employer intended to discriminate. Felix v. Baxter Healthercare Corp. No. 2:09-cv-06459-JHN-CWx, 2010 WL 3245368 at *5 (C.D. Cal. July 13, 2010) (citing Horn v. Cushman & Wakefield W., 72 Cal. App. 4th 798, 806-07, 85 Cal. Rptr. 2d 459 (1999)). Further, a claim is insufficient if a plaintiff shows only that "an employer's decision was wrong, mistaken or unwise." Veronese v. Lucasfilm Ltd., 212 Cal. App. 4th 1, 21, 151 Cal. Rptr. 3d 41 (2012) (holding that the trial court erred by failing to instruct jury that it could not find liability for discrimination or retaliation on the basis that defendant made an error of business judgment).
The plaintiff must do more than raise the inference that the employer's asserted reason is false. "[A] reason cannot be proved to be 'a pretext for discrimination' unless it is shown both that the reason was false, and that discrimination was the real reason." Hicks v. KNTV Television, Inc., 160 Cal. App. 4th 994, 1003, 73 Cal. Rptr. 3d 240 (2008) (holding [*16]  that use of subjective criteria as basis for termination does not, by itself, demonstrate pretext) (emphasis in original) (quoting St. Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks 509 U.S. 502, 515 (1993)). If a plaintiff produces no evidence from which a reasonable factfinder could infer that the employer's true reason was discriminatory, the employer is entitled to summary judgment. Caldwell v. Paramount Unified School Dist., 41 Cal. App. 4th 189, 203, 48 Cal. Rptr. 2d 448 (1995). Therefore, Plaintiff must show both that the reason he was fired was false, and that discrimination was the real reason behind his termination.
In response to Rite Aid's claim that it terminated Plaintiff for legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons, Plaintiff points to the short time between his revealing that he is HIV positive to Denny and his dismissal; Denny's repeated offensive comments as to his homosexuality; a purportedly forged email indicating his resignation; as well as the simple implausibility that he was terminated for stealing a dollar's worth of soda. Plaintiff also notes purported flaws in the manner in which his alleged theft was investigated. Plaintiff struggles to present a coherent theory connecting discriminatory animus with many of the red flags he raises as to his termination decision.
Nonetheless, Plaintiff does raise a triable issue of fact as to whether [*17]  Denny's decision was pretextual and whether he was fired out of discriminatory animus, thereby defeating Rite Aid's Motion:
Plaintiff's claims of presenting direct evidence of discrimination, thereby negating the application of the McDonnell Douglas burden shifting analysis, are misguided. The evidence Plaintiff presents is not direct evidence of discrimination. He does present evidence of comments by Denny that are inappropriate, further negative stereotypes, and perhaps insensitive. However, none of these comments directly shows a desire by Denny to discharge Plaintiff because he was gay or HIV positive. See DeJung v. Superior Court, 169 Cal. App. 4th 533, 550, 87 Cal. Rptr. 3d 99, 111 (2008) ("Direct evidence is evidence which, if believed, proves the fact of discriminatory animus without inference or presumption"). The evidence shows that Denny gave Plaintiff a very positive review and invited him to spend the weekend at Denny's farm. The evidence does not show, without some inference, that any person wanted to terminate Plaintiff because of his sexual orientation, gender or disability. Because Plaintiff does not present direct evidence of discrimination he bears the burden of showing that his termination was motivated by discriminatory animus.
Plaintiff's concerns over the investigation [*18]  are also largely irrelevant to deciding the Motion. Plaintiff's initial claim in his Complaint that he was terminated without any investigation has been shown to be incorrect by substantial evidence presented by Rite Aid. Rite Aid's evidence shows that a thorough investigation was carried out by Rite Aid personnel before the decision was presented to Denny. (DSUF ¶¶ A:5; A:7-9; A:11-15; A:17).
Plaintiff presents some evidence that the investigation was not carried out strictly according to Rite Aid policy and procedure. For example, an Ethics Point file was opened only after Plaintiff was terminated, Denny and Burch did not review the video until after he was terminated, and the cashier who was present in the cafeteria was not interviewed. Further, testimony by certain Rite Aid employees establishes that, despite Plaintiff's written statement regarding the video, Plaintiff did not "affirmatively admit" to stealing. (PAMF ¶¶ 60, 62).
Rite Aid contests the relevance of much of this evidence. First, Rite Aid points to testimony by its security personnel that the procedure of an investigation is not specifically circumscribed but depends on the context of the alleged conduct. (Baxley Depo. [*19]  18:7-21:12; Middleton Depo. 42:13-20, 98:6-21, 146:9-17) Plaintiff's senior position, Rite Aid argues, was one of the reasons why the investigation did not take place in precisely the manner which Plaintiff now argues it should have. Specifically, Rite Aid argues that Plaintiff states deposition testimony out of context and presents the declaration of an undisclosed witness who was lower in the HR chain of command to Plaintiff and so was only aware of investigations into junior employees. (Baxley Depo. 63:12-21).
Plaintiff fails to connect the allegedly problematic investigation to the asserted discrimination. Plaintiff only presents evidence as to animus for Denny. Of those involved in some way in Plaintiff's termination, only Denny knew that Plaintiff was HIV positive, and only Denny and Burch were aware that Plaintiff was gay. Plaintiff presents no evidence that Burch harbored any animus against Plaintiff. Plaintiff therefore fails to show any connection between the purported shortcomings of the investigation and his allegedly discriminatory termination.
Further, Rite Aid may not be held liable for a mistaken termination resulting from a mishandled investigation. Such errors are errors [*20]  of business judgment and not a basis for liability. See, e.g., King v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 152 Cal. App. 4th 426, 443, 60 Cal. Rptr. 3d 359 (2007) (For purposes of establishing the moving employer's initial burden of proof, it does not matter whether employee actually did commit an integrity violation as long as employer honestly believed he did); Hersant v. Dep't of Soc. Servs., 57 Cal. App. 4th 997, 1005, 67 Cal. Rptr. 2d 483 (1997) ("It is not enough for the employee simply to raise triable issues of fact concerning whether the employer's reasons for taking the adverse action were sound. What the employee has brought is not an action for general unfairness but for . . . discrimination."). Having established a plausible reason for its decision to terminate the burden is on Plaintiff to establish that the reason given was false and that his termination was in fact driven by discriminatory animus.
In this regard, Plaintiff presents the short period between revealing his HIV status to Denny and his being fired by Denny, as well as Denny's insensitive comments to Plaintiff. Plaintiff also points to Denny's inconsistent testimony in his deposition as to whether he fired Plaintiff or whether Plaintiff resigned. Further, Plaintiff presents an email that Denny allegedly forged to show that Plaintiff resigned. Plaintiff also challenges the plausibility of Rite [*21]  Aid's justification in terminating him for the theft of $1.00 in soda.
Rite Aid argues that such evidence is insufficient to establish that its reason for terminating Plaintiff was false. Rite Aid points to its no tolerance theft policy, and Plaintiff's awareness thereof, and the fact that a substantial portion of Plaintiff's responsibilities at Rite Aid involved dealing with similar disciplinary issues show that it was entirely justified in terminating Plaintiff. Rite Aid further argues that three other employees at the same distribution center had been terminated for stealing soda. (Baxley Decl. ¶ 13).
The evidence establishes that Denny was solely responsible for the decision to terminate Plaintiff once the investigation was complete. (Denny Depo. 26:25-27:5). Further, of all the people involved in some way in his termination, Plaintiff only presents evidence of discriminatory malice against Denny. The question then, is whether Denny's decision in terminating Plaintiff was driven by animus --did he use the opportunity presented by the investigation to terminate Plaintiff under cover of this minor infraction? Given the circumstantial evidence as to Denny's treatment of Plaintiff, the [*22]  very close connection between the termination and Plaintiff revealing his HIV status to Denny, the minor nature of the infraction, as well as Denny's contradictory statements and purportedly forged email, the Court concludes that Plaintiff establishes that there is a material issue of fact only appropriately resolved by a jury.
In particular, the Court notes that while Rite Aid presents evidence that suggests that it had a non-discriminatory reason to fire Plaintiff, Plaintiff presents sufficient evidence from which the jury could infer that the reason given by Denny was a pretext. Rite Aid argues that it has established that the evidence shows that Plaintiff was terminated subject to a zero tolerance theft policy which justified his termination for such a minor offense. Rite Aid however, fails to show that in each and every instance of a similar conduct the employee was terminated. The documentary evidence shows that while theft was certainly in contravention of Rite Aid's Standards of Conduct and Fraud Policy, both documents laying out the policies provided for a variety of forms of discipline and not only immediate termination. (Declaration of Beth Kearney, Exs. D, F (Docket No. [*23]  52-2)). Rite Aid also provides evidence that three other employees were terminated for stealing soda from the Willsonville Distribution Center. (Declaration of Richard Baxley, ¶ 13 (Docket No. 52-5)). However, no further evidence is presented as to the nature of those incidents, the level of the employees or what has happened at the numerous other distribution centers and other Rite Aid facilities across the country. Baxley's testimony at his deposition suggests that terminations had likely occurred under similar circumstances. Baxley testified that he was aware of three cases of termination resulting from thefts for amounts that "varied from . . . a couple of dollars up to a couple hundred dollars" and that he believed that they were more than one dollar. (Baxley Depo. 62:9-20).
While this evidence is suggestive that Plaintiff was terminated as part of a consistent and unvarying company policy it is not dispositive of that fact. Indeed, the fact that Denny was presented with the decision, in his discretion, as to how to deal with Plaintiff once the investigation had concluded that he had stolen the sodas indicates that termination was not the automatic resolution of such an incident. [*24]  Further, Denny's email purporting to be from Plaintiff indicating his resignation raises significant flags as to Denny's motivations, even if Rite Aid concedes that Plaintiff did not voluntarily resign. (Mutti Decl. Ex. 13). Given the minor nature of the infraction, Rite Aid has not presented sufficient evidence to show that Plaintiff's termination was part of their standard business practices and so is beyond reproach.
Of course, the Court does not conclude that Denny's explanation was not the basis for his decision to terminate Plaintiff. The Court only determines that on a motion for summary judgment, Rite Aid have failed to establish that when presented with the evidence of discriminatory animus and minor nature of the infraction, a reasonable jury could not conclude that the purported theft was a pretext for the real reason Denny terminated Plaintiff.
In addition to Plaintiff presenting enough evidence to suggest that Denny may have harbored animus on the basis of sexual orientation or disability, Denny's comments also suggest discrimination on the basis of his gender. California Government Code section 12926(r)(2) states that sex "includes, but is not limited to, a person's gender. 'Gender' means sex, and includes a person's [*25]  gender identity and gender expression. 'Gender expression' means a person's gender-related appearance and behavior whether or not stereotypically associated with the person's assigned sex at birth." Denny's comment could plausibly support a finding of gender discrimination because they indicate that Plaintiff did not conform with Denny's views of appropriate male behavior. The precise relationship between Plaintiff's sexual orientation and gender discrimination claims may be addressed by the Court in the Rule 16 process.
Accordingly, the Court DENIES Rite Aid's Motion as to Plaintiff's claims for discrimination on the basis of disability (HIV status) in violation of FEHA, discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in violation of FEHA, and discrimination on the basis of gender in violation of FEHA.

B. Harassment Claims
Rite Aid also seeks summary judgment as to Plaintiff's claims for harassment on the grounds of disability, sexual orientation and gender in violation of FEHA.
To establish a claim for harassment under FEHA Plaintiff must prove that he was subject to unwelcome harassment based on a protected characteristic, the harassment complained of was "sufficiently pervasive so as to [*26]  alter the conditions of employment and create an abusive working environment" and respondeat superior. Kelley v. Conco Companies, 196 Cal. App. 4th 191, 202-03, 126 Cal. Rptr. 3d 651 (2011) (holding that "while sexually taunting comments by supervisors and employees were commonplace, including gay innuendo, profanity, and rude, crude and insulting behavior [such] comments were made both jokingly and in anger" and were not sufficient to establish harassment based on sex).
Further, "[w]ith respect to the pervasiveness of harassment, courts have held an employee generally cannot recover for harassment that is occasional, isolated, sporadic, or trivial; rather, the employee must show a concerted pattern of harassment of a repeated, routine, or a generalized nature." Lyle v. Warner Bros. Television Productions, 38 Cal.4th 264, 283-284, 42 Cal. Rptr. 3d 2 (2006) (holding that plaintiff failed to establish sexually objectionable work environment that was sufficiently severe or pervasive to support hostile work environment sexual harassment claims despite presence of sexually coarse and vulgar language). As the California Supreme Court has further explained in the context of sexual harassment, "to establish liability in a FEHA hostile work environment sexual harassment case, a plaintiff employee must show [he] was subjected to sexual advances, conduct, or comments that [*27]  were severe enough or sufficiently pervasive to alter the conditions of [his] employment and create a hostile or abusive work environment." Id. at 283; see also Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Services, Inc., 523 U.S. 75, 81 (1998) ("The prohibition of harassment on the basis of sex requires neither asexuality nor androgyny in the workplace; it forbids only behavior so objectively offensive as to alter the 'conditions' of the victim's employment" and create a hostile or abusive work environment.); Hope v. California Youth Authority, 134 Cal. App. 4th 577, 588, 36 Cal. Rptr. 3d 154 (2005) (upholding jury award as supported by substantial evidence applying sexual harassment claims for harassment based on sexual orientation).
Plaintiff fails to establish that the alleged harassment was sufficiently severe or pervasive to maintain a claim. Plaintiff identifies four comments by Denny, one by another coworker, and his treatment by Rite Aid's IT. As a matter of established law, the comments were not so pervasive, nor any of them so severe, as to create a hostile or abusive work environment.
The alleged comments include Denny's inviting Plaintiff to his farm to have a "real man's weekend" hunting and riding Denny's tractor; Denny's reference to HIV as "stuff" prior to learning of Plaintiff's HIV status; Denny's questioning and dismissal of Plaintiff's concern [*28]  with what he ate and how he looked; and Denny's comment that Plaintiff presumably had a lot of sex because with two men involved neither was likely to say no.
Denny's comments, while perhaps insensitive, inappropriate and crude, are not severe and were not sufficiently pervasive to create a hostile work environment. See, e.g., Manatt v. Bank of America, 339 F.3d 792, 798 (9th Cir. 2003) (jokes referring to "China Man," purposeful mispronunciation of names, employees pulling their eyes back to mock the appearance of Asians did not create a hostile work environment); Mokler v. County of Orange, 157 Cal. App. 4th 121, 68 Cal. Rptr. 3d 568 (2007) ("To be actionable, however, a workplace must be permeated with discriminatory intimidation, ridicule and insult, that is sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of the victim's employment and create an abusive working environment," and "rude, inappropriate, and offensive behavior" is insufficient) (citations omitted).
Plaintiff also complains of the statement by a fellow employee that he would likely want to go to a gay bar. While Plaintiff claims that he found this to be offensive because it suggested that because he was gay, he only wanted to go to gay bars, and he was unprofessional because he would want to go to a bar while traveling for work. (Mutti Decl. ¶ [*29]  12). Again, while perhaps insensitive, this statements does not constitute severe harassment, especially in light of the employee in fact offering to accompany Plaintiff to the bar, and Plaintiff's own deposition testimony that he found the comment "ignorant and offensive" but not harassing. (Mutti Depo. 55:23-25). The employee might also have been attempting to acknowledge and signal acceptance of Plaintiff's sexual orientation, although Plaintiff obviously did not view the comment as such.
Plaintiff's complaints about his treatment by Rite Aid's IT manager are also insufficient to establish that that he experienced pervasive or severe harassment such as to create an abusive working environment.
Further, Plaintiff's own deposition testimony undermines his claim in his Opposition that the comments made him "extremely uncomfortable" and made his work environment "intolerable." When asked whether Denny's comments had affected his ability to do his job, Plaintiff said that they had not. (Mutti Depo. 47:7-11). Even without Plaintiff's conflicting deposition testimony, his present claims as to his subjective feelings about the various comments are insufficient. Lyle, 38 Cal. 4th at 284 (An "objectionable environment [*30]  must be both objectively and subjectively offensive, one that a reasonable person would find hostile or abusive, and one that the victim in fact did perceive to be so.") (quoting Faragher v. Boca Raton 524 U.S. 775, 787, (1998)). While perhaps insensitive, the comments Plaintiff references are not such that "a reasonable person would find [the work environment] hostile or abusive." Id. As courts have held, "FEHA is not a 'civility code' and is not designed to rid the workplace of vulgarity." Id. at 295.
Plaintiff also presents no evidence as to harassment on the basis of his disability. The only comment he identifies related to his HIV status is Denny's question as to how he knows so much about "this HIV stuff" before Denny was aware that Plaintiff was HIV positive.
Therefore, the Court GRANTS Rite Aid's Motion as to Plaintiff's second, eighth, and twelfth claims for harassment in violation of FEHA.

C. Plaintiff's Retaliation Claims
Rite Aid argues that it is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's retaliation claims because he did not engage in any protected activity.
The McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting analysis also applies in retaliation claims under FEHA. Stegall v. Citadel Broadcasting Co., 350 F3d 1061, 1065 (9th Cir. 2003); Flait v. North American Watch Corp. 3 Cal. App. 4th 467, 475-476, 4 Cal. Rptr. 2d. 522 (1992). Rite Aid contends, however, that Plaintiff did not engage in any protected activity and so summary [*31]  adjudication is appropriate without addressing the Rite Aid's reasons for terminating Plaintiff. (Mot. at 18).
To establish a prima facie case of retaliation under FEHA, Plaintiff must show: (i) that he engaged in protected activity; (ii) that employer submitted him to an adverse employment action; and (iii) a causal link existed between the protected activity and the employer's actions." Yanowitz v. L'Oreal USA, Inc., 36 Cal. 4th 1028, 1044, 32 Cal. Rptr. 3d 436 (2005).
Plaintiff makes two different claims regarding retaliation. Plaintiff claims that he was retaliated against for complaining of discrimination and harassment based on his gender and sexual orientation. Plaintiff also claims that he was retaliated against for requesting an accommodation for his disability. The Court will address these claims separately.
FEHA protects employees who make a charge, testify, assist or participate in any manner in proceedings or hearings under the statute; or oppose acts made unlawfu by the statute. Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(h)
Plaintiff does not address Rite Aid's argument that he did not engage in protected activity sufficient to establish a claim for retaliation for complaining about harassment on the basis of his sexual orientation and gender. Further Plaintiff's deposition testimony shows that Plaintiff [*32]  did not complain to anyone at Rite Aid regarding his perceived harassment or discrimination apart from a junior human resources manager. (Mutti Depo. 71:14-72:15, 186:1-5). Plaintiff's comments to Denny that his statements were inappropriate stereotypes are not sufficient to constitute protected activity protected by FEHA. Arn v. News Media Grp., 175 F. App'x 844, 846 (9th Cir. 2006) ("[Plaintiff's] complaints regarding his opposition to the sexually hostile environment that he believed his supervisor was creating are the type of 'complaints about personal grievances or vague or conclusory remarks that fail to put an employer on notice as to what conduct it should investigate [and] will not suffice to establish protected conduct.'") (quoting Yanowitz, 36 Cal. 4th at 1047). Plaintiff therefore fails to present evidence on a necessary element for a claim for retaliation.
Accordingly, the Court GRANTS Rite Aid's Motion as it pertains to Plaintiff's third, ninth, and thirteenth claims for relief.

D. Plaintiff's Failure to Accommodate and Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process Claims
Rite Aid argues that Plaintiff fails to establish a claim for a failure to accommodate and failure to engage in an interactive process because Plaintiff's discussion of his travel schedule with [*33]  Denny and revelation of his HIV status did not constitute a request for accommodation. Plaintiff argues that he has met his burden because he has established that he has a disability, he was qualified to work in his job, with or without reasonable accommodations, and Rite Aid failed to accommodate him. See Jensen v. Wells Fargo Bank, 85 Cal. App. 4th 245, 260, 102 Cal. Rptr. 2d 55 (2000) (holding that employer had not met its burden of establishing the absence of a triable issue of material fact with respect to reasonable accommodation where employer failed to give preferential treatment to disabled employee qualified for other positions).
Under FEHA, an employer's failure to provide reasonable accommodation to enable an employee with a disability to perform the essential functions of his job constitutes an unlawful employment practice. Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(m); Spitzer v. Good Guys, Inc., 80 Cal. App. 4th 1376, 1383, 96 Cal. Rptr. 2d 236 (2000) (holding that genuine issues of material fact existed as to whether employer knew it had not reasonably accommodated the employee's limitations and, if so, whether suitable positions to which she could have been reassigned were available when employer learned that the restructuring had failed to reasonably accommodate her.) However, "the interactive process of fashioning an appropriate accommodation lies primarily with the employee." [*34]  Id. at 1384. Therefore, Plaintiff was obliged "to tender a specific request for a necessary accommodation." King v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 152 Cal. App. 4th 426, 443, 60 Cal. Rptr. 3d 359 (2007) (quoting Spitzer, 80 Cal. App. 4th at 1384). In King, the Court of Appeal upheld the trial court's grant of summary judgment in favor of the employer where plaintiff failed to "establish that he communicated his distress to his supervisors or made the kind of specific request for a modified work schedule required to trigger an employer's duty to provide accommodation." 152 Cal. App. 4th at 444. In King, the plaintiff presented a note from his doctor, but the note failed to articulate the sort of limitations he claimed he needed.
Plaintiff did far less here. When the topic of HIV came up independently, Plaintiff told Denny that he was HIV positive, and added that his travel was wearing him down. Denny responded by saying, "We will be more sensitive to that." (DSUF ¶ M:2). Plaintiff failed to make any further request or articulate what accommodation might be necessary. "It is an employee's responsibility to understand his or her own physical or mental condition well enough to present the employer at the earliest opportunity with a concise list of restrictions which must be met to accommodate the employee." Jensen, 85 Cal. App. 4th at 266.
Plaintiff did not do enough either to request [*35]  an accommodation or establish that Rite Aid failed to engage in the interactive process to determine appropriate accommodations. Therefore, the Court GRANTS Rite Aid's Motion as to Plaintiff's claims for failure to accommodate and failure to engage in the interactive process.

E. Plaintiff's Wrongful Termination in Violation of Public Policy
Plaintiff also has claims for wrongful termination in violation of public policy on the basis of discrimination and retaliation. Because Plaintiff fails to defeat summary judgment as to his retaliation claims, these may not form the basis for a wrongful termination claim. Similarly, Plaintiff's failure to present evidence as to gender discrimination warrants summary judgment on his wrongful termination on that basis in its entirety.
However, discrimination alone may form the basis for a claim for wrongful termination in violation of public policy. City of Moorpark v. Superior Court, 18 Cal. 4th 1143, 1161, 77 Cal. Rptr. 2d 445 (1998) ("[W]e think discrimination based on disability, like sex and age discrimination, violates a 'substantial and fundamental' public policy and can form the basis of a common law wrongful discharge claim."); Stevenson v. Superior Court, 16 Cal. 4th 880, 894-95, 66 Cal. Rptr. 2d 888 (1997) (holding that like the policy against sex and race discrimination, the policy prohibiting employment [*36]  discrimination against older workers set forth in FEHA satisfies each of criteria necessary to support common law action for tortious wrongful discharge).
Accordingly, because Plaintiff's claims for discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, disability and gender, survive summary judgment so too do Plaintiff's claims for wrongful termination in violation of public policy to the extent they are premised on discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, disability, and gender.

F. PUNITIVE DAMAGES
Rite Aid also seeks summary judgment on Plaintiff's punitive damages claims. In light of the Court's decisions as to Plaintiff's claims, only punitive damages on the grounds of his discrimination claims potentially remain. Rite Aid argues that Plaintiff only alleges discriminatory animus against Denny. The Court concludes that Plaintiff fails to show that he can establish clear and convincing evidence that punitive damages are warranted.
Under California law, punitive damages may be appropriate "where it is proven by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant has been guilty of oppression, fraud, or malice." Cal. Civ. Code § 3294. Punitive damages are recoverable for FEHA violations. Yeager, 944 F. Supp. 2d at 931; Commodore Home Systems, Inc. v. Superior Court, 32 Cal. 3d 211, 220, 221, 185 Cal. Rptr. 270 (1982) (holding that [*37]  FEHA does not limit the relief a court may grant in a statutory suit charging employment discrimination). Under FEHA, "[b]ecause Defendant is a corporation, the evidence must demonstrate an officer, director or managing agent of Defendant committed, authorized or ratified an act of malice, oppression or fraud to create a genuine issue of material fact on punitive damages." Yeager, 944 F. Supp. 2d at 931.
Malice is "conduct which is intended by the defendant to cause injury to the plaintiff or despicable conduct which is carried on by the defendant with a willful and conscious disregard of the rights or safety of others." Cal. Civ. Code § 3294(c)(1). Oppression is "despicable conduct that subjects a person to cruel and unjust hardship in conscious disregard of that person's rights." Cal. Civ. Code § 3294. Despicable conduct is conduct that is "so vile, base, contemptible, miserable, wretched or loathsome that it would be looked down upon and despised by ordinary decent people." Scott v. Phoenix Schools, Inc., 175 Cal. App. 4th 714, 715, 96 Cal. Rptr. 3d 159 (2009) (a teacher fired for refusing to violate state laws limiting class size did not sustain claim for punitive damages) (citations omitted).
Under California law, firing an employee, without more, does not support an award of punitive damages; nor does it show a "conscious disregard" of an [*38]  employee's interests. Id. at 716. Further, "[s]omething more than the mere commission of a tort is always required for punitive damages." Taylor v. Superior Court, 24 Cal. 3d 890, 895, 157 Cal. Rptr. 693 (1979) (holding that plaintiff alleging harm caused by intoxicated drive could sustain claim for punitive damages even absent an allegation of defendant's intent to harm). Punitive damages are proper only when the tortious conduct rises to levels of extreme indifference to the plaintiff's rights, a level which decent citizens should not have to tolerate." American Airlines, Inc. v. Sheppard, Mullin, Richter & Hampton, 96 Cal. App. 4th 1017, 1050-1051, 117 Cal. Rptr. 2d 685 (2002) (holding that no claim for punitive damages could not be sustained where attorney violated duty to former client by submitting to deposition over client's objections because he protected client's confidential information in the deposition).
Rite Aid argues that Plaintiff fails to present any evidence of oppression, fraud or malice on the part of Denny or any other person at Rite Aid. (Mot. at 24). Plaintiff cites to Cloud v. Casey, 76 Cal. App. 4th 895, 90 Cal. Rptr. 2d 757 (1999) in which the Court of Appeal overturned the trial court's judgment notwithstanding the verdict on jury's award of punitive damages. The court held "[t]he jury could properly conclude that the corporations intentionally discriminated by denying Ms. Cloud a promotion based on gender, then attempted to [*39]  hide the illegal reason for their decision with false explanations, and that in this, they acted in a manner that" supported an award of punitive damages.
The Cloud court's decision overturned a trial court's ruling on the two employers' motion for a judgment notwithstanding the verdict, striking the jury's award of punitive damages. In Cloud, the court determined that there was clear and convincing evidence that the defendant companies had provided Cloud with numerous false reasons related to her experience and qualifications every time they failed to promote her in order to hide their illegal actions. In the present case, Rite Aid, and Denny, clearly had a plausible reason for terminating Plaintiff. Neither Denny nor Rite Aid presented continually false, and differing reasons to hide their termination decision, as the Cloud defendants did to hide their reasons for not promoting the plaintiff.
Plaintiff has not established that he can show by clear and convincing evidence that Denny, or anyone else at Rite Aid, acted in a "vile, despicable, manner," or out of malice towards defendant, or out of extreme indifference to Plaintiff's rights. American Airlines, 96 Cal. App. 4th at 1051. Plaintiff ultimately has not established anything more than [*40]  a genuine issue of fact as to the basic outlines of the tortious conduct, and that alone is insufficient to proceed with a claim for punitive damages. Taylor, 24 Cal. 3d at 895. Moreover, Plaintiff simply does not have a very strong case. Even if the conduct establishing the tort could also justify punitive damages, no rational jury could so conclude here by clear and convincing evidence.
Accordingly, Rite Aid's Motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's claim for punitive damages.

V. CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated above, the Court GRANTS in part and DENIES in part Rite Aid's Motion. Specifically, the Court rules as follows:
1. Discrimination on the basis of disability in violation of FEHA: DENIED;
2. Harassment on the basis of disability in violation of FEHA: GRANTED;
3. Retaliation for complaining of discrimination and harassment on the basis of disability in violation of FEHA: GRANTED;
4. Failure to engage in the interactive process in violation of FEHA: GRANTED;
5. Failure to accommodate disability in violation of FEHA: GRANTED;
6. Wrongful termination on the basis of disability and in retaliation for complaining of discrimination and harassment on the basis of disability: DENIED;
7. Discrimination on the basis of sexual [*41]  orientation in violation of FEHA: DENIED;
8. Harassment on the basis of sexual orientation in violation of FEHA: GRANTED;
9. Retaliation for complaining of harassment on the basis of sexual orientation in violation of FEHA: GRANTED; 10. Wrongful termination of employment on the basis of sexual orientation and in retaliation for complaining of discrimination and harassment on the basis of sexual orientation: DENIED;
11. Discrimination on the basis of gender in violation of FEHA: DENIED;
12. Harassment on the basis of gender in violation of FEHA: GRANTED;
13. Retaliation for complaining of discrimination and harassment on the basis of gender in violation of FEHA: GRANTED;
14. Wrongful termination of employment on the basis of gender and in retaliation for complaining of discrimination and harassment on the basis of gender: DENIED; and
15. Punitive damages: GRANTED.
IT IS SO ORDERED.


End of Document

