Newcomb v. City of Newport News
United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia, Newport News Division
May 24, 2021, Decided; May 24, 2021, Filed
Civil Action No. 4:20cv63

Reporter
2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 265196 *
NICOLE NEWCOMB, Newcomb, v. CITY OF NEWPORT NEWS, The City.
Counsel:  [*1] For City of Newport News, Defendant: James Arthur Cales III, LEAD ATTORNEY, Brittany Ashley McGill, Furniss Davis Rashkind & Saunders PC, Norfolk, VA.
For Nicole Newcomb, Plaintiff: James Richard Theuer, James R. Theuer PLLC, Norfolk, VA.
Judges: Lawrence R. Leonard, United States Magistrate Judge.
Opinion by: Lawrence R. Leonard
Opinion



REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION
Before the Court is Defendant, City of Newport News's (the "City"), Motion for Summary Judgment and accompanying memorandum. ECF Nos. 20-21. Plaintiff, Nicole Newcomb, filed her Brief in Opposition to the City's Motion for Summary Judgment, ECF No. 23, and the City filed a reply thereto, ECF No. 24. This matter was referred to the undersigned United States Magistrate Judge ("undersigned") pursuant to a Referral Order from the United States District Judge. ECF No. 25. For the following reasons, the undersigned recommends that the City's Motion for Summary Judgment, ECF No. 20, be GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART.

I. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
On May 5, 2020, Newcomb filed a Complaint alleging that her employer the City of Newport News discriminated against her in her role as a Master Police Officer in the Newport News Police Department. ECF No. 1. The City filed [*2]  an Answer accordingly. ECF No. 5. On January 5, 2021, the City filed a Motion for Summary Judgment and supporting memorandum. ECF Nos. 20-21. Newcomb then filed an opposition to the City's Motion for Summary Judgment. ECF No. 23. Subsequently, the City filed a Rebuttal Brief in Support of Motion for Summary Judgment. ECF No. 24. The motion was then referred to the undersigned for a report and recommendation. ECF No. 25. Consequently, the City's Motion for Summary Judgment, ECF No. 40, is now ripe for recommended disposition.

II. LEGAL STANDARD
Under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56, summary judgment is appropriate when the Court, viewing the record as a whole and in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party, finds there is no genuine issue of material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248-50 (1986). A court should grant summary judgment if the nonmoving party, after adequate time for discovery, has failed to establish the existence of an essential element of that party's case, on which that party will bear the burden of proof at trial. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323 (1986).
For the nonmoving party to prevail in a motion for summary judgment, they must go beyond the facts alleged in the pleadings and instead rely upon affidavits, [*3]  depositions, or other evidence to show a genuine issue for trial. See id. at 324. Conclusory statements, without specific evidentiary support, are insufficient. Causey v. Balog, 162 F.3d 795, 802 (4th Cir. 1998). Further, a genuine issue of material fact may not be found "through mere speculation or the building of one inference upon another." Adams v. Drew, 906 F.Supp. 1050, 1053 (E.D.Va. 1995). Rather, "there must be evidence on which the jury could reasonably find for the [party]." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 252.
Finally, as provided in E.D. Va. Local Civil Rule 56(b), "In determining a motion for summary judgment, the Court may assume that facts identified by the moving party in its listing of material facts are admitted, unless such a fact is controverted in the statement of genuine issues filed in opposition to the motion." Additionally, "[H]earsay evidence, which is inadmissible at trial, cannot be considered on a motion for summary judgment." Maryland Highways Contractors Ass'n, Inc. v. Maryland, 933 F.2d 1246, 1251-52 (4th Cir. 1991). "[A] party cannot create a triable issue in opposition to summary judgment simply by contradicting his deposition testimony with a subsequent affidavit. Hernandez v. Trawler Miss Vertie Mae, Inc., 187 F.3d 432, 438 (4th Cir. 1999).

III. UNDISPUTED MATERIAL FACTS
The Court has fashioned its undisputed material facts from those undisputed facts put forth by both Newcomb and the City which were supported by evidence in the record.1 While the parties appear to disagree about the characterization [*4]  of some facts put forth by the opposing party or feel the need to supplement, modify, or qualify the opposing party's stated facts, Newcomb and the City do not have any genuine disputes regarding the facts necessary and material to resolution in the instant motion.2 As such, this Court resolves the City's Motion for Summary Judgment, ECF No. 20, pursuant to the following undisputed material facts.

A. Background
Newcomb began work as a Newport News Police officer in 2006. ECF No. 21 at 3, ¶ 2. In 2010, Newcomb received a medical waiver from the City to permit her to wear black running shoes rather than boots because of her medial tibial stress syndrome with periostitis (commonly known as shin splints) and posterior tibialis tendon dysfunction (commonly known as adult acquired flatfoot).3 Id at 21, ¶ 4-6. In 2016, she became a Master Police Officer, a part of the Uniformed Patrol Division that answers calls for service from citizens and patrols activities in their assigned areas. Id at 2-3, ¶ 1. Newcomb concedes that at all relevant times, she was able to perform her job responsibilities regardless of the accommodation for her claimed disability. Id. at 3,13.

B. Acting Sergeant Pay [*5] 4
While the parties disagree on the underlying facts and circumstances surrounding Newcomb's claim for active sergeant pay, it is undisputed that on July 24, 2018, the City initially denied Newcomb's request for acting sergeant pay. ECF No 21 at 13; No. 23 at 13. Shortly thereafter, on August 4, 2018, Plaintiff informed her chain of command, that she would appeal the denial and expressed her belief that the denial was because of her sex. ECF No. 23 at 13.

C. Uniform Boot Policy
In July 2018, Stephen Drew became the Newport News Chief of Police. ECF No. 21 at 3, ¶ 7. In October 2018, Chief Drew reissued an amended uniform policy, ADM 520. Id. at 3, ¶ 8. The amended policy provides that "only issued uniform shoes, or plain black shoes of a similar brand and style are authorized to be worn with the police uniform. Id. at 3, ¶ 9. Shoes or boots worn with the uniform must be all black, lace-up and with plain toes. They will be leather or synthetic leather and shall be kept polished. Reflective or white lettering is not approved." Id. at 3-4, ¶ 9; Id attach 9 (Drew Declaration), ¶ 6. On October 18, 2018, Newcomb filed a formal request for accommodation with the City of Newport News, [*6]  seeking permission to wear a pair of Brooks running shoes designated as Brooks Adrenaline GTS 18 with mesh uppers. ECF No. 21 at 4, ¶ 10-11.
On September 17, 2018, Lt. Dunbar emailed the former Assistant Director of Human Resources a copy of MPO Newcomb's medical documentation that indicated she would benefit from the use of supportive athletic shoes, like the Brooks running shoes, to work on a daily basis. Id at 4, ¶ 13. Human Resources received Newcomb's ADA Accommodation Request form on October 23, 2018 and requested written documentation to support that proper footwear was established and approved by the former Police Chief as indicated on her Accommodation request. Id at 5, ¶ 14. On October 30, 2018, the former Captain, Randy Franklin, responded to Newcomb's request for supporting documentation indicating that he recalled her prior accommodation, and he remembered having a doctor look into her request. However, he did not have any of the paperwork and did not recall the outcome; other than the fact that she was approved to wear shoes outside of department policy. Id at 5, ¶ 15.
On November 15, 2018, Newcomb informed Human Resources that she received a verbal directive ordering her [*7]  to comply with the amended uniform policy. Id at 5, ¶ 16. Subsequently, due to a lack of response from her November 15 email, Newcomb reported to work wearing boots in compliance with the amended uniform policy, and she asked Human Resources to continue to review her October 2018 ADA Accommodation Request. Id. at 6, ¶ 17. The City ultimately denied Newcomb's request to wear the Brooks running shoes on November 19, 2018. Id at 4, ¶ 12.
On April 2, 2019, Newcomb submitted another ADA Reasonable Accommodation Request Packet including a medical note from her treating physician emphasizing the Brooks running shoes as a medical necessity, photos of her bruising, and a consideration of the alternatively proposed SAS footwear. Id. at 7, ¶ 22. On April 24, 2019, Newcomb underwent a Fitness for Duty Medical Evaluation with Dr. Padiyar who also reviewed her accommodation request. Id. at 8, ¶ 24.

D. Disciplinary Action
Regarding supervisory opportunities and potential retaliation, Chief Drew formed an advisory panel of officers to consider changes to the weekend scheduling of patrol officers. Id. at 12, ¶ 39. While there is some dispute as to when and why she was denied a temporary supervisory role, [*8]  at one-point Newcomb was a member of that panel representing her precinct. Id
On or about December 20, 2019, Newcomb was formally disciplined for a July 19, 2019 incident involving a fire at the Riverside Regional Medical Center.5 Id. at 12, ¶ 40. Other than that incident, Newcomb did not receive any formal discipline during the relevant time. Id. Notably, Newcomb concedes that on roughly twenty different occasions she was informally admonished to leave the precinct station more promptly to engage in her patrol duties. Id. at 12, ¶ 42.
Newcomb generally submits that the only shoe that has mitigated her symptoms is the Brooks running shoe. Id. at 13, ¶ 48. Additionally, both parties agree that the necessary job description and corresponding requirements include the ability to pursue and apprehend suspects, make arrests, engage in physically restraining a suspect, run, crawl, and climb as necessary. Id. at 13, ¶ 50. At all relevant times, Newcomb has been and remains a master police officer, and she has not received a reduction in her rank. Id at 13, ¶ 45.

E. Additional claims and assertions
In her deposition, Newcomb asserted for the first time that she was subject to a hostile work [*9]  environment related to her ADA claim, however there is no such claim in the Complaint. ECF No. 21 at 15.6 Accordingly, the implied allegations are not addressed herein.

IV. DISCUSSION
In the underlying complaint Newcomb alleged that she suffered discrimination through disparate treatment, failure to reasonably accommodate, and retaliation against her in violation of the ADA and EPA. Where a plaintiff alleges that her employer unlawfully discriminated or retaliated against her in violation of the ADA, she can prove her claim through direct and indirect evidence, or she may proceed under the burden-shifting framework of McDonnell Douglas Corp." Land v. Fairfax County, 978 F.3d 887, 892 (4th Cir. 2020)(citing Jacobs v. N.C. Admin. Off of the Cts., 780 F.3d 562, 572 (4th Cir. 2015)).
When assessing direct or indirect evidence of discrimination the Court looks to "evidence of conduct or statements that both reflect directly the alleged discriminatory attitude and that bear directly on the contested employment decision." Jacobs, 780 F.3d at 577-78. To avoid summary judgment, the plaintiff must produce direct evidence of a stated purpose to discriminate and/or indirect evidence of sufficient probative force to reflect a genuine issue of material fact." Rhoads v. F.D.I.C., 257 F.3d 373, 391 (4th Cir. 2001). Alternatively, where a plaintiff fails to present direct evidence of discrimination, the Court [*10]  must follow the three-step, McDonnell Douglas burden shifting analysis to determine whether a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether the plaintiff was discriminated against. See McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 807 (1973).
In McDonnell Douglas, the Supreme Court established a burden-shifting framework for determining whether discrimination has occurred. See id. Under this framework, Newcomb must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination to survive summary judgment on a wrongful discrimination claim. See id "This framework requires, initially, that a plaintiff prove by a preponderance of the evidence a prima facie case for intentional discrimination." Emami v. Bolden, 241 F. Supp. 3d 673, 679 (E.D. Va. 2017) (citing Tex. Dep't of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 252-53 (1981)).
If Newcomb does establish a prima facie case, then "the burden shifts to the defendant to articulate some legitimate, nondiscriminatory explanation which, if believed by the trier of fact, would support a finding that unlawful discrimination was not the cause of the employment action." Ennis v. Nat'l Ass'n of Bus. & Educ. Radio, 53 F.3d 55, 58 (4th Cir. 1995). To meet this burden, the City "need not persuade the court that it was actually motivated by the proffered reasons... [i]t is sufficient if the defendant's evidence raises a genuine issue of fact as to whether it discriminated against the plaintiff." Burdine, 450 U.S. at 254. If the City meets this burden, Newcomb is [*11]  given an opportunity to show that the City's "stated reason . . . was in fact pretext." McDonnell Douglas Corp., 411 U.S. at 804. Throughout the analysis, "[c]ourts must . . . resist the temptation to become so entwined in the intricacies of the [McDonnell Douglas] proof scheme that they forget that the scheme exists solely to facilitate determination of 'the ultimate question of discrimination vel non.'" Merritt v. Old Dominion Freight Line, Inc., 601 F.3d 289, 295 (4th Cir. 2010) (quoting Proud v. Stone, 945 F.2d 796, 798 (4th Cir. 1991)).

A. ADA Reasonable Accommodation
The ADA generally prohibits employers from discriminating against qualified individuals on the basis of disability. 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a)-(b). Discrimination in this context includes, inter alia, failing to "make reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who is an applicant or employee." Id. § 12112(b)(5)(A), (b)(1)-(7).
Here, the statement of undisputed material facts does not include direct evidence of discrimination against Newcomb regarding her accommodation requests. While Newcomb describes the denial of her two requests as arbitrary and criticizes the result as "Chief Drew's uninformed, unmoored intuition", ECF No. 23 at 19, the record does not include any direct evidence that her requests were discriminatorily denied. Newcomb does however present [*12]  indirect evidence of discrimination based on the timing of the first and second denial of her accommodation requests.
Contrary to Newcomb's representation, the record includes evidence of an accommodation, albeit not her preferred accommodation, thus limiting the probative force of her indirect evidence for this claim and any alleged discriminatory intent. The evidence surrounding the City's proposed accommodation reveals the question of whether the proposed accommodation was reasonable, but this determination requires more than a mere facial review of direct and indirect evidence. The conflicting evidence offered by both sides on the issue of reasonability is more appropriately assessed via the McDonnell Douglas burden shifting framework.
1. Plaintiff's Prima Facie Case
The McDonnell Douglas framework was extended to failure to accommodate claims in Jacobs v. N.C. Administrative Office of the Courts, 780 F.3d 562 (4th Cir. 2015). Pursuant to the framework, Newcomb must first establish a prima facie case for failure to accommodate in order to survive summary judgment. See McDonnell Douglas Corp., 411 U.S. at 807. To establish a prima facie case for the City's failure to accommodate, Newcomb must show the following:
(1) that [she] was an individual who had a disability within the meaning of the statute; (2) that the employer had notice of [*13]  [her] disability; (3) that with reasonable accommodation [she] could perform the essential functions of the position; and (4) that the employer refused to make such accommodations.
Wilson v. Dollar Gen. Corp., 717 F.3d 337, 345 (4th Cir. 2013). Notably, "a reasonable accommodation is one that 'enables [a qualified] individual with a disability . . . to perform the essential functions of [a] position' Id at 580; see also Reyazuddin v. Montgomery County, Maryland, 789 F.3d 407, 414 (4th Cir. 2015)("A reasonable accommodation is one that is feasible or plausible."). "Acquisition or modification of equipment or devices" is an expressed form of reasonable accommodation. See 42 U.S.C. § 12111(9)(B).
Here, there is a factual dispute regarding the third and fourth prong of the prima facie analysis. As for the first and second prong, the undisputed material facts indicate that Newcomb was an individual who had a disability within the meaning of the statute and that the City of Newport News and her chain of command within the police department had notice of her disability. The first two prongs are clearly established, and the Court need only determine whether Plaintiff has proffered sufficient evidence to establish the remaining elements. The City contends that Newcomb has failed to establish that, with a reasonable accommodation, she could still perform her duties [*14]  as a Master Police Officer, and that the City failed to grant such a reasonable accommodation. These two prongs have been largely conflated by both parties due to the parties' disagreement as to whether the initially requested Brooks shoes were a reasonable accommodation.
Officer footwear is governed by the Newport News Police Department Policy on Uniform and Attire. More specifically, once Chief Drew took charge of the department in July 2018, footwear was governed by the amended uniform policy, ADM 520.
Only issued uniform shoes or plain black leather shoes of a similar brand and style are authorized to be worn with the police uniform. Shoes or boots worn with the uniform must be all black, lace-up and with plain toes. They will be leather or synthetic leather and shall be kept polished. Reflective or white lettering or striping is not authorized.
ECF No. 21 attach 8 at 13. When this amended policy took effect in October 2018, Newcomb routinely wore a pair of Brooks Adrenaline GTS 18 that did not comply with the policy due to their "mesh uppers". Notably, the Brooks shoes did not comply with uniform policy prior to Chief Drew's amendment, but Newcomb contends, and the City concedes, [*15]  that she was granted an accommodation in 2011 and wore the requested Brooks shoes for eight years prior to the superseding enforcement of Chief Drew's Amended Uniform Policy. ECF No. 21 at 18, FN 2. Accordingly, Newcomb has characterized her accommodation request following Chief Drew's amendment as the continuation of the accommodation she had previously received and maintained for the eight years before the amended policy was implemented. ECF No. 23 at 18.
Notably, the subsequent denial of a previously permitted reasonable accommodation can establish a prima facie case for the third and fourth prong of the failure to accommodate standard. See Anderson v. School Board of Gloucester Cty., No. 3-18cv745, 2020 WL 2832475, at *16 (May 29, 2020, E.D. Va.)(holding that plaintiff established the third and fourth elements of a prima facie case for failure to accommodate by demonstrating that she was denied a previously permitted reasonable accommodation). However, this presumes that the previously permitted accommodation was in fact reasonable. In the event that the Brooks shoes are established as a reasonable accommodation, there are eight years of proof that she is capable of performing the work, and the denial of the shoes would be a refusal to grant a reasonable accommodation. This in turn would [*16]  establish a prima facie failure to accommodate claim.
Conversely, the City asserts that the Brooks shoes were not a reasonable accommodation, and the eight years of use with the Brooks shoes are irrelevant. ECF No. 21 at 19. The City argues that without the presumptive reasonability of the Brooks shoes, there is no evidence in the record to support the proposition that Newcomb was capable of performing the essential functions of the position with a reasonable accommodation. Procedurally, the City insists that Newcomb was afforded a full review of her request for accommodation. Id. That review included an investigation into her prior allowance, a review of her treating physician's recommendation, and a fitness for duty medical evaluation that resulted in two alternative accommodations, the Reebok Walk Ultra 6 DMX MAX and the SAS Walk Easy Black Shoe, proposed with the intention of addressing her condition and complying with the underlying safety concerns in the uniform policy. ECF No 21 at 4, 9; Id attach 7 at 15-19. The City impliedly argues that the 2011 accommodation does not make the Brooks shoes presumptively reasonable. See ECF No. 21 at 18-19. Further, Newcomb's insistence that [*17]  the Brooks shoes are the only reasonable accommodation does not refute the results of the review process, nor does it render the proposed alternatives unreasonable. Id at 20.
The reasonability of the Brooks shoes appears to be a fact specific analysis that is more appropriately reserved for the fact finder. As such, when construed in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, there is competent evidence in support of each prong in the prima facie analysis. The disputed evidence surrounding the reasonability of the Brooks shoes cannot be resolved as a matter of law. In fact, a reasonable jury considering the disputed evidence regarding the nuances of the uniform policy, underlying safety concerns, and details of the Brooks shoes, could return a verdict for Newcomb regarding their suitability as an accommodation. Thus, there is a genuine dispute as to the material facts surrounding the reasonability of the Brooks shoes as an accommodation suitable for a Master Police Officer.
The City also contends that the prohibition of the Brooks shoes was not a denial of a reasonable accommodation. ECF No. 21 at 20. In fact, the City further explained that after the requisite review process for both [*18]  the October 2018 and April 2019 requests, Newcomb was granted a reasonable accommodation and permitted to wear two different types of shoes, other than the Brooks, that would address her needs and comply with the underlying safety concerns that accompany the essential functions of her position. Id. at 19. While this incorporates a similar fact specific analysis of the Brooks shoes' reasonability, it is important to note that the standard requires Newcomb demonstrate that "the employer refused to make such accommodations." A strict reading of the prima facie standard for failure to accommodate does not limit the employer to merely grant or deny the employee's proposed accommodation. Rather, it more broadly considers whether the employer refused to make "such a reasonable accommodation" at all. "An employer may reasonably accommodate an employee without providing the exact accommodation that the employee requested. Rather, the employer may provide an alternative reasonable accommodation." Reyazuddin v. Montgomery County, Md., 789 F.3d 407, 415 (4th Cir. 2015). Put simply, the denial of an employee's proposed accommodation does not necessarily satisfy the fourth prong of the prima facie analysis where the employer offers an alternative reasonable accommodation. [*19] 
While it is undisputed that the City denied the use of the Brooks shoes as an accommodation, the City maintained that Newcomb was not denied an accommodation as they approved two different alternatives as reasonable accommodations for her disability. These alternatives were not her preferred accommodation, but the City asserts that they were reasonable substitutes that would "more adequately address[ ] areas of officer safety". ECF No. 21 attach 8 at 3. Newcomb does not address the Reebok shoes that were initially offered as an alternative, and she flatly asserts that the SAS shoe alternative did not accommodate her disability. ECF No. 23 at 6, ¶ 28. Nevertheless, it stands to reason that the suitability of the alternatives requires a similar fact specific analysis as the reasonability of the Brooks shoes. While Newcomb is notably silent on the issue, there appears to be a genuine dispute of material fact as to the reasonability of the proposed alternatives that is best reserved for the fact finder.
Therefore, viewing the record as a whole and in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, the Court FINDS that Newcomb has established a prima facie case of failure to accommodate in violation [*20]  of the ADA. Having acknowledged that Newcomb established a prima facie claim for her employer's failure to accommodate, the burden now shifts to the City to articulate some legitimate, nondiscriminatory explanation which, if believed by the trier of fact, would support a finding that unlawful discrimination was not the cause of the adverse employment action.
2. The City's Legitimate, Non-Discriminatory Justification Here, the City claims that the termination of Newcomb's prior accommodation was not discriminatory, but the result of a uniform policy change geared towards the safety of the officers. ECF No. 24 at 19. In his declaration, Chief Drew explained that safety was the primary concern and rationale behind the denial of Newcomb's proposed accommodation.
Predominantly cloth shoes, such as the one that Nicole Newcomb submitted to wear, are not suitable. The shoes proposed by Ms. Newcomb do not offer the same protection against hazardous liquid substances that a leather or synthetic shoe provides. Moreover, the risk of puncture from sharp objects while wearing a cloth shoe is a concern for officer safety.
ECF No. 21 attach 8 at 2. Collectively, Chief Drew's explanation of the rationale [*21]  behind the uniform policy, the review process conducted by the City's Department of Human Resources and the Newport News Police Department, and the approval of alternative accommodating shoes provide adequate evidence that the Department was actually motivated by the articulated safety concerns. Even if this evidence was not ultimately persuasive, the City "need not persuade the court that it was actually motivated by the proffered reasons...[i]t is sufficient if the City's evidence raises a genuine issue of fact as to whether it discriminated against the plaintiff." Burdine, 450 U.S. at 254. At the very least, there is a genuine issue of fact as to whether there was discriminatory animus or intent towards Newcomb when the department chose to enforce the uniform policy and no longer permitted the use of her Brooks shoes as an accommodation. Therefore, the City has proffered a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the outcome of Newcomb's accommodation requests, and the Court FINDS that it has met its burden of production. The burden now shifts back to Newcomb to demonstrate that the purported safety concerns are in fact pretext.

3. Alleged Pretext
To demonstrate pretext, Newcomb must show that the "asserted [*22]  justifications, even if true, are post hoc rationalizations invented for purposes of litigation." Jacobs, 780 F.3d at 576. A plaintiff can demonstrate pretext "directly by persuading the court that a discriminatory reason more likely motivated [Defendant,] or indirectly by showing that . . . [Defendant's] proffered explanation is unworthy of credence." Burdine, 450 U.S. at 256.7 Accordingly there are several factors that the Court must evaluate to determine pretext. The Court must evaluate (i) whether plaintiff has established that defendant's explanation was not the true explanation for the alleged discrimination, see Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000)(addressing pretext generally under the McDonnell Douglas framework); (ii) whether plaintiff has established that there is evidence sufficiently probative of discrimination, see Ullrich v. CEXEC, Inc., 233 F. Supp. 3d 515, 528 (E.D. Va. 2017) (quoting Mereish v. Walker, 359 F.3d 330, 335 (4th Cir. 2004)); (iii) whether defendant has proffered any factors supportive of defendant's case, see Reeves, 530 U.S. at 148-49; and (iv) whether plaintiff has met her "ultimate burden of proving that she has been the victim of intentional discrimination." Smith v. Strayer Univ. Corp., 79 F. Supp. 3d 591, 599 (E.D. Va. 2015) (quoting Ennis, 53 F.3d at 58).
Notably, "[T]he McDonnell Douglas framework—with its presumptions and burdens—disappear[s]" at this stage of the analysis. Reeves, 530 U.S. at 142-43 (quoting St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 510 (1993)). Therefore, once a defendant has asserted a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason, the plaintiff's prima facie case is no longer the focus of the inquiry. See id. Instead, on a motion for summary judgment, the Court must resolve "one central question: Has the employee produced sufficient evidence for a reasonable jury to find that the employer's asserted non-discriminatory reason was not the actual reason and that the employer intentionally discriminated against the employee[?]" Brady v. Off of the Sergeant at Arms, 520 F.3d 490, 496-494 (D.C. Cir. 2013).
Newcomb's only contention that the City's [*24]  safety concerns are pretextual is her comparative evidence of other exemptions to provisions of the uniform policy that are similarly connected to officer safety. ECF No. 23 at 20. Namely, Newcomb notes the department routinely allowed officers to stop shaving for a fundraiser despite the established appearance policy that generally prohibited facial hair as it would prevent the proper seal on a gas mask when necessary. ECF No. 23 at 4, 20. The exception permits the officers to grow beards but required them to have a razor with them to shave in the event that they needed to wear a gas mask. Id Newcomb suggests that a similar approach could be implemented by allowing her to change shoes whenever circumstances involving the relevant safety concerns arise. Id. Newcomb impliedly suggests that the Department's safety concerns are pretextual because there are examples of uniform and appearance policy exceptions even where safety is a concern.
While Newcomb has revealed a potential inconsistency in the department's enforcement of the uniform and appearance policies, the significance and materiality of that inconsistency is questionable and falls short of pretext. It is unclear how, if at all, [*25]  the department's approach to facial hair and gas masks refutes the Department's claim that the enforcement of the uniform shoe policy is rooted in concerns for officer safety. Just because the department has provided for exceptions regarding one aspect of the uniform and appearance policy, it does not delegitimize the underlying safety concerns related to a different policy with its attendant different safety concerns. It stands to reason that in a comprehensive uniform policy, like that of the Newport News Police Department, not all safety concerns are the same. Nor is the department compelled to provide perfectly analogous exceptions and accommodations to policies that appear to address differing safety concerns. Nonetheless it is not for the Court to evaluate the comparative prudence of the uniform and appearance policies, only whether they reveal discriminatory intent behind the City's adverse employment action.
While Newcomb has provided some competent evidence to dispute the purported non-discriminatory justification, such negligible evidence does not adequately address whether officer safety is an ad hoc justification offered as pretext. In fact, the City has consistently maintained [*26]  that officer safety is the primary purpose of the uniform policy at issue. Even if the City's concerns for officer safety had a disparate effect on Newcomb compared to those affected by the facial hair appearance policy, so long as it is not achieved through discriminatory means it remains a supportable goal for the City. See DeJarnette, 133 F.3d at 299 (quoting Giannopoulos, 109 F.3d at 410-11) ("[I]t is not [the Court's] province to decide whether the reason was wise, fair, or even correct, ultimately, so long as it truly was the reason for the plaintiff's termination."). As there is no evidence that the City's rationale was dishonest, and no evidence that directly conflicts with their stated reason, Newcomb has not established that the rationale offered by the City—officer safety—was pretextual and not the true explanation for the outcome of Newcomb's accommodation request. Therefore, there does not appear to be a genuine dispute of material fact regarding the alleged pretext for the City's enforcement of the uniform policy.
Despite the burden-shifting framework available under the McDonnell Douglas framework, Plaintiff retains "at all times" the burden to persuade the Court that she has been the victim of intentional discrimination. Merritt, 601 F.3d at 294 (citing Burdine, 450 U.S. at 256). In making [*27]  the determination whether Plaintiff has met this burden, the Court must look at all the facts and evidence that have been presented in the instant case. See Conner v. Schnuck Mkts., Inc., 121 F.3d 1390, 1398 (10th Cir. 1997) ("Each case turns on its facts[.]"). While Newcomb has established a prima facie case, that case is weakened by the City's apparent efforts to accommodate her disability with alternatively accommodating shoes and consistent non-discriminatory justification for denying her preferred accommodation. While there appear to be facts at issue regarding the reasonability of the proposed accommodations that could lead to a scenario in which it is "permissable for the trier of fact to infer the ultimate fact of discrimination from the falsity of the employer's explanation," Reeves, 530 U.S. at 147 (emphasis in original), the weakness of Newcomb's prima facie case, combined with the lack of evidence that her disability was the reason for the adverse employment action, convinces the Court that even if Plaintiff were to make "such a showing[,]" it would be "[in]adequate to sustain a jury's finding of liability." Id. at 148. Crediting Newcomb with establishing a prima facie failure to accommodate claim, nonetheless there is no genuine dispute of material fact regarding the [*28]  City's non-discriminatory justification for the establishment and enforcement of the amended uniform policy and Newcomb's failure to establish that such justification was a pretext for discrimination. Therefore, the Undersigned FINDS that Plaintiff has failed to demonstrate that she has been the victim of intentional discrimination by the City and RECOMMENDS that the City's Motion for Summary Judgment regarding Newcomb's failure to accommodate claim be GRANTED.

B. ADA Retaliation
Similar to that of the Failure to Accommodate standard, "[i]n order to prevail on a claim of retaliation, a plaintiff must either offer sufficient direct and indirect evidence of retaliation, or proceed under a burden-shifting method." Jacobs, 780 F.3d at 577. "Retaliation claims and discrimination claims require fact-specific analysis that 'depends on the particular circumstances of the case." Laird v. Fairfax County, Virginia, 978 F.3d 887, 893 (4th Cir. 2020)(quoting Adams v. Anne Arundel Cty. Pub. Schs., 789 F.3d 443, 431 (4th Cir. 2015). To establish a prima facie claim for retaliation under the ADA, Newcomb must prove that "(1) she has engaged in protected conduct; (2) she suffered an adverse action after engaging in the protected conduct; and (3) there was a causal link between the protected conduct and the adverse action." Laird v. Fairfax County, 978 F.3d 887, 892 at Fn. 4 (4th Cir. Oct. 23, 2020). Notably, "the scope of the antiretaliation [*29]  provision extends beyond workplace-related or employment-related retaliatory acts and harm." Id. If Newcomb can make out a prima facie case for retaliation, the burden shifts to the employer to offer a non-discriminatory basis for the adverse employment action. Matvia v. Bald Head Island, 259 F.3d 261, 271 (4th Cir. 2011). Newcomb then has the opportunity to demonstrate that the stated basis is merely pretextual. Id.
1. Prima Facie Retaliation Claim
The City concedes that Newcomb's request for accommodation under the ADA is protected conduct establishing the first prong of the prima facie retaliation claim. ECF No. 21 at 21. However, the City contends that Newcomb cannot establish that she suffered adverse action after filing her request for accommodation and that the adverse action was causally linked to her request for accommodation. Id.
An action is materially adverse if the action "might have dissuaded a reasonable worker from making or supporting a charge of discrimination . . . 'a significant detriment'. . . not `relatively insubstantial or trivial.'" Id. at 893. Newcomb alleges that she suffered the following adverse actions: the denial of opportunities to serve as an acting sergeant; a pattern of harassment and intimidation that interfered with her [*30]  right to a reasonable accommodation; a lower evaluation that reduced her pay. ECF No. 23 at 21-22. On their face, these all appear to be adverse actions that could dissuade a reasonable worker from pursuing a discrimination claim. However, upon closer review of the surrounding circumstances the significance of the detriment stemming from each action remains in dispute.
For example, it is undisputed that at one point Newcomb was denied her acting sergeant pay from a prior shift, and she was later denied future opportunities to serve as acting sergeant with increased pay. ECF No. 23 at 13, 21. However, the City contends that this is an aggregation of two different events with distinct justifications to create the appearance of a more significant detriment. ECF No 24 at 14. The City explains that at the time at which formal discipline was imposed on December 20, 2019, Newcomb had already been reimbursed for her claimed back pay, and she had been granted two footwear alternative accommodations. ECF No. 24 at 12. Nonetheless, the Department's denial of future opportunities to serve as acting sergeant does arise to the level of an adverse employment action that affects her employment status. [*31]  The City downplayed the significance of the adverse action and offered a response as to the causal link between the protected conduct and the adverse action, but it does not otherwise respond to the contention that withholding the temporary promotion to acting sergeant constitutes an adverse employment action.
Similarly, the parties dispute the veracity of the "pattern of harassment and intimidation" and the extent to which the alleged conduct deprived Newcomb of her rights under the ADA. ECF No. 23 at 22. Preliminarily, the parties do not agree on the conduct that was alleged to be harassing and intimidating. Throughout her "Statement of Disputed Material Facts", Newcomb references incidents of harassment from her superiors, namely Capt. Hileman, Sgt. Van Lawson, and Assistant Chief Grinstead. ECF No. 23 at 3, 12. Who the alleged harassing parties are does not appear to be in dispute, but the nature of the alleged harassment is disputed. The alleged harassment purportedly took place prior to and shortly after the institution of the October 2018 amended uniform policy, ECF No. 24 at 2, ¶8, and included conduct such as berating her in public, excess scrutiny of her job performance, withholding [*32]  of information from her, and denial of training. ECF No. 23 at 23. Newcomb contends that it was directed at her footwear, id, whereas the City argues that any of the alleged conduct even remotely related to Newcomb's footwear accommodation does not arise to the level of harassment and retaliation. ECF No. 24 at 2, ¶8. The City emphasizes that there was no written directive memorializing her 2011 accommodation and therefore contends that the officers in question were merely seeking to enforce the amended uniform policy. Id.
Finally, Newcomb claims that her performance evaluation for the period ending April 30, 2019, was the lowest she had received in three years which directly impacted her eligibility for an annual pay increase. ECF No. 23 at 11-12,22. The City argues that the variance between the 2019 evaluation and others was insignificant. ECF No. 24 at 17 "[S]imple minimal numerical variance in an evaluation does not evidence any retaliation against Newcomb." Id. In light of the conflicting claims by the parties, the significance and adverse effects of the lowered evaluation are also in dispute. In light of the above material facts in dispute, a reasonable jury could find that Newcomb [*33]  has established at least one example of adverse employment action in furtherance of her prima facie claim for retaliation.
Newcomb's claim that there is a causal link between the adverse actions and her accommodation requests is similarly disputed. Newcomb asserts that the alleged adverse employment actions are causally related to the protected activity, evidenced in part by the close temporal proximity to her pursuit of the footwear accommodation. ECF No. 22 at 22. However, the City consistently maintains that the record is devoid of evidence of retaliation that bears a causal link to Newcomb's pursuit of an accommodation, and offers alternate justifications for each example.
In reference to the acting sergeant role, Newcomb contends that she was prohibited from serving as an acting sergeant three weeks after her initial accommodation request was denied in November 2018. ECF No. 23 at 23. In contrast, the City asserts that the causal link is more properly drawn to Newcomb's other shortcomings on the job. ECF No. 24 at 14. Captain Hileman explained that the direction to withhold future opportunities to serve as an active sergeant was based upon Newcomb's "mishandling of a traffic ticket, [*34]  her failure to understand the importance of getting on the road on patrol, and the Riverside Regional Fire." Id. The City further emphasizes that Newcomb has not been denied training that is necessary for her employment, she has not received a reduction in rank, nor has she applied for any promotion during the period following her accommodation requests. Id. at 17; attach 1, ¶ 26.
Newcomb also asserts that, from September to November 2018, the alleged pattern of harassment and intimidation interfered with her efforts to reinstate her 2011 accommodation. ECF No. 23 at 23. The City reemphasizes that the alleged conduct, absent a written directive of her prior accommodation, does not arise to the level of harassment and asserts that the causal link is indeterminate because "[t]he Police Chief is not aware of, nor has Officer Newcomb reported to him, any undue scrutiny of her work, nor has she or anyone else made him aware of any harassment she claims to have endured." ECF No. 24 at 24.
Finally, Newcomb asserts that in May 2019, while her second reasonable accommodation request and EEOC charge were pending, the City gave her a lower evaluation for the reporting period that included the culmination [*35]  of Newcomb's protected activity. ECF No. 23 at 23. Newcomb argues that the lower evaluation also reduced her eligibility for an annual pay raise. Id at 11-12. She also claims that Capt. Hileman, who was named as one of her alleged harassers, likely influenced the evaluation. Id. The City does not directly address the causal link between the evaluation and her accommodation request beyond characterizing it as a "positive evaluation" that was not materially different than her prior evaluations. ECF No. 24 at 17, ¶47. It is also worth noting that the City disputes the effects of the evaluation and asserts contrary facts as to Newcomb's eligibility for promotion following the evaluation and discipline for the Riverside incident.8
Despite the City's effort to refute and recharacterize the facts surrounding the alleged adverse employment actions and the causal link to Newcomb's protected activity, there is a notable concern for the temporal proximity between the two. While the relevant authority regarding causation does not prescribe a specific amount of time indicative of a causal connection, it is widely recognized that "close temporal proximity is sufficient to establish a disputed issue [*36]  of fact as to the causation element of the prima facie case." Jacobs, 780 F.3d at 579 (finding that a three-week window between the plaintiff's requested accommodation and the alleged retaliation was sufficient to establish a disputed issue of fact as to causation). See Haulbrook v. Michelin North America, 252 F.3d 696, 706 (finding that "a contested issue of fact arguably exists as to the causal connection between his accommodation request and termination, due solely to the proximity in time of his termination on November 25 and his assertion on November 4 of a right to accommodation under the ADA.") Giving Newcomb the benefit of all reasonable inferences, the undersigned finds that a reasonable jury could in fact assess the timing of Newcomb's protected conduct and the subsequent adverse action and, by a preponderance of the evidence, determine that Newcomb has established a prima facie case for retaliation in violation of the ADA. The burden now shifts to the City to demonstrate a non-discriminatory motive for the alleged retaliation.
2. The City's Proposed Non-Retaliatory Justification
The City maintains that Newcomb failed to establish a prima facie claim for retaliation and does not expressly address the second stage of the McDonnell Douglas burden shifting framework. Nevertheless, [*37]  the City generally asserts that all formal disciplinary action was in response to the Riverside incident, ECF No. 21 at 10, ¶ 32; No. 24 at 19-20, and Chief Drew did not know about Newcomb's ADA and EPA complaints at that time, ECF Not 21 at 10; No. 24 at 11-12, ¶ 33.
On July 19, 2019, Newcomb was working in her capacity as an officer at Riverside Regional Medical Center when an individual in her custody, and unknowingly in possession of a lighter, started a fire that spread across their hospital bed causing damages in excess of $12,000. ECF No. 21 at 9.9 The department conducted an internal affairs investigation that lasted several months, and it ultimately revealed that Newcomb failed to search, or confirm prior search of, the individual upon taking him into custody from another officer. Id. The investigation also revealed that Newcomb authorized the release of one of the detainee's hands to eat but did not restrain them again after they completed their meal, which allowed them to retrieve the aforementioned lighter. Id. During these events, Newcomb was outside of the hospital room where the person was being held. Id. at 10.
Following a December 9, 2019, meeting regarding the Riverside [*38]  incident, Chief Drew imposed ten disciplinary points for Newcomb's failure to maintain proper control over a person in her custody and her failure to accept responsibility for her actions. Id; attach 8 at 3-4. The surrounding investigation and formal discipline were both outlined in Chief Drew's written correspondence with Newcomb dated November 19, 2019 and December 20, 2019. Id. attach 8 at 3-4, 22-25. The Police Chief asserted that the disciplinary measures were lenient for the infraction and maintains that the discipline imposed was not in any way related to her requested footwear accommodation or her compensation claim under the EPA. Id. In fact, Chief Drew claims that at the time that he imposed the disciplinary measures he was unaware that she had made a discrimination filing or claimed any unlawful treatment. Id.
The City's refutation of the adverse employment action element of the prima facie analysis also incorporates additional arguments that may serve as legitimate, non-retaliatory justification for their actions. Pursuant to its burden of production, the City produced evidence of a number of non-retaliatory reasons for its actions, including Captain Hileman's explanation [*39]  that the direction to withhold future opportunities to serve as an active sergeant was based upon Newcomb's "mishandling of a traffic ticket, her failure to understand the importance of getting on the road on patrol, and the Riverside Regional Fire". ECF No. 24 at 14. Similarly, the City also contends that the alleged harassment, if any, and lower performance evaluation were insignificant and in no way retaliatory because Newcomb's chain of command was simply enforcing the amended uniform policy. ECF No. 24 at 2. In light of this evidence, a reasonable jury could find that the City has satisfied this relatively modest burden.
3. The City's Pretextual Justification
Finally, the burden shifts back to Newcomb to prove that the asserted justifications are pretextual. Newcomb begins by addressing the veracity of the City's claim that the disciplinary action was a result of the fire incident at Riverside. Newcomb argues that the chronology of the alleged retaliation reveals that this justification is pretextual, and that Chief Drew had knowledge of her EEOC claim. The City contends that "[Newcomb's] charge is dated only a day before the Chief's [December 20, 2019] letter to her advising her [*40]  of his disciplinary findings [re Riverside incident]". ECF No. 21 at 22. However, Newcomb's EEOC charge was filed on December 19, 2018, seven months before the Riverside incident, which occurred on July 19, 2019. In the Reply Brief, the City concedes that it misread the date on the charge and the letter imposing discipline as occurring in the same year. ECF No. 24 at 12, FN 1. The City argues that the error is immaterial as the fundamental issue is that the underlying complaints for the EEOC charge had been addressed by the time that formal discipline was imposed. Id. Even if the City's assertion regarding the resolution of the EEOC concerns were true, the chronology remains material for purposes of assessing retaliatory intent and pretextual justification. The City consistently upheld the timing of the EEOC charge and discipline as the basis for its assertion that Chief Drew did not possess retaliatory or discriminatory intent because he did not have knowledge of Newcomb's EEOC charge when he imposed the formal discipline. It is now undisputed that the actual chronology did allow for Chief Drew's knowledge of the EEOC charge and thus opens the door for potential retaliatory intent. [*41]  In light of the corrected timeline, a reasonable jury could find that the City's justification was pretextual and unworthy of credence from their chronological misrepresentations alone. See Dennis v. Columbia Colleton Med. Ctr. Inc., 290 F.3d 639, 647 (4th Cir. 2002)("[t]he fact that an employer has offered inconsistent post-hoc explanations for its employment decisions is probative of pretext").
Additionally, according to Captain Hileman, "at the time he made the decision that Officer Newcomb would not be an acting sergeant in [his] precinct," the factors he considered in making his decision were "concerns with regards to understanding the importance of being put out on the road or getting out on the road in the morning, her writing a traffic ticket for "some other traffic infraction" instead of for reckless driving, and the Riverside fire issue. ECF No. 21, attach. 9 at 7-8. However, Plaintiff was barred from acting sergeant assignments by Captain Hileman on December 7, 2018, seven months before the Riverside fire incident. ECF No. 23, attach. 5 at 3. Consequently, material facts are disputed as to whether the City's reasons for denying Plaintiff acting sergeant assignments are pretextual.
Ultimately, the undisputed facts regarding the chronology of events [*42]  reveal that the City's non-retaliatory justification may in fact be pretextual. As such, the Undersigned FINDS that there is a genuine dispute of material fact within Newcomb's ADA retaliation claim and RECOMMENDS that the City's Motion for Summary Judgment be DENIED.
C. EPA Retaliation
Similar to that of the ADA, the EPA bars retaliation against employees who have filed a complaint or other action. 29 U.S.C. § 215(a)(3). An alleged violation of the EPA requires the same retaliation analysis as that of an ADA claim. To that end, where there is no direct or indirect evidence of retaliation, the McDonnell-Douglas burden shifting framework applies. A prima facie case of EPA retaliation requires Newcomb to show, by a preponderance of the evidence, that (1) she engaged in protected activity; (2) her employer acted adversely against her; and (3) the protected activity and the adverse action were causally connected. Kennedy v. Va. Polytechnic Inst. & State Univ., 781 F. Supp. 2d 297, 303 (W.D. Va., Feb. 7, 2011).
At the outset, the City maintains the position that the Equal Pay Act claim was resolved in April 2019. ECF No. 24 at 18. In support of this position, Defendant provided the Retroactive Compensation Agreement, dated April 19, 2019, as proof of Newcomb's receipt of the previously owed acting sergeant's pay. ECF [*43]  No. 24 attach 7. While this confirms that Newcomb is not currently owed compensation for her prior service as acting sergeant from February 26, 2018—April 8, 2018, it does not absolve the City of potential liability for retaliation stemming from Newcomb's pursuit of that compensation. Chronologically, Newcomb's initial request for active sergeant's pay was denied on July 24, 2018; on August 4, 2018, she informed her chain of command that she planned to appeal the denial, alleging that she was denied compensation because of her sex; ultimately, she received the compensation owed on April 19, 2019. ECF No. 23 at 13. Notably, Newcomb's first footwear accommodation request was filed on October 18, 2018, and subsequently addressed,10 on November 19, 2018, both within the time frame of her pending request for active sergeant's pay. ECF No 21 at 4, 6. Her denial of acting sergeant assignments was also within this time frame. To the extent that Newcomb can establish the requisite causal link, adverse actions that occurred during the pendency of her EPA claim and shortly after its resolution may provide a basis for her EPA retaliation claim. As such, there appear to be sufficient facts and evidence [*44]  in the record to proceed with an analysis of Newcomb's EPA retaliation claim, despite her eventual payment of the compensation owed.
1. Prima Facie EPA Retaliation Claim
The City states generally that Newcomb's retaliation claim under the EPA fails for the same reasons that her claim under the ADA fails. ECF No. 21 at 24. This impliedly suggests that the City again does not contest that Newcomb was engaged in a protected activity, but the City does argue that Newcomb failed to establish an adverse employment action and causal link to the protected activity, her EPA claim.
As for the alleged adverse employment action, the record and briefing suggest that the adverse conduct most relevant to Newcomb's EPA retaliation claim includes: the alleged denial of a temporary promotion and limitation of her ability to serve as an acting sergeant; the September 2019 restrictions from using the equipment room; the revocation of her prior accommodation; and her lower performance evaluation for the period ending April 30, 2019. ECF No. 21 at 24; No. 23 at 21-22. The City also clarifies that while the Riverside incident was the justification for Newcomb's formal discipline, for purposes of assessing potential [*45]  adverse employment actions, it is "unrelated to any events having to do with Newcomb's request for equal pay". ECF No. 21 at 24. Once again, on their face all of these examples were adverse employment actions as they could be expected to affect Newcomb's employment status in some regard. Notably, Newcomb points out that conduct like the limitation of her ability to serve as an acting sergeant and the lower evaluation were directly linked to her payment and posed a significant detriment that could reasonably dissuade an individual from pursuing an EPA claim. ECF No. 23 at 22.
As for the causal link, Newcomb again asserts that the close temporal proximity between the denial of her reasonable accommodation requests on November 19, 2018 and June 13, 2019, and her pending EPA claim, initiated December 19, 2018, and resolved in her favor on April 19, 2019, was evidence of the causal link between the two activities. ECF No. 23 at 23. Similarly, Newcomb claims that there was a causal link between her lower performance evaluation in May 2019, and the pursuit of EPA rights, as the evaluation took place mere weeks after the EPA claim was resolved in her favor and while her second accommodation [*46]  request and EEOC charge were pending. Id.
In response, the City attempts to downplay the timing of this conduct by highlighting Chief Drew's declaration. Chief Drew states that despite the concerning timing of the prior admonishment, formal discipline, and performance evaluation, they were all unrelated to her pursuit of her rights under the EPA. ECF No. 24 at 11. Notably "[Chief Drew was] not aware of, nor has Officer Newcomb reported to me, any undue scrutiny of her work, nor has she or anyone's made me aware of any harassment she claims to have endured." Id.; ECF No. 21 attach 8 at 4, ¶ 16. Moreover, Chief Drew also contends that Newcomb has not been denied training for her current position as a Master Police Officer, she has not received a reduction in her rank, nor has she applied for any promotion during the relevant period. ECF No. 28 attach 8 at 6. As previously established, the City has now acknowledged that the timing of the underlying events contradicts Chief Drew's alleged lack of knowledge in certain key respects.
The City's claims regarding her employment status also do not eliminate any material factual dispute. Rather than address the alleged adverse employment action [*47]  or link to her protected activity, the City merely acknowledged other aspects of her employment that remained unscathed. However, this overlooks the adverse actions that occurred, like the denial of opportunity to serve as acting sergeant or reduced performance evaluation. Put simply, the concern for the timing that would otherwise suggest a causal link is no less significant simply because the City's adverse conduct could have been worse. Thus, based on the evidence in the record, there appears to be a genuine dispute of material fact as to whether the City's conduct constitutes an adverse employment action and the causal link between that conduct and Newcomb's pursuit of her rights under the EPA. Such a determination is more properly suited for the fact finder at trial. Accordingly, it is apparent that a reasonable jury could in fact find by a preponderance of the evidence that Newcomb has established a prima facie case for retaliation in violation of the EPA. The burden of production now shifts to the City to demonstrate a non-discriminatory motive for the alleged retaliation.
2. The City's Proposed Non-retaliatory Justification
The City contends that the alleged adverse employment [*48]  actions were not retaliatory in nature, instead the City argues that they were the product of Newcomb's shortcomings elsewhere in her job. ECF No. 21 at 24. Namely, the City highlights "the issues raised by officer Newcomb's failure to engage in patrol that required roughly 20 admonitions by her supervisors, her mishandling of a specific traffic event, and her failure to maintain control over a person in her custody that was able to start a fire at Riverside Regional Medical Center were the reasons she was prevented from serving as an acting sergeant." Id. In light of these alternate and intervening explanations, the City has produced a legitimate non-retaliatory justification for the alleged violations related to Newcomb's EPA claim.
3. The City's Pretextual Justification
Newcomb again relies on the timing of the City's conduct to disprove their proposed non-retaliatory justifications. Newcomb restates her argument that the City's mistaken understanding of the factual chronology is evidence that Chief Drew's lack of knowledge is pretext. She also emphasizes, based on the timing, that "no one had a problem with [her] Brooks running shoes until she made an EPA complaint." ECF No. 23 at [*49]  25. Similarly, Newcomb minimizes the asserted performance issues and claims about her patrol duties. Id. She indicates that there is contradictory testimony from Captain Hileman and Sergeant Nowak regarding her willingness to engage in patrol duties and reemphasizes that she was prohibited from serving as an acting sergeant long before the Riverside fire incident and traffic event. Id. Newcomb also notes that her chain of command "did not[sic] display any animus towards her until after the EPA complaint and reasonable accommodation request." Id.
Ultimately, given the now accepted chronology of events, the City's non-retaliatory justification may in fact be pretextual. As such, there appears to be a genuine dispute of material fact within Newcomb's EPA retaliation claim. Therefore, the Undersigned  that the City's Motion for Summary Judgment on this claim be DENIED.

V. RECOMMENDATIONS
For the reasons stated herein, the Undersigned RECOMMENDS the City's Motion for Summary Judgment, ECF No. 20, be GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART.
1. With respect to Plaintiffs Failure to Accommodate Claim, the City's Motion for Summary Judgment should be GRANTED.
2. With respect to Plaintiffs ADA and EPA [*50]  Retaliation claims, the City's Motion for Summary Judgment should be .

VI. REVIEW PROCEDURE
By receiving a copy of this Report and Recommendation, the parties are notified that:
1. Any party may serve on the other party and file with the Clerk of this Court specific written objections to the above findings and recommendations within fourteen (14) days from the date this Report and Recommendation is forwarded to the objecting party, see 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(C) and Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 72(b), computed pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure Rule 6(a). A party may respond to another party's specific written objections within fourteen days after being served with a copy thereof. See 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1); Fed. R. Civ. P. 72(b).
2. A United States District Judge shall make a de novo determination of those portions of this Report and Recommendation or specified findings or recommendations to which objection is made. The parties are further notified that failure to file timely specific written objections to the above findings and recommendations will result in a waiver of the right to appeal from a judgment of this Court based on such findings and recommendations. Thomas v. Arn, 474 U.S. 140 (1985); Carr v. Hutto, 737 F.2d 433 (4th Cir. 1984), cert. denied, 474 U.S. 1019 (1985); United States v. Schronce, 727 F.2d 91 (4th Cir. 1984), cert. denied, 467 U.S. 1208 (1984).
The Clerk is DIRECTED to forward a copy of this Order to all counsel of record.
It is so ORDERED.
/s/ Lawrence R. Leonard [*51] 
Lawrence R. Leonard
United States Magistrate Judge
Newport News, Virginia
May 24, 2021


End of Document

