Ojeda v. Neopost USA, Inc.
United States District Court for the District of Connecticut
August 26, 2015, Decided; August 26, 2015, Filed
3:13-cv-00877-WWE

Reporter
2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 196029 *
ENRIQUE OJEDA, Plaintiff, v. NEOPOST USA, INC., Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Enrique Ojeda, Plaintiff: Robert Burdette Mitchell, LEAD ATTORNEY, Jessica Slippen, Mitchell & Sheahan, P.C., Stratford, CT.
For Neopost USA, Inc, Defendant: Clair E. Wischusen, Michael L. Eidel, LEAD ATTORNEYS, PRO HAC VICES, Fox Rothschild LLP - PENN, Warrington, PA; Matthew J Schenker, LEAD ATTORNEY, Fox Rothchild, LLP, New York, NY.
Judges: WARREN W. EGINTON, SENIOR UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: WARREN W. EGINTON
Opinion



MEMORANDUM OF DECISION ON CROSS MOTIONS FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
Defendant Neopost USA, Inc., terminated plaintiff Enrique Ojeda's employment after plaintiff's three-week absence from work in early 2013. Plaintiff alleges the following claims against defendant: (1) Count I — failure to pay wages under the Fair Labor Standards Act, 29 U.S.C. § 201, et seq. ("FLSA"); (2) Count II — failure to pay wages under the Connecticut Minimum Wage Act, Conn. Gen. Stat. § 31-68(a), et seq. ("CMWA"); (3) Count III — retaliation under the FLSA; (4) Count IV — interference through retaliation under the Family and Medical Leave Act, 29 U.S.C. § 2601, et seq. ("FMLA"); (5) Count V — interference through failure to reinstate under the FMLA; (6) Count VI — breach of contract; (7) Count VII — violation of the covenant of good faith and fair dealing; (8) Count VIII — discriminatory termination [*2]  based on disability in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. § 12101, et seq. ("ADA"); (9) Count IX — discriminatory termination based on perceived disability in violation of the ADA; and (10) Count X — discriminatory termination based on disability in violation of the Connecticut Fair Employment Practices Act ("CFEPA"), Conn. Gen. Stat. §§46a-60(a)(1) and 46a-100.
Plaintiff has moved for summary judgment as to liability on counts I, II, IV, and V; defendant has moved for summary judgment on counts IV through X.

BACKGROUND
Defendant markets and sells shipping solutions products. Plaintiff began working for defendant on April 1, 2009, as a Leasing Administrator. On August 15, 2011, plaintiff was promoted to Sr. Lease Administrator ("Team Lead"). As a Team Lead, plaintiff was reclassified from a "non-exempt" to an "exempt" employee for purposes of overtime pay. Accordingly, plaintiff's time sheets were pre-filled at 8 hours per day, regardless of actual hours worked. Team Leads' telephone usage is tracked by a telephone system, which shows when the employee logs in and out of the system. Telephone login/logout records do not necessarily correspond with actual hours worked. Plaintiff submits that he actually worked 45-50 hours per [*3]  week, but he did not record hours worked, as he was not paid for his overtime.
In January 2012, plaintiff was diagnosed with hypertension and requested FMLA leave. Defendant granted the request, and plaintiff took leave from January 18, 2012, through February 28, 2012. During that time, plaintiff's supervisor picked up the majority of plaintiff's workload. Plaintiff's 2012 FMLA leave created difficulty and was a burden for his coworkers and supervisor.
On February 28, 2012, plaintiff received his job performance review. Whereas plaintiff had scored 4.5 out of a possible 5 points on his 2011 review, after taking his FMLA leave, he dropped to 2.5 out of 5. Defendant submits that plaintiff's lower scores reflected his inability to handle his new role of Team Lead. Plaintiff admitted to difficulty with his workload.
On January 17, 2013, plaintiff fell down the stairs at his home and injured his back. Plaintiff went to work that day; however, due to the pain he was experiencing, he notified defendant, via email, that he had to leave early. January 17, 2013, was plaintiff's last day working for defendant.
On Friday, January 18, 2013, plaintiff text-messaged his supervisor to let her know that [*4]  he would be out sick for the day. The following Tuesday, after a 3-day holiday weekend, plaintiff again informed defendant by text message that he would be out sick. His supervisor responded affirmatively and requested a doctor's note if plaintiff was going to be out the next day as well.
On January 23, 2013, after notifying defendant that he would be out again, plaintiff saw a heart specialist who directed plaintiff to the emergency room due to malignant hypertension. Plaintiff was admitted to Griffin Hospital in Derby, Connecticut. Plaintiff's wife called defendant and faxed a note from plaintiff's doctor, instructing that plaintiff "is not cleared to return to work until further notice."
Plaintiff remained in the hospital for three days. Plaintiff was discharged on January 25, 2013, after plaintiff's doctor determined that plaintiff was no longer at risk of intracranial hemorrhage.
Plaintiff received FMLA paperwork on January 25, 2013. The cover letter to the FMLA paperwork notes that certain forms are enclosed in the FMLA packet and sets February 8, 2013, as the date when the health care provider form was to be returned, and stated that if the form was not sent in by February 8, plaintiff [*5]  was to "provide [defendant] a reasonable explanation for the delay." Further, the cover letter states that, "[f]ailure to provide [the health care provider] certification may result in a denial of continuation of leave."
The "Notice to Employee of Family /Medical Leave obligations (Connecticut and Federal)" form enclosed with Plaintiff's FMLA packet stated that plaintiff's leave of absence was "provisionally designated as FMLA leave pending receipt of appropriate documentation by the Company", and that if the medical provider certification had not been sent in by February 8, 2013, the Company may "delay the commencement of your leave until further certification is submitted."
On February 1, 2013, plaintiff attended a follow-up appointment with his cardiologist. Plaintiff's blood pressure was elevated. Nevertheless, plaintiff alleges that his doctor told him that only plaintiff's primary physician could fill out the FMLA required medical certification form. Plaintiff scheduled an appointment with his primary physician for February 8, 2013.
Plaintiff continued to feel incapable of working due to headaches, but he did not contact his employer. On February 8, 2013, a large blizzard hit the [*6]  State of Connecticut. Governor Malloy activated the State Emergency Operations Center at 9:00 a.m. and declared a state of emergency at 12:00 noon. Plaintiff missed the appointment with his primary physician.
Plaintiff alleges that he called a fellow employee with defendant, Ms. Greer, to inform her that he needed an extension of time to return his medical paperwork. Plaintiff alleges that he could not reach Ms. Greer and declined to leave a message.
Defendant sent plaintiff a letter of termination dated February 11, 2013. The termination letter cited plaintiff's failure to call in or show up for work for three or more days as job abandonment under defendant's attendance policies. The termination letter was sent via Federal Express on February 12, 2013. Plaintiff received the letter on February 14, 2013. At that time, plaintiff had yet to contact defendant about an extension of time or reschedule his February 8, 2013 appointment with his primary physician.
Plaintiff contacted defendant on February 17, 2013, and left a voicemail. On February 20, 2013, plaintiff emailed Ms. Greer, stating that his termination was a "terrible surprise," and that he thought his doctor's note of January 25, [*7]  2013, had been sufficient to explain his absence. Plaintiff asked defendant to reconsider. Ms. Greer informed plaintiff that defendant's general counsel had reconsidered but upheld the termination.

DISCUSSION
A motion for summary judgment will be granted where there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and it is clear that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). "Only when reasonable minds could not differ as to the import of the evidence is summary judgment proper." Bryant v. Maffucci, 923 F.2d 979, 982 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 502 U.S. 849, 112 S. Ct. 152, 116 L. Ed. 2d 117 (1991).
The burden is on the moving party to demonstrate the absence of any material factual issue genuinely in dispute. American International Group, Inc. v. London American International Corp., 664 F.2d 348, 351 (2d Cir. 1981). In determining whether a genuine factual issue exists, the court must resolve all ambiguities and draw all reasonable inferences against the moving party. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986).
If a nonmoving party has failed to make a sufficient showing on an essential element of his case with respect to which he has the burden of proof, then summary judgment is appropriate. Celotex Corp., 477 U.S. at 323. If the nonmoving party submits evidence which is "merely colorable," legally sufficient opposition to the motion for summary judgment is not met. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249.

Plaintiff's Motion: Counts I and II (Failure to Pay Overtime)
Plaintiff argues [*8]  that summary judgment should be granted in his favor on counts I and II, as defendant failed to pay him overtime pursuant to the FLSA and the CMWA. The parties genuinely dispute the material fact of whether plaintiff ever worked any overtime. Accordingly, summary judgment will not enter for plaintiff on these counts.

Plaintiff's Motion: Counts IV and V (FMLA Interference and Retaliation)
Plaintiff next argues that summary judgment should be granted in his favor on counts IV and V, alleging interference with his rights under the FMLA. Defendant responds that plaintiff failed to submit the required medical certification within 15 calendar days of defendant's request, as required by 29 C.F.R. § 825.305(b). Indeed, plaintiff never submitted certification issued by his health care provider, and "[a] certification that is not returned to the employer is not considered incomplete or insufficient, but constitutes a failure to provide certification." 29 C.F.R. 825.305(c). Moreover:
If the employee fails to provide the employer with a complete and sufficient certification, despite the opportunity to cure the certification as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, or fails to provide any certification, the employer may deny the taking [*9]  of FMLA leave, in accordance with § 825.313.
29 C.F.R. 825.305(d)
Finally:
In the case of unforeseeable leave, an employer may deny FMLA coverage for the requested leave if the employee fails to provide a certification within 15 calendar days from receipt of the request for certification unless not practicable due to extenuating circumstances. For example, in the case of a medical emergency, it may not be practicable for an employee to provide the required certification within 15 calendar days. Absent such extenuating circumstances, if the employee fails to timely return the certification, the employer can deny FMLA protections for the leave following the expiration of the 15-day time period until a sufficient certification is provided. If the employee never produces the certification, the leave is not FMLA leave.
29 C.F.R. § 825.313(b)
Here, plaintiff asserts that he faced extenuating circumstances in the form of a blizzard, Winter Storm Nemo, which caused him to miss his physician's appointment on February 8, 2013, the date his certification was due. Nevertheless, plaintiff first became aware of his termination by letter received on February 14, 2013, and by that time had still failed to notify defendant that he needed more time to obtain [*10]  certification. After plaintiff learned of his termination, he declined to reschedule his February 8, 2013 medical appointment, believing it to be futile.
Winter Storm Nemo may constitute an extenuating circumstance excusing plaintiff's failure to timely return his certification. Plaintiff's home is only ten miles, as the crow flies, from Hamden, Connecticut, where the highest recorded snowfall of the storm measured 40 inches. Moreover, regardless of whether the validity of plaintiff's blizzard excuse expired in the days following the storm, or whether plaintiff's failure was never excused, his protections under the FMLA would only have been lost until a sufficient certification was provided. See 29 C.F.R. § 825.313(b). However, plaintiff never produced the certification and never contacted defendant to request an extension of time. Indeed, plaintiff failed to contact defendant at all until days after receiving his termination letter on February 14, 2013; in the days following his hospitalization, plaintiff continued to be absent from work without further explanation.
The Court finds that summary judgment cannot enter in plaintiff's favor on his FMLA claims where plaintiff failed to timely submit certification, [*11]  failed to request an extension of time, remained absent from work without explanation, and remained silent, despite proper notice of the certification deadline, until February 17, 2013, three days after receiving notice of his termination. Had plaintiff obtained certification somewhere down the road, the Court may have been pressed to analyze in greater depth the timeline implicating the competing interests of an employer's right to terminate an AWOL employee and an employee's right to belatedly procure FMLA rights. Here, plaintiff's failure to obtain and produce a certification, at any time, renders the procedural deficiencies in his attempts to obtain FMLA coverage incurable. "If the employee never produces the certification, the leave is not FMLA leave." 29 C.F.R. § 825.313(b). Accordingly, plaintiff's motion for summary judgment on his FMLA claims will be denied.

Defendant's Motion: Counts IV and V (FMLA Interference and Retaliation)
"To establish a prima facie case for interference under the FMLA, a plaintiff must establish: (1) that []he is an 'eligible employee' under the FMLA; (2) that defendant constitutes an employer under the FMLA; (3) that []he was entitled to leave under the FMLA; (4) that []he [*12]  gave notice to defendant of [his] intention to take leave; and (5) that defendant denied [him] benefits to which []he was entitled by the FMLA." Weichman v. Chubb & Son, 552 F. Supp. 2d 271, 288-89 (D. Conn. 2008). As discussed above, "[i]f the employee never produces the certification, the leave is not FMLA leave." 29 C.F.R. § 825.313(b). Accordingly, defendant did not deny plaintiff benefits to which he was entitled. Summary judgment will be granted in defendant's favor on plaintiff's FMLA interference claim.
Plaintiff's FMLA retaliation claim also fails. "In order to make out a prima facie case [of FMLA retaliation], he must establish that: 1) he exercised rights protected under the FMLA; 2) he was qualified for his position; 3) he suffered an adverse employment action; and 4) the adverse employment action occurred under circumstances giving rise to an inference of retaliatory intent." Potenza v. City of New York, 365 F.3d 165, 168 (2d Cir. 2004).
FMLA retaliation claims are analyzed under the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework. Serby v. New York City Dept. of Educ., 526 Fed. Appx. 132, 134 (2d Cir. 2013). Presuming that plaintiff has met his prima facie burden based on his exercise of FMLA rights in 2012, defendant submits that it legitimately terminated plaintiff pursuant to its attendance policy. Thus, plaintiff bears the burden of demonstrating that defendant's non-discriminatory reason was [*13]  pretextual. See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. 792, 804-05, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973).
Plaintiff has failed to present evidence upon which a reasonable jury could find that defendant's articulated reason for terminating plaintiff's employment — his violation of defendant's attendance policy — was pretextual. Despite receiving the Employee Request for FMLA Leave and Certification of Health Care Provider forms on January 24, 2013, plaintiff never completed and returned either form and, without explanation, failed to contact his supervisor again until February 17, 2013.
Plaintiff argues that defendant should not be permitted to deem plaintiff to have abandoned his job under its three day no-call/no show absence policy where three work days had not passed from February 8, 2013, the date that plaintiff was due to return the medical certification. Nevertheless, plaintiff did not learn of his termination until February 14, 2013, yet by that time, three work days had passed, and he had still failed to contact his employer. Accordingly, even when excluding the period from January 23 through February 8, 2013, there is no dispute that plaintiff failed to show up for work or to call for three work days before learning of his termination.
Plaintiff further contends [*14]  that the no-call/no-show policy did not apply if there was medical cause for the absence, arguing that his doctor's note of January 23, 2013, essentially nullifies a request for FMLA certification. An employers' general policy that employees will not be subjected to normal no-call/no-show protocol due to medically related absences does not supercede and vitiate FMLA regulations requiring medical certification where the employer properly requests such certification.
Finally, plaintiff argues that defendant declined to give him an opportunity to provide a "reasonable explanation" as to why his certification was late, but defendant notified plaintiff in writing: "Please be sure that this completed form is returned to me by February 8, 2013 or provide us a reasonable explanation for the delay." Plaintiff's attempt to impose an affirmative duty on his employer to inquire as to whether he had a reasonable explanation is unavailing. Plaintiff simply failed to return the completed form or to contact defendant to provide a reasonable explanation for his delay.
Moreover, plaintiff cannot demonstrate, in the alternative, that his negative performance reviews constituted retaliatory adverse employment [*15]  action where plaintiff admits that he was not able to handle the workload. Ojeda Dep. at 146:19-23. Plaintiff's supervisors repeatedly met with plaintiff to identify performance issues for almost a year following his return from FMLA leave in 2012. ["N]othing about the timing and number of evaluations suggests a retaliatory intent as opposed to normal oversight of a less than satisfactory [employee]." See Davies v. New York City Dept. of Educ., 563 Fed. Appx. 818, 821 (2d Cir. 2014). Accordingly, summary judgment will be granted in defendant's favor on plaintiff's FMLA retaliation claim.

Defendant's Motion: Counts VI and VII (Breach of Contract and Covenant of Good Faith and Fair Dealing)
Count VI alleges that defendant's January 24, 2013 letter to plaintiff modified the conditions of plaintiff's employment by creating a written contractual agreement between the parties, whereby plaintiff would be excused from the February 8, 2013 due date for returning the medical certification so long as plaintiff provided a "reasonable explanation for the delay." Count VII alleges violation of the covenant of good faith and fair dealing attached to the alleged written contractual agreement.
The relevant portion of defendant's January 24, 2013 letter provides:
Certification of [*16]  Health Care Provider: You will need to give this form to your health care provider for completion. Your health care provider may return the completed form directly to me or to you for submission. Please be sure that this completed form is returned to me by February 8, 2013 or provide us a reasonable explanation for the delay. Failure to provide certification may result in a denial of continuation of leave. As stated in our FMLA policy, medical information received for FMLA leave is considered confidential and shall be disclosed only to those involved in the FMLA leave determination.
Defendant disputes the existence of any contract. "To be enforceable, an agreement must be definite and certain as to its terms and requirements." Presidential Capital Corp. v. Reale, 231 Conn. 500, 506, 652 A.2d 489 (1994). "In order to form a binding and enforceable contract, there must exist an offer and an acceptance based on a mutual understanding by the parties." Steinberg v. Reding, 24 Conn. App. 212, 214, 587 A.2d 170 (1991). In the absence of consideration — a benefit to the party promising, or a loss to the party to whom the promise is made — a promise is unenforceable. State Nat. Bank of Connecticut v. Dick, 164 Conn. 523, 529, 325 A.2d 235 (1973). The "burden rest[s] on the plaintiff to prove a meeting of the minds to establish its version of the claimed contract." Bridgeport Pipe Engineering Co. v. DeMatteo Constr. Co., 159 Conn. 242, 246, 268 A.2d 391 (1970).
Here, plaintiff argues that he should have [*17]  been granted an undisclosed amount of time after the February 8, 2013 certification deadline within which to provide defendant a reasonable explanation for his delay in meeting the deadline. Plaintiff has failed to demonstrate an agreement with definite, certain terms and requirements; a meeting of the minds; or consideration for defendant's promise.
The Court finds that the phrase: "Please be sure that this completed form is returned to me by February 8, 2013 or provide us a reasonable explanation for the delay," did not form a binding and enforceable contract. If a contract was created, reasonable interpretation of that contract would require plaintiff to provide a reasonable explanation for the delay before or contemporaneous with the February 8, 2015 deadline. Plaintiff did not communicate with defendant until 9 days after the deadline had passed, after learning that his job was terminated.
The existence of a contract is antecedent to any claim for breach of the covenant of good faith and fair dealing. See Magnan v. Anaconda Industries, Inc., 193 Conn. 558, 566, 479 A.2d 781 (1984). Moreover, "a breach of such an implied covenant cannot be predicated simply upon the absence of good cause for a discharge." Id. Accordingly, summary judgment will be granted [*18]  in defendant's favor on plaintiff's breach of contract and covenant of good faith and fair dealing claims.

Defendant's Motion: Counts VIII, IX, and X (Discriminatory Termination in Violation of the ADA and the CFEPA)
"In interpreting CFEPA, Connecticut courts look to the interpretation of federal discrimination laws for guidance and have applied the same burden-shifting analysis that the federal courts use in analyzing claims of intentional discrimination brought under federal law." Rogers v. First Union Nat. Bank, 259 F. Supp. 2d 200, 204 (D. Conn. 2003).
"To establish a prima facie case of discrimination under the ADA, plaintiff must show by a preponderance of the evidence that (1) his employer is subject to the ADA; (2) he was disabled within the meaning of the ADA; (3) he was otherwise qualified to perform the essential functions of his job, with or without reasonable accommodation; and (4) he suffered adverse employment action because of his disability." Heyman v. Queens Village Committee for Mental Health for Jamaica Community Adolescent Program, Inc., 198 F.3d 68, 72 (2d Cir. 1999).
The Court's disability discrimination analysis parallels its analysis of plaintiff's FMLA claims. Presuming that plaintiff has met his prima facie burden as to disability discrimination, defendant submits that it legitimately terminated plaintiff pursuant to its attendance policy. Thus, plaintiff bears [*19]  the burden of demonstrating that defendant's non-discriminatory reason was pretextual. See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. 792, 804-05, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973).
Plaintiff's opposition to defendant's motion argues, for the first time, that even if defendant's submission that it terminated him pursuant to its attendance policy is accepted, defendant was obligated to treat plaintiff's request for reconsideration of his termination as a request for reasonable accommodation of his disability. "Once a disabled individual has suggested to his employer a reasonable accommodation, federal law requires, and we agree, that the employer and the employee engage in an informal, interactive process with the qualified individual with a disability in need of the accommodation . . . [to] identify the precise limitations resulting from the disability and potential reasonable accommodations that could overcome those limitations." Curry v. Allan S. Goodman, Inc., 286 Conn. 390, 416, 944 A.2d 925 (2008). Here, not only is there no evidence that plaintiff suggested to defendant a reasonable accommodation, but also, plaintiff never alleged a reasonable accommodation claim in his complaint.
Plaintiff otherwise relies upon the same pretext arguments used with his FMLA claims, namely that the three day no-call/no-show policy was not actually violated [*20]  and that defendant unreasonably discredited plaintiff's February 8, 2013 blizzard excuse. Those arguments fail here for the same reasons articulated there. Accordingly, summary judgment will be granted in defendant's favor on plaintiff's disability-based discriminatory termination claims.

CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, plaintiff's motion for summary judgment as to liability on counts I, II, IV, and V is DENIED, and Defendant's motion for summary judgment on counts IV through X is GRANTED.
Within 21 days of this ruling's filing date, plaintiff is instructed to file an amended complaint in accordance with this ruling.
Dated this 26th Day of August, 2015, at Bridgeport, Connecticut.
/s/ WARREN W. EGINTON
SENIOR UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

