Ortiz v. Delta Dental of Pa.
United States District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania
March 6, 2020, Decided; March 6, 2020, Filed
Civil No. 1:18-CV-456

Reporter
2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 40242 *
ATHENA ORTIZ, Plaintiff v. DELTA DENTAL OF PENNSYLVANIA, et al., Defendants
Subsequent History: Adopted by, Summary judgment granted by, Dismissed by, Motion denied by, As moot Ortiz v. Delta Dental, 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 84899 (M.D. Pa., May 13, 2020)
Counsel:  [*1] For Athena Ortiz, Plaintiff: Stephen G. Console, LEAD ATTORNEY, Console Mattiacci Law, LLC, Philadelphia, PA; Kevin C Console, Laura C. Mattiacci, Anna D Norman, Console Mattiacci Law, LLC, Philadelphia, PA.
For Delta Dental of Pennsylvania, doing business as Delta Dental, Delta Dental, Defendants: Brandon R. Sher, Ogletree, Deakins, Nash, Smoak & Stewart, P.C., Philadelphia, PA; Paul Lancaster Adams, Jr., Ogletree Deakins, Philadelphia, PA.
Judges: Martin C. Carlson, United States Magistrate Judge.
Opinion by: Martin C. Carlson
Opinion



REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION

I. Introduction
Pending before the court is the defendants' motion for summary judgment in an employment dispute case between the former employee and current plaintiff, Athena Ortiz, and her former employer and supervisors. (Doc. 36). Ortiz brought the instant suit against her former employer, Delta Dental, alleging violations of her rights under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000e, et. seq. ("Title VII"), the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12111, et seq., the Family Medical Leave Act ("FMLA"), 29 U.S.C. § 2611, et seq., and the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act, 43 P.S. §§ 951-963 ("PHRA"). Ortiz contends that she was entitled to FMLA leave, and that after taking such leave consistent with her rights, she [*2]  was terminated in retaliation for her exercise of these rights. Ortiz further argues that the defendant discriminated against her because of her alleged disabilities, failed to reasonably accommodate her disabilities, and retaliated against her in violation of Title VII, the ADA, the FMLA, and the PHRA.
The defendant disputes these claims, arguing initially that Ortiz had misused her FMLA leave and was therefore terminated for this misuse and her dishonesty surrounding the FMLA leave, rather than for discriminatory or retaliatory reasons. Further, the defendants claim that they had granted Ortiz's requests for accommodations, indeed providing her with choices for accommodations, thus subjecting this claim to dismissal. The defendants also claim that there is no evidence that they had treated the plaintiff differently than any other employee, despite her pregnancy or her personal beliefs to the contrary.
After review of the record, we find that there are no genuine issues of material fact which would preclude the entry of summary judgment with respect to any of the plaintiff's claims. Accordingly, for the reasons stated below, we recommend that summary judgment be granted as to all of [*3]  the plaintiff's claims in this case.

II. Statement of Facts and of the Case
The plaintiff, Athena Ortiz, began working for Delta Dental in March of 2015 as a customer service representative responsible for answering phone calls from providers, enrollees, and brokers regarding eligibility, claims, and benefits. (Doc. 38-1, Ex. F). As a customer service representative, the plaintiff was evaluated based on her overall efficiency—i.e., the amount of time she was available to answer phone calls versus the amount of time spent away from her desk. (Ortiz Dep. at 156-57). Thus, the plaintiff was expected to be available to answer phone calls during the majority of her work day and to minimize the number of breaks needed. While employed with Delta Dental, the plaintiff was a member of the Local 170 and was subject to the collective bargaining agreement ("CBA") between the union and Delta Dental. (Ortiz Dep. at 189). This agreement provided that "no such prior warning, notice, or probation shall be necessary if the cause for discharge is dishonesty." (Doc. 38-1, Ex. C; see also Raup Dep. at 259). The plaintiff was provided with this agreement when she joined the union.
From the time Ortiz was hired [*4]  in March of 2015 until January or February of 2016, the plaintiff worked under Kurt Moffit on an evening shift. (Ortiz Dep., at 150-51). On November 5, 2015, while still on Moffit's team, the plaintiff discovered that she was pregnant with her fourth child with an approximate due date of July 7, 2016. (Id., at 26, 247). Excited by this news, the plaintiff informed Moffit, a friend and co-worker, Amanda Miltenberger, and the human resources department ("HR department") of her pregnancy and need for eventual maternity leave. (Id., at 32-33). Approximately two months later, in January or February of 2016, the plaintiff requested a transfer to a morning shift to allow her to spend more with her children. (Id., at 150). This transfer request was promptly granted, and the plaintiff began working under a new supervisor, Shauna Michaels. (Id., at 159). The plaintiff told Michaels about her pregnancy around this same time and later found out that Michaels was planning a baby shower for her. (Id., at 172, 186).
Shortly after beginning her new position with Michaels' team, the plaintiff began to experience pain due to symphysis pubis dysfunction ("SPD") as a result of her pregnancy, causing stiffness, soreness, and general discomfort in her pelvic region, making [*5]  it painful to sit for extended periods of time. (Id., at 25). The plaintiff had experienced SPD pain with each of her prior pregnancies and was aware of its tendency to worsen with subsequent pregnancies. (Id., at 26). Indeed, according to the plaintiff, this worsening of symptoms happened with her fourth pregnancy, and she found that getting up to walk around helped alleviate this pain. (Id., at 259, 337). In addition, the plaintiff began needing more frequent restroom breaks due to her pregnancy progressing. (Id., at 25, 173).
In March or April of 2016, the plaintiff had a discussion with Michaels about her need for more frequent restroom breaks due to her pregnancy after Michaels had approached the plaintiff about spending too much time away from her desk. (Id., at 173). Michaels informed the plaintiff that in order to take additional breaks, the plaintiff would need to either use the restroom during one of her scheduled 15-minute breaks during the day or clock out and use unpaid FMLA leave. (Id., at 173, 175) Thereafter, the plaintiff spoke with a business partner in the HR department, Amy Anderson, who informed her about the different forms of FMLA, what it could be used for, and how it works. (Id., at 176). By this point, the plaintiff had become eligible for FMLA leave, [*6]  and after seeking a certification from one of her health care providers, she was approved for intermittent FMLA leave from April 1, 2016 until July 6, 2016, which she could use to take additional breaks throughout the day. (Doc. 39-6, Ex. D).
On May 20, 2016, the plaintiff allegedly woke up in pregnancy-related SPD pain and decided to use her intermittent FMLA leave to stay home from work. (Ortiz Dep., at 259). This date also happened to coincide with the day of her children's field day event at school. (Id., at 262-64) Having always wanted to attend this event, the plaintiff decided to appear as a spectator where she could watch her children enjoy the day and walk around as needed to help alleviate her pain. (Id.) Later that evening, the plaintiff chose to send some pictures of the event to her co-worker and friend, Amanda Miltenberger. (Id., at 283; Raup Dep. at 133). These pictures were sent as a collage, captioned with "this is what I did on my day off, shhhhh, lol." (Ortiz Dep. at 281, 303). During the course of this text conversation, the plaintiff told Miltenberger that she was happy to have gotten some sun and a little tan, and Miltenberger relayed that since it had been such a gorgeous day, "a lot [*7]  of people played hookie [at work]." (Id., at 283, 303). The plaintiff responded "lol, I bet. It was a great day. I knew I was going to take off for a while now cause I knew it was their field day and I didn't want to miss it." (Id.)
Unfortunately for the plaintiff, Miltenberger decided to report these text messages to the HR department. On May 23, 2016, the Monday after the plaintiff had sent the texts, Miltenberger met with HR business partner, Jennifer Raup, and showed Raup the texts that she had received from the plaintiff. (Raup Dep., at 113-15; Miltenberger Dep., at 53-54). A few days later on the morning of May 25, 2016, the plaintiff was asked to meet with Raup to discuss her absence from work on Friday, May 20. (Ortiz Dep. at 258). This meeting was also attended by a Local 170 representative, Kevin Curtis, and a second HR business partner, Amy Anderson. (Ortiz Dep. at 258). During this meeting, Raup questioned the plaintiff about her day off on May 20. The plaintiff admitted attending her children's field day, but insisted that she had only done so after waking up in pregnancy-related pain that morning and deciding to take a day off using her FMLA leave. (Ortiz Dep. at 262-64). In addition, [*8]  the plaintiff stated that she had gone to a pregnancy center later that afternoon, but could not remember why she decided to go there.1 (Id., at 265).
After this meeting, the plaintiff spoke to Curtis separately and had "some choice words for her friend," wondering "why would she do this to me." (Curtis Dep. at 66). According to Curtis, the plaintiff also told him about a prior incident where a similar occurrence had taken place at a former job.2 (Id.) The next day, on May 26, 2016, the plaintiff had a follow-up meeting with the same individuals present at which she was asked whether she had texted anyone about the field day event. (Ortiz Dep. at 275). After being shown the texts, the plaintiff remembered sending the picture collage to Miltenberger, but did not remember whether she had sent the corresponding text messages. (Id., at 296-97). At some point during the investigation, Raup had decided to suspend the plaintiff pending completion thereof since Miltenberger worked in the same department as the plaintiff and Raup knew that the plaintiff would be aware that Miltenberger had reported the messages. (Raup Dep. at 76, 277-78). Since the plaintiff was on suspension, Raup called the plaintiff at home on May [*9]  26 and asked her to bring in her cell phone so that Raup could determine whether she had all the facts necessary for the investigation. (Ortiz Dep. at 286). Rather than volunteering this information, the plaintiff refused to show Raup the text message conversation, instead stating that Raup should ask the person accusing the plaintiff for the conversation and stating that she had no additional information to give Raup. (Id., at 286-89).
The plaintiff was terminated on June 2, 2016 after Raup concluded that the plaintiff was not willing to cooperate further in the investigation or provide a legitimate reason for her day off on May 20. (Ortiz Dep. at 292, 302; Raup Dep. at 313). The plaintiff was notified via phone call and letter that she was being terminated for her dishonesty and misuse of FMLA leave. (Id.)
On these facts, the plaintiff filed this complaint on February 23, 2018 against the defendants alleging discrimination, retaliation, a hostile work environment, and failure to accommodate under Title VII, the ADA, the FMLA, and the PHRA. (Doc. 1). Fact discovery concluded in this case on January 18, 2019 and the defendants moved for summary judgment on November 25 of the same year. This motion [*10]  has been fully briefed and is ripe for our disposition. For the reasons set forth below, we will recommend that this summary judgment motion be granted.

III. Discussion

A. Summary Judgment — Standard of Review
The defendants have moved for summary judgment pursuant to Rule 56 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, which provides that the court shall grant summary judgment if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). Through summary adjudication, a court is empowered to dispose of those claims that do not present a "genuine dispute as to any material fact," Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a), and for which a trial would be "an empty and unnecessary formality." Univac Dental Co. v. Dentsply Int'l, Inc., No. 07-0493, 702 F. Supp. 2d 465, 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 31615, at *4 (M.D. Pa. Mar. 31, 2010). The substantive law identifies which facts are material, and "[o]nly disputes over facts that might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law will properly preclude the entry of summary judgment." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). A dispute about a material fact is genuine only if there is a sufficient evidentiary basis that would allow a reasonable fact finder to return a verdict for the non-moving party. Id., at 248-49.
The moving party has the initial burden of identifying evidence that it believes shows an absence of a genuine issue of material [*11]  fact. Conoshenti v. Pub. Serv. Elec. & Gas Co., 364 F.3d 135, 145-46 (3d Cir. 2004). Once the moving party has shown that there is an absence of evidence to support the non-moving party's claims, "the non-moving party must rebut the motion with facts in the record and cannot rest solely on assertions made in the pleadings, legal memoranda, or oral argument." Berckeley Inv. Group. Ltd. v. Colkitt, 455 F.3d 195, 201 (3d Cir. 2006); accord Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 324, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). If the non-moving party "fails to make a showing sufficient to establish the existence of an element essential to that party's case, and on which that party will bear the burden at trial," summary judgment is appropriate. Celotex, 477 U.S. at 322. Summary judgment is also appropriate if the non-moving party provides merely colorable, conclusory, or speculative evidence. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249. There must be more than a scintilla of evidence supporting the non-moving party and more than some metaphysical doubt as to the material facts. Id., at 252; see also Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986). In making this determination, the Court must "consider all evidence in the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion." A.W. v. Jersey City Pub. Sch., 486 F.3d 791, 794 (3d Cir. 2007).
Moreover, a party who seeks to resist a summary judgment motion by citing to disputed material issues of fact must show by competent evidence that such factual disputes exist. Further, "only evidence which is admissible at trial may be considered in ruling on a motion [*12]  for summary judgment." Countryside Oil Co., Inc. v. Travelers Ins. Co., 928 F. Supp. 474, 482 (D.N.J. 1995). Similarly, it is well-settled that: "[o]ne cannot create an issue of fact merely by . . . denying averments . . . without producing any supporting evidence of the denials." Thimons v. PNC Bank, NA, 254 F. App'x 896, 899 (3d Cir. 2007) (citation omitted). Thus, "[w]hen a motion for summary judgment is made and supported . . ., an adverse party may not rest upon mere allegations or denial." Fireman's Ins. Co. of Newark NJ v. DuFresne, 676 F.2d 965, 968 (3d Cir. 1982); see Sunshine Books, Ltd. v. Temple University, 697 F.2d 90, 96 (3d Cir. 1982). "[A] mere denial is insufficient to raise a disputed issue of fact, and an unsubstantiated doubt as to the veracity of the opposing affidavit is also not sufficient." Lockhart v. Hoenstine, 411 F.2d 455, 458 (3d Cir. 1969). Furthermore, "a party resisting a [Rule 56] motion cannot expect to rely merely upon bare assertions, conclusory allegations or suspicions." Gans v. Mundy, 762 F.2d 338, 341 (3d Cir. 1985) (citing Ness v. Marshall, 660 F.2d 517, 519 (3d Cir. 1981)).
Finally, it is emphatically not the province of the court to weigh evidence, or assess credibility, when passing upon a motion for summary judgment. Rather, in adjudicating the motion, the court must view the evidence presented in the light most favorable to the opposing party, Anderson, 477 U.S. at 255, and draw all reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Big Apple BMW, Inc. v. BMW of North America, Inc., 974 F.2d 1358, 1363 (3d Cir. 1992). Where the non-moving party's evidence contradicts the movant's, then the non-movant's must be taken as true. Id. Additionally, the court is not to decide [*13]  whether the evidence unquestionably favors one side or the other, or to make credibility determinations, but instead must decide whether a fair-minded jury could return a verdict for the plaintiff on the evidence presented. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 252; see also Big Apple BMW, 974 F.2d at 1363. In reaching this determination, the Third Circuit has instructed that:
To raise a genuine issue of material fact . . . the opponent need not match, item for item, each piece of evidence proffered by the movant. In practical terms, if the opponent has exceeded the "mere scintilla" threshold and has offered a genuine issue of material fact, then the court cannot credit the movant's version of events against the opponent, even if the quantity of the movant's evidence far outweighs that of its opponent. It thus remains the province of the fact finder to ascertain the believability and weight of the evidence.
Id. In contrast, "[w]here the record taken as a whole could not lead a rational trier of fact to find for the non-moving party, there is no genuine issue for trial." Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co., Ltd. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 587, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986) (internal quotation marks omitted); NAACP v. North Hudson Reg'l Fire & Rescue, 665 F.3d 464, 476 (3d Cir. 2011).

B. The Defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment Should be Granted as to the Plaintiff's Claims Under Title VII.
Title VII prohibits employment discrimination [*14]  based on an individual's sex or gender. 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(a). To prevail on a claim based upon indirect evidence of discrimination, a complaining employee must rely upon the familiar three-step burden shifting analysis announced in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L.Ed.2d 668 (1973). Under this test, a plaintiff must first establish a prima facie case of employment discrimination based upon one of the categories protected by Title VII. Id., at 802. To establish a prima facie case of gender-based employment discrimination under Title VII, a plaintiff must demonstrate that: "(1) s/he is a member of a protected class; (2) s/he was qualified for the position s/he sought to attain or retain; (3) s/he suffered an adverse employment action; and (4) the action occurred under circumstances that could give rise to an inference of intentional discrimination." Makky v. Chertoff, 541 F.3d 205, 214 (3d Cir. 2008); see also Jones v. Se. Pa. Trans. Auth., 796 F.3d 323 (3d Cir. 2015); Pivirotto v. Innovative Sys., Inc., 191 F.3d 344, 348 n. 1, 352, 356, 357 (3d Cir. 1999). The last element also requires that the plaintiff demonstrate a causal connection between her protected status and the allegedly adverse action. Sarullo v. U.S. Postal Serv., 352 F.3d 789, 797 (3d Cir. 2003). The key focus of the prima facie test is "always whether the employer is treating 'some people less favorably than others because of their race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.'" Id., at 798 (citation omitted).
If a plaintiff establishes a prima facie case, then [*15]  "the burden shifts to the defendant to articulate a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the adverse employment action." Id. If the defendant meets that test, a plaintiff may nevertheless prevail by showing that "the defendant's proffered reason is merely pretext for intentional discrimination." Id. In proving pretext, "a plaintiff . . . may survive a motion for summary judgment by either (i) discrediting the proffered reasons, either circumstantially or directly, or (ii) adducing evidence, whether circumstantial or direct, that discrimination was more likely than not a motivating or determinative cause of the adverse employment action." Fuentes v. Perskie, 32 F.3d 759, 764 (3d. Cir. 1994).
To discredit the employer's proffered reason, however, the plaintiff cannot simply show that the employer's decision was wrong or mistaken, since the factual dispute at issue is whether discriminatory animus motivated the employer, not whether the employer is wise, shrewd, prudent, or competent. Rather, the non-moving plaintiff must demonstrate such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, incoherencies, or contradictions in the employer's proffered legitimate reasons for its action that a reasonable factfinder could rationally find them [*16]  "unworthy of credence" and hence infer "that the employer did not act for [the asserted] non-discriminatory reasons."
Id., at 765 (alteration in original) (citations omitted).
Under that first approach, evidence sufficient to allow a factfinder to disbelieve the employer's legitimate reasons requires a plaintiff to show "such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, incoherencies, or contradictions in the employer's proffered legitimate reasons" that a jury could find that the employer did not actually act for non-discriminatory reasons. Fuentes, 32 F.3d at 765. A plaintiff cannot merely show that the employer's decision was "wrong or mistaken," because the issue is the employer's motivation — not whether the decision was sound. Id. Moreover, the plaintiff must point to inconsistencies that would be significant enough to discredit the logic of the proffered legitimate reason. Id.; see also Schroder v. Pleasant Valley Sch. Dist., 458 F. App'x 128, 130 (3d Cir. 2012).
Under the second approach, a plaintiff may come forward with evidence that would show that the employer treated similarly situated comparators more favorably. In order to demonstrate discrimination by showing comparators, "comparator employees must be similarly situated in all relevant respects," the determination of which "takes [*17]  into account factors such as the employees' job responsibilities, the supervisors and decision-makers, and the nature of the misconduct engaged in." Wilcher v. Postmaster Gen., 441 F. App'x 879, 882 (3d Cir. 2011). It is not necessary to show that misconduct in which employees engaged was identical since comparators who committed offenses that were of "comparable seriousness" may satisfy a plaintiff's burden. Opsatnik, 335 F. App'x at 223) (quoting Wright v. Murray Guard, Inc., 455 F.3d 702, 710 (7th Cir. 2006)). Sometimes, however, the circumstances of a plaintiff's misconduct may justify treating him differently than similar comparators. See George v. Lehigh Valley Health Network, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 51690, 2014 WL 1464327, *4 (E.D. Pa. April 15, 2014). Additionally, the Third Circuit has instructed that although "identification of one or two comparators may be sufficient at the prima facie stage of analysis, it is not sufficient at the pretext stage." Ray v. Pinnacle Health Hospitals, Inc., 416 F. App'x 157, 164 (3d Cir. 2010) (citing Simpson v. Kay Jewelers, 142 F.3d 639, 645-46 (3d Cir. 1998)).
Title VII likewise prohibits retaliation against employees who have engaged in protected activity. Specifically, the statute's anti-retaliation provision forbids an employer from "discriminat[ing] against any of his employees . . . because he has opposed any practice made an unlawful employment practice by [Title VII], or because he has made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under [Title VII]." 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-3(a). "To assert a prima [*18]  facie Title VII retaliation claim, the employee must show that '(1) she engaged in activity protected by Title VII; (2) the employer took an adverse employment action against her; and (3) there was a causal connection between her participation in the protected activity and the adverse employment action.'" Hussein v. UPMC Mercy Hospital, 466 Fed. App'x 108, 112 (3d Cir. 2012) (quoting Moore v. City of Phila., 461 F.3d 331, 340-41 (3d Cir. 2006)). Once the plaintiff has established her prima facie case, the familiar McDonnell Douglas burden shifting framework laid out above applies. Hussein, 466 Fed. App'x at 112.
Initially, we note that the scope of the plaintiff's claims under each given count is unclear from the face of the complaint. Specifically, the plaintiff has chosen to paint with a broad brush, allowing us to assemble her claims for her, rather than denoting which facts accompany which claims.3 It is only in the plaintiff's brief in opposition to the pending summary judgment motion that we gather that the plaintiff asserts that she has met her burden of proving a prima facie case of discrimination based on her gender because she felt that she was treated differently from her non-pregnant and male co-workers after she became pregnant and needed more frequent restroom breaks and accommodations due to her pregnancy. In addition, the plaintiff [*19]  claims that she was terminated after requesting a day off of work for pregnancy-related pain, a condition that is inherently tied to the plaintiff's sex. While we agree that Ortiz has met her burden to prove a prima facie case of discrimination, for the reasons set forth below, we find the defendants' rejoinder, that they opted to terminate her employment for legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons which she cannot rebut, is compelling and controlling for this claim.
We begin our analysis with the plaintiff's prima facie case. We gather that both parties appear to concede the first three elements of the plaintiff's case, so we need not address them here. The parties do, however, dispute whether "the action occurred under circumstances that could give rise to an inference of intentional discrimination." Makky, 541 F.3d at 214. Specifically, the parties dispute whether there was a causal connection between the plaintiff's protected status and the allegedly adverse action. Sarullo, 352 F.3d at 797.
The plaintiff alleges that the following summarized facts indicate that she faced discrimination and retaliation while working for the defendants: (1) the plaintiff was the only pregnant and disabled employee supervised by Shauna Michaels and felt that she was treated "substantially worse" than her fellow employees on this team; (2) Michaels was incentivized to discriminate against the plaintiff since Ortiz was a hindrance to Michaels' production requirements for her team since the defendants did not provide any exceptions for Michaels' productivity metrics despite having a worker who needed medical leave on her team; [*21]  (3) the plaintiff was terminated three weeks before she was set to commence maternity leave; (4) the Human Resources ("HR") department recommended terminating the plaintiff before conducting an investigation into her alleged conduct and had been "actively searching for 'cases' to try to build against Plaintiff"; (5) even after conducting its investigation, the HR department chose to ignore the plaintiff's version of events, despite her version being consistent with her various doctors' notes and medical certifications; (6) the defendants chose to immediately terminate the plaintiff despite other employees allegedly committing worse infractions and receiving progressive discipline; and (7) the plaintiff had not lied about her use of FMLA leave, rendering the defendants' stated reason for termination false. (Doc. 39-4, at 20-22).
We find that none of these facts except for the last are sufficient to meet the plaintiff's burden to set forth a prima facie case under Title VII. Specifically, the plaintiff has produced no evidence that she was treated differently than any of her fellow employees—only that she subjectively felt that she was being treated differently. (Ortiz Dep. at 204-05, [*22]  316-17). This subjective impression, which is unadorned by any admissible evidence, is insufficient to state a claim. In fact, in response to direct questions regarding her treatment versus her coworkers', Ortiz stated that she didn't know if Michaels treated other employees differently than herself. (Id., at 204-05). She merely stated that she felt like she was "always being watched[,]" being judged, or singled out, but did not know if other employees felt the same. (Id., at 172-74, 178-80, 365-66). However, even if Michaels had treated Ortiz differently than other employees on her team, it is undisputed that Michaels had no involvement in the decision to terminate the plaintiff. (Michaels Dep. at 39). Thus, any allegedly adverse treatment by Michaels did not result in the plaintiff's termination.4
In addition, many of the plaintiff's stated facts are of no moment for our consideration under a Title VII analysis. For instance, the fact that the plaintiff was terminated three weeks before she was set to commence maternity leave has no proven connection on the record to why the plaintiff was terminated. Further, in spite of the HR department allegedly recommending termination before conducting an investigation, "actively searching [*23]  for 'cases' to try to build against Plaintiff, or choosing to ignore the plaintiff's version of events, these actions have no connection to the defendants' decision to terminate plaintiff on the basis of sex as required by Title VII. Simply put, Ortiz argues that the decisions made here were wrong, but the plaintiff has neither alleged nor proven that these actions took place because she was a woman or because she was pregnant. Rather, the plaintiff appears to claim that the defendants had some personal vendetta against her without connecting this personal dispute to the plaintiff's sex or the elements of Title VII. Furthermore, the individuals that the plaintiff cites as allegedly committing more egregious infractions but receiving progressive discipline were not similarly situated to the plaintiff. In fact, many of these individuals were male employees accused of sexual harassment or employees with different supervisors, rather than employees who had been dishonest for misusing FMLA leave. (See generally Moroski Dep.). Moreover, of the employees who had been accused of dishonesty, regardless of supervisor or sex, the HR department had recommended that they be terminated, rather than [*24]  a placed on a progressive discipline program. (Id.) In short, the HR department had not treated the plaintiff's case any differently than any other employees who had been found to be dishonest.
The plaintiff may have met her burden of establishing a prima facie case, however, because viewing the facts in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, as we must for purposes of evaluating this motion for summary judgment, we find that her representation that her use of FMLA leave on May 20, 2016 was genuine is sufficient to satisfy her burden under Title VII. Specifically, while Ortiz admitted that she attended her children's field day event, she claims that she did so after waking up that morning in pain due to her SPD, and recognizing that she would need to move around more than she would otherwise be able to at work. (Ortiz Dep. at 262-64). Having always wanted to attend her children's field day, she determined that walking around at this event would help ease her discomfort and thus made the decision to attend. (Id.) The plaintiff argues that the defendants' decision to terminate her employment based on this sequence of events—an allegedly proper use of her FMLA leave for a pregnancy-related [*25]  condition—constitutes discrimination based on her sex. Constrained as we are to view the evidence in a light most favorable to Ortiz, we agree that this satisfies the plaintiff's burden of setting forth a prima facie case of discrimination. Thus, the burden shifts to the defendants to set forth a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the plaintiff's termination.
On this score, the defendants claim that the plaintiff had pre-planned her day off from work based on a series of text messages provided to the HR department by one of Ortiz's co-workers, Amanda Miltenberger. Substantial, uncontested evidence supports this conclusion. These texts began with a series of pictures of Ortiz's children at their field day event captioned "this is what I did on my day off, shhhhh, lol" and went on to state that Ortiz had been planning to take this day off for a while since she had always wanted to attend her children's field day event. (Ortiz Dep. at 281, 283-85). On the basis of these messages, which were not refuted by the plaintiff except to say in her deposition that they were "maybe not worded the way that [she] meant it," but that "[she knew] what [she] meant," (Ortiz Dep. at 285-86), the [*26]  defendants made the decision to terminate the plaintiff, finding that her pre-planned day off, taken under the guise of FMLA leave, was deceptive and dishonest. (Raup Dep. at 169). Both the defendants' CBA and the internal policies dictated that dishonesty constitutes grounds for immediate termination, and the defendants chose to exercise this option. Throughout the HR department's investigation and related correspondence, the reason for recommending the plaintiff's termination remained her dishonest and deceptive behavior indicating that she had pre-planned to take a day off, chose to improperly use FMLA leave to accomplish this end, and then bragged to a co-worker regarding this deceptive behavior.. (Raup Dep. at 169; Doc 39-6, Exs. H, I).
Attempting to carry her heavy burden of proving that the defendants' decision was actually pretext to discriminate against her on the basis of sex because she was pregnant, the plaintiff argues that even if she had pre-planned the day off, she had still legitimately taken FMLA leave that day because she began her morning in pain and needed the day off to walk around; therefore, she had not been dishonest about her FMLA use and could not have been [*27]  terminated for any reason other than the fact that she was pregnant. Thus, Ortiz invites us to accept her deceit, find that she planned to lie to her employer, but conclude that the employer could not rely upon this apparently deceitful conduct to terminate her because an intervening medical event may have unexpectedly converted her lie into a truthful account.
We find that this argument fails. The defendants were explicit that their reason for terminating the plaintiff was her pattern of deceptive conduct in attempting to pre-plan a day off from work through the conduit of inappropriately using her FMLA leave. The fact that this deceitful plan may have accidentally ended up being somewhat legitimate does not change its fundamental dishonesty and mendacity. We reiterate that proving pretext requires a plaintiff to show "such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, incoherencies, or contradictions in the employer's proffered legitimate reasons" that a jury could find that the employer did not actually act for non-discriminatory reasons. Fuentes, 32 F.3d at 765. A plaintiff cannot merely show that the employer's decision was "wrong or mistaken," because the issue is the employer's motivation — not whether [*28]  the decision was sound. Id. The defendants have made their motivations crystal clear throughout the record and the plaintiff has not proved anything more than her disagreement with the defendants' decision. This is insufficient to survive summary judgment and we accordingly recommend that summary judgment be granted as to the plaintiff's claim for discrimination under Title VII.
To the extent that the plaintiff alleges a retaliation claim under Title VII, this claim too fails.5 As we have stated, a plaintiff must set forth a prima facie case of retaliation by demonstrating that "(1) she engaged in activity protected by Title VII; (2) the employer took an adverse employment action against her; and (3) there was a causal connection between her participation in the protected activity and the adverse employment action.'" Hussein, 466 Fed. App'x at 112. We find that the plaintiff has not set forth any facts to indicate that she engaged in protected activity under Title VII. Such activity involves "oppos[ing] any practice made an unlawful employment practice by this subchapter, or . . . ma[king] a charge, testif[ying], assist[ing], or participat[ing] in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this [*29]  subchapter." 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-3(a). Thus,
With respect to "protected activity," the anti-retaliation provision of Title VII protects those who participate in certain Title VII proceedings (the "participation clause") and those who oppose discrimination made unlawful by Title VII (the "opposition clause"). Slagle v. County of Clarion, 435 F.3d 262, 266 (3d Cir. 2006). Whether the employee opposes, or participates in a proceeding against, the employer's activity, the employee must hold an objectively reasonable belief, in good faith, that the activity they oppose is unlawful under Title VII. Clark County v. Breeden, 532 U.S. 268, 271, 121 S. Ct. 1508, 149 L. Ed. 2d 509 (2001) (per curiam) (rejecting retaliation claim where "[n]o reasonable person could have believed that" the underlying incident complained about "violated Title VII's standard" for unlawful discrimination); Aman v. Cort Furniture Rental Corp., 85 F.3d 1074, 1085 (3d Cir. 1996) (retaliation plaintiff must "act[] under a good faith, reasonable belief that a violation existed"). Moreover, the employee's "opposition" to unlawful discrimination must not be equivocal. Barber v. CSX Distribution Servs., 68 F.3d 694, 702 (3d Cir. 1995).
Moore v. City of Philadelphia, 461 F.3d 331, 341 (3d Cir. 2006). "A general complaint of unfair treatment is insufficient to establish protected activity under Title VII." Curay-Cramer v. Ursuline Acad. of Wilmington, Del, Inc., 450 F.3d 130, 135 (3d Cir. 2006).
Thus, from the record before us, it appears as though the plaintiff has failed to satisfy the first element of her prima facie case for a retaliation claim under Title VII. There is no [*30]  evidence that the plaintiff either participated in a Title VII lawsuit prior to the present one or opposed discrimination by her employer in terms more specific than a "general complaint of unfair treatment" when her requests for accommodations were denied. Id. Absent these facts, we are constrained to recommend granting the defendants' motion for summary judgment as to all claims under Title VII.

C. The Defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment Should be Granted as to the Plaintiff's Claims Under the ADA and the PHRA.
It appears from the plaintiff's brief that her discrimination and retaliation claims under the ADA and PHRA also include "subjecting Plaintiff to a hostile work environment; suspending Plaintiff without pay; terminating Plaintiff's employment; and denying Plaintiff's request for accommodation while also failing to engage in an interactive process."6 (Doc. 39-4, at 28). While these additional claims are not explicitly mentioned in the plaintiff's complaint, we will reach their merits since the defendants discuss them in their brief and do not otherwise appear to contest their introduction.7

1. Summary Judgment Should be Granted on the Plaintiff's ADA and PHRA Disability Discrimination [*31]  Claims.
Disability discrimination claims under the ADA and PHRA are analyzed pursuant to the same legal standard. Colwell v. Rite Aid Corp., 602 F.3d 495, 499 n. 3 (3d Cir. 2010) (citing Kelly v. Drexel Univ., 94 F.3d 102, 105 (3d Cir. 1996)). Therefore, we will address these claims together. These disability discrimination claims are analyzed under the same McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework as the above Title VII claims. McCarty v. Marple Twp. Ambulance Corp., 869 F. Supp. 2d 638 (E.D. Pa. 2012) (applying McDonnell Douglas framework to ADA claim). Pursuant to this framework, the plaintiff must establish her prima facie case by showing that: she has a disability; she was qualified for the position with or without a reasonable accommodation; and she suffered an adverse employment action as a result of her disability. Williams v. Phila. Housing Authority Police Dep't, 380 F.3d 751 (3d Cir. 2004). Once the plaintiff establishes her prima facie case, the defendant then bears the burden of producing a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the adverse employment action. McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 802, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). If the defendant makes this showing, then the burden shifts back to the plaintiff to establish that the defendant's asserted reason was actually a pretext for discrimination. Id., at 804.
In this case, it appears as though the defendants do not contest that the plaintiff was disabled or that she sought an accommodation. The defendants do, however, contest that the plaintiff suffered an [*32]  adverse employment action as a result of her disability. For many of the same reasons presented above, while we find that the plaintiff may have satisfied her burden of setting forth a prima facie case of disability discrimination, the defendants have put forth a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the plaintiff's termination which she has not successfully rebutted.
We conclude that the plaintiff has met her prima facie burden of establishing that she was disabled at the time these events took place due to her SPD pain, that she was otherwise qualified for the position with or without a reasonable accommodation, and that her termination was due to this disability. At this stage of the burden shifting framework, viewing the facts in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, we accept the plaintiff's assertion that her May 20, 2016 day of FMLA leave was genuine. Specifically, the plaintiff claims that she attended her children's filed day event after waking up that morning in pain due to her SPD. (Ortiz Dep. at 262-64). Recognizing that she would need to move around more than she would otherwise be able to at work, and having always wanted to attend her children's field day, she [*33]  determined that walking around at this event would help ease her discomfort and thus made the decision to attend. (Id.) The plaintiff argues that the defendants' decision to terminate her employment based on this sequence of events—an allegedly proper use of her FMLA leave for a pregnancy-related disability—constitutes discrimination based on her disability.8 We agree that this satisfies the plaintiff's burden of setting forth a prima facie case of discrimination. Thus, the burden shifts to the defendants to set forth a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the plaintiff's termination.
On this score, the defendants claim, and the immutable evidence reveals, that the plaintiff had pre-planned her day off from work based on a series of text messages provided to the HR department by Ortiz's co-worker, Amanda Miltenberger. These texts began with a series of pictures of Ortiz's children at their field day event captioned "this is what I did on my day off, shhhhh, lol" and went on to state that Ortiz had been planning to take this day off for a while since she had always wanted to attend her children's field day event. (Ortiz Dep. at 281, 283-85). On the basis of these messages, which [*34]  were not refuted by the plaintiff except to say that they were "maybe not worded the way that [she] meant it," but that "[she knew] what [she] meant," (Ortiz Dep. at 285-86), the defendants made the decision to terminate the plaintiff, finding that her pre-planned day off, taken under the guise of FMLA leave based on her disability, was deceptive and dishonest. (Raup Dep. at 169). Both the defendants' collective bargaining agreement with the local union and the defendants' internal policies dictated that dishonesty constitutes grounds for immediate termination, and the defendants accordingly chose to exercise this option. Throughout the HR department's investigation and related correspondence, the reason for recommending the plaintiff's termination remained her dishonest and deceptive behavior indicating that she had pre-planned a day off and chose to improperly use FMLA leave on the basis of her disability to accomplish this end. (Raup Dep. at 169; Doc. 39-6, Exs. H, I).
Attempting to prove that the defendants' decision was actually pretext to discriminate against her on the basis of her disability, we gather that the plaintiff argues that even if she had pre-planned the day off, she [*35]  had still legitimately taken FMLA leave that day because she began her morning in pain due to her SPD and needed the day off to walk around; therefore, she had not been dishonest about her FMLA use and could not have been terminated for any reason other than the fact that she was disabled. We find that this argument fails.
The defendants were explicit that their reason for terminating the plaintiff was her pattern of deceptive conduct in attempting to pre-plan a day off from work through the conduit of inappropriately using her FMLA leave, regardless of what her reasons were after the fact.9 As we have noted, the fact that this deceitful plan may have accidentally ended up being legitimate does not change its basic mendacity. We reiterate that proving pretext requires a plaintiff to show "such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, incoherencies, or contradictions in the employer's proffered legitimate reasons" that a jury could find that the employer did not actually act for non-discriminatory reasons. Fuentes, 32 F.3d at 765. A plaintiff cannot merely show that the employer's decision was "wrong or mistaken," because the issue is the employer's motivation—not whether the decision was sound. Id. The [*36]  defendants have made their motivations crystal clear throughout the record and the plaintiff has not proved anything more than her disagreement with the defendants' decision. This is insufficient to survive summary judgment and we accordingly recommend that summary judgment be granted as to the plaintiff's claim for disability discrimination under the ADA.

2. Summary Judgment Should be Granted on the Plaintiff's Claims for Retaliation Under the ADA and PHRA.
Retaliation claims asserted under the ADA and PHRA are likewise analyzed using the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework. Williams, 380 F.3d at 759 n. 3. "To make out a prima facie case of illegal retaliation under the ADA, a plaintiff must show (1) protected employee activity, (2) adverse action by the employer either after or contemporaneous with the employee's protected activity, and (3) a causal relationship between the protected activity and the adverse action." Northern v. Susquehanna Univ., 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 214349, *25 (M.D. Pa. 2018) (citing Williams, 380 F.3d at 759). Under the first prong of this analysis, if an employee requests a reasonable accommodation from her employer or complains of disability discrimination on the part of her employer, that employee is deemed to have engaged in protected activity for purposes of a retaliation [*37]  claim. Fogleman v. Greater Hazleton Health Alliance, Inc., 122 Fed. App'x 581, 585 (3d. Cir. 2004); Szostek v. Drexel Univ., No. 12-2921, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 130328, 2013 WL 4857989, at *14 (E.D. Pa. Sept. 11, 2013). For purposes of our analysis, we focus on the plaintiff's requests for reasonable accommodation since she has not alleged that she complained of disability discrimination to the defendants.
Second, for purposes of determining whether the plaintiff suffered an adverse employment action, we note that courts have set stringent standards to meet this second prong of the plaintiff's prima facie case. Specifically, "minor or trivial actions that merely make an employee 'unhappy' are not sufficient to qualify as retaliation under the ADA, for otherwise every action that an 'irritable, chip-on-the-shoulder employee did not like would form the basis of a discrimination suit.'" Mondzelewski v. Pathmark Stores, 162 F.3d 778, 787 (3d Cir. 1998) (quoting Robinson v. City of Pittsburgh, 120 F.3d 1286, 1300 (3d Cir. 1997)). Thus, "a retaliation plaintiff must show that he or she suffered a 'materially adverse employment action.'" Id. This involves some form of discrimination "in regard to job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a).
Third, with respect to the "causal connection" prong, a plaintiff may establish a causal connection through either direct or circumstantial evidence. Farrell v. Planters Lifesavers Co., 206 F.3d 271, 279-81 (3d Cir. 2000). In [*38]  evaluating whether a causal connection exists between the protected activity and the adverse employment action, courts have "focused on two main factors in finding the causal link necessary for retaliation: timing and evidence of ongoing antagonism." Abramson v. William Paterson College of New Jersey, 260 F.3d 265, 288 (3d Cir. 2001). While evidence with respect to timing may be persuasive, a court need not examine the timing of the adverse employment action if the plaintiff "has presented additional evidence to prove the causal nexus," which may include evidence probative of ongoing antagonism from her employer. Id., at 288-89.
At base, "[i]n all cases involving alleged retaliation, a plaintiff must prove that retaliatory animus played a role in the employer's decision-making process and that it had a determinative effect on the outcome of the process." Northern, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 214349, at *26 (citing Krouse v. Am. Sterilizer Co., 126 F.3d 494, 501 (3d Cir. 1997)). We find that the plaintiff cannot prove retaliatory animus in this case and has further failed to satisfy her prima facie burden of proof for this retaliation claim under the ADA.
While not explicitly stated in the plaintiff's complaint or brief, we infer that the plaintiff claims that she engaged in protected activity when she requested two additional fifteen-minute breaks throughout the day to get up and move around [*39]  and to use the restroom.10 Viewing the facts in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, we agree that these requests constituted protected activity under the ADA. The plaintiff is unable, however, to meet the second and third elements of her prima facie case. The plaintiff's brief in opposition to the defendants' motion for summary judgment states that the result of the defendants denying the plaintiff's requests for an accommodation "was that Plaintiff was forced to continue to work in pain for weeks, while seven-months' pregnant, without accommodation, until she became FMLA eligible." (Doc. 39-4, at 29). While we are sympathetic to the plaintiff's situation, she has not alleged or proven any adverse employment action from the defendants with a retaliatory motive as required to state an ADA retaliation claim. In fact, the plaintiff claims that the status quo for her position was maintained; i.e., that she remained unable to take any more time for breaks than she was previously afforded. There is no evidence that the plaintiff was treated any differently after having requested these accommodations since she claims she felt "like [she] was always being watched" for her frequent restroom [*40]  use both before and after her requests for additional breaks during the day. (Ortiz Dep. at 172). Therefore, in the absence of any adverse employment action, let alone materially adverse employment action, the plaintiff has also necessarily failed to satisfy the third element of her prima facie case and the defendants should be entitled to summary judgment on this claim.11

3. Summary Judgment Should be Granted on the Plaintiff's Claim for Failure to Accommodate.
Related to the plaintiff's retaliation claim, we now turn to a discussion of whether the defendants provided the plaintiff with reasonable accommodations, as required by the ADA.12 As the Third Circuit has summarized,
An employer discriminates against a qualified individual when it does "not make reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of the individual unless the [employer] can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business of the [employer]." Id. § 12112(b)(5)(A). "Reasonable accommodation" means measures such as "job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, reassignment to a vacant position, acquisition or modification of equipment or devices, . . . and [*41]  other similar accommodations for individuals with disabilities." Id. § 12111(9).
Turner, 440 F.3d at 608. Thus, an employee must prove that "1) the employer knew about the employee's disability; 2) the employee requested accommodations or assistance for his or her disability; 3) the employer did not make a good faith effort to assist the employee in seeking accommodations; and 4) the employee could have been reasonably accommodated but for the employer's lack of good faith." Colwell v. Rite Aid Corp., 602 F.3d 495, 504 (3d Cir. 2010).
In this claim, the central issue is the defendants' good faith efforts to accommodate the plaintiff. After review, we find that the record belies the plaintiff's assertions that she was denied reasonable accommodations and that the defendants failed to engage in the interactive process. Specifically, the record indicates that the defendants had offered to separate the plaintiff's current 15-minute break schedule throughout the day so that she could have more time away from her desk in more frequent, albeit shorter intervals when she was not yet eligible for FMLA leave. (Ortiz Dep. at 175). In addition, after the plaintiff became FMLA-eligible, the defendants also told her that she could take intermittent FMLA as needed throughout the day on [*42]  an unpaid basis to get up and walk around or use the restroom. (Id.) While the plaintiff had requested two additional 15-minute breaks throughout the work day based on a note from one of her treating physicians, the defendants had counter-offered her the option to either split her two existing 15-minute breaks into six 5-minute breaks or to clock out and take intermittent FMLA leave throughout the day on an unpaid basis in conjunction with her existing breaks. (Ortiz Dep. at 175, 178). Thus, it appears as though the defendants offered the plaintiff two reasonable accommodation options to meet the needs of her request. The plaintiff, however, seemed to take issue with these proposed accommodations, expressing dissatisfaction with the fact that she would either lose her "right" to have longer 15-minute breaks that she felt entitled to or that she would be unpaid for any additional breaks. (Ortiz Dep., at 175, 229-30). Despite her discontentment with the defendants' efforts, when asked during her deposition what other accommodations the defendants should have provided her, she responded that she did not know but appeared to strongly believe that she was entitled to the two additional [*43]  15-minute breaks recommended by her treating physician. (Id., at 178, 228-30).
Unfortunately for the plaintiff, it is clear that "[a]n employer is not obligated to provide an employee the accommodation [she] requests or prefers, the employer need only provide some reasonable accommodation." Kortyna v. Lafayette College, 47 F. Supp. 3d 225, 242 (E.D. Pa. 2014) (quoting Yovtcheva v. City of Philadelphia Water Dep't, 518 Fed. App'x 116, 122 (3d Cir. 2013)); see also Keyhani v. Trs. of the Univ. of Pa., 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 104201, *8 (E.D. Pa. 2019) ("The law is clear that Plaintiff was entitled to reasonable accommodations, but not the accommodations of her choice."); Santacrose v. CSX Transp., Inc., 288 Fed. App'x 655, 657 (11th Cir. 2008) ("While [plaintiff] was not given the precise accommodation he requested . . ., a qualified individual with a disability is not entitled to the accommodation of his choice, but only to a reasonable accommodation."). Therefore, the objectively reasonable accommodations that the defendants had offered to the plaintiff satisfied their burden under the ADA. Indeed, based on the record, it was the plaintiff who failed to engage in the interactive process to her own detriment. We accordingly recommend that summary judgment be granted on this claim.

4. Summary Judgment Should be Granted on the Plaintiff's Claim for Hostile Work Environment.13
To establish a claim for a hostile work environment, a plaintiff must establish that she faced "intentional discrimination because of [her disability [*44]  or gender]; the discrimination was sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of [her] employment and create an abusive working environment; the discrimination detrimentally affected [her]; and it would have detrimentally affected a reasonable person in [her] position." Mercer v. Southeastern Pa. Transit Auth., 26 F. Supp. 3d 432, 443 (E.D. Pa. 2014) (quotation marks omitted). In order to show that a hostile work environment exists, a plaintiff needs to demonstrate harassment that is so severe or pervasive that it actually alters the conditions of the plaintiff's employment and gives rise to an abusive environment. Faragher v. City of Boca Raton, 524 U.S. 775, 788, 118 S. Ct. 2275, 141 L. Ed. 2d 662 (1998). Thus, "'offhanded comments, and isolated incidents (unless extremely serious)' are not sufficient to sustain a hostile work environment claim." Caver v. City of Trenton, 420 F.3d 243, 262 (3d Cir. 2005) (quoting Faragher, 524 U.S. at 788). In order to determine if the complained-of conduct is sufficiently egregious, courts are to "consider the totality of the circumstances," Andrews v. City of Philadelphia, 895 F.2d 1469, 1482 (3d Cir. 1990), so that the analysis "concentrate[s] not on individual incidents, but on the overall scenario." Id., at 1484; see also Harris v. Forklift Sys., Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 23, 114 S. Ct. 367, 126 L. Ed. 2d 295 (1993) ("[W]hether an environment is 'hostile' or 'abusive' can be determined only by looking at all the circumstances."). In making this assessment, courts may consider "the frequency of the discriminatory conduct; its severity; whether it is [*45]  physically threatening or humiliating, or a mere offensive utterance; and whether it unreasonably interferes with an employee's work performance." Harris, 510 U.S. at 23.
In this case, we are only presented with evidence of the plaintiff's subjective feelings of being "singled out," being treated differently from other employees, and feeling constantly under watch for having to use the restroom with some frequency. (Ortiz Dep., at 172, 178-80, 316-17). However, these subjective apprehensions based on the plaintiff's personal feelings about Michaels, without more, are insufficient to indicate a hostile work environment. Specifically, there is no evidence that Michaels ever made inappropriate comments, gestures, or did anything to treat the plaintiff differently than her co-workers based on her pregnancy, associated disability, or her gender. In fact, it is questionable whether any of the plaintiff's supervisors were even aware of the plaintiff's pregnancy-related disability to form the intent necessary to discriminate based on this disability. (See Raup Dep. at 177) (stating that May 25 was the first day she became aware of the plaintiff's SPD pain); (Michaels Dep. at 36). There is certainly no evidence that [*46]  any of the plaintiff's supervisors engaged in conduct that was so severe or pervasive to actually alter the conditions of the plaintiff's employment. Further, the plaintiff does not allege or testify that any alleged treatment from her supervisors detrimentally affected her, aside from noting that she was under some level of stress and that work was "less enjoyable" as a result of working under Michaels' supervision. (Ortiz Dep. at 183). It is unclear, however, how much of this stress was related to the plaintiff's home life, rather than anything work-related. (Ortiz Dep. at 236-37). Regardless, examining the totality of the circumstances before us on the record, it appears that the plaintiff's work environment was far from abusive. The plaintiff has thus failed to establish a sufficient basis for a hostile work environment claim and we accordingly recommend that summary judgment be granted with respect to this claim.

D. The Defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment Should be Granted as to the Plaintiff's Claims Under the FMLA.
The FMLA's implementing regulations make clear that an employer "is prohibited from discriminating against employees or prospective employees who have used FMLA [*47]  leave. For example . . . employers cannot use the taking of FMLA leave as a negative factor in employment actions such as hiring, promotions or disciplinary actions . . . ." 29 C.F.R. § 825.220(c). In the typical FMLA retaliation claim, an employee alleges that after taking FMLA-qualifying leave, she was subjected to an adverse employment action, including termination or other retaliatory action, because she took time away from work for FMLA-qualifying reasons. See, e.g., Freeman v. Phila. Hous. Auth., No. 12-1422, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 100774, at *31 (E.D. Pa. July 18, 2018) (describing retaliation claims as those "where an employee requested or took FMLA leave, remained at or returned to work, and then was subject to some type of adverse employment action such as termination or demotion"). Indeed, the gist of an FMLA retaliation claim is that the defendant has taken some adverse action against an employee because of her past use of FMLA leave.
To prove a claim for FMLA retaliation, an employee "must show that [her] employer intentionally discriminated against [her] for exercising an FMLA right." Mascioli, 610 F. Supp. 2d at 433 (quoting Martin v. Brevard County Sch., 543 F.3d 1261, 1267 (11th Cir. 2008)). Where, as here, the plaintiff's retaliation claims are based on circumstantial evidence, they are analyzed under the familiar burden-shifting paradigm in McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668, described above in the plaintiff's aforementioned [*48]  claims. Bearley v. Friendly Ice Cream Corp., 322 F. Supp. 2d 563, 571 (M.D. Pa. 2004); Baltuskonis v. U.S. Airways, Inc., 60 F. Supp. 2d 445, 448 (E.D. Pa. 1999). To establish a prima facie case of FMLA retaliation, the plaintiff must show that: (1) she took leave under the FMLA; (2) she suffered an adverse employment action; and (3) there was a causal connection between her protected activity and the employer's adverse employment action. Lichtenstein v. Univ. of Pittsburgh Med. Ctr., 691 F.3d 294, 302 (3d Cir. 2012); Bearley, 322 F. Supp. 2d at 571.
To demonstrate a causal connection, a plaintiff must show either (1) an unusually suggestive temporal proximity between the protected activity and the adverse action alleged to be retaliatory, or (2) a pattern of antagonism, coupled with timing. Budhun v. Reading Hosp. and Med. Ctr., 765 F.3d 245, 258 (3d Cir. 2014). When temporal proximity between protected activity and adverse is action is "unduly suggestive," it may be "sufficient standing alone to create an inference of causality and defeat summary judgment." Lichtenstein, 691 F.3d at 307 (quoting LeBoon v. Lancaster Jewish Cmty. Ctr. Ass'n, 503 F.3d 217, 232 (3d Cir. 2007)). If temporal proximity is not unusually suggestive on its own, courts are to "ask whether 'the proffered evidence, looked at as a whole, may suffice to raise the inference.'" Id. (quoting LeBoon, 503 F.3d at 232). There is no bright-line rule as to what constitutes suggestive temporal proximity, LeBoon, 503 F.3d at 233, although case law indicates that where temporal proximity has been found sufficiently suggestive, it has typically been a matter of days or weeks. See, e.g., Jalil v. Avdel Corp., 873 F.2d 701, 708 (3d Cir. 1989) (two days). [*49] 
As with the plaintiff's claims under Title VII and the ADA, while we find that there is sufficient factual support on the record for the plaintiff's prima facie case, for the same reasons detailed above, the plaintiff is unable to rebut the defendants' legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for her termination. To this end, we find that the plaintiff has met her prima facie burden of establishing an FMLA retaliation claim in that she took FMLA leave due to her SPD pain, she was terminated within days after taking this leave, and that her termination was connected to her day off for FMLA leave. At this stage of the burden shifting framework, viewing the facts in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, we accept the plaintiff's assertion that her May 20, 2016 day of FMLA leave was genuine and agree that this satisfies her burden of setting forth a prima facie case of FMLA retaliation. Thus, the burden shifts to the defendants to set forth a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the plaintiff's termination.
On this score, the defendants reassert their reason behind the plaintiff's termination: that the plaintiff had pre-planned to take a day off from work under the guise of FMLA leave [*50]  to attend her children's field day event. The defendants base their decision to terminate on Ortiz's own words, a series of text messages provided to the HR department by Amanda Miltenberger, which stated that Ortiz had been planning to take this day off for a while since she had always wanted to attend her children's field day event and were accompanied by a series of pictures of the event captioned "this is what I did on my day off, shhhhh, lol." (Ortiz Dep. at 281, 283-85). On the basis of these messages, which were not refuted by the plaintiff except to say that they were "maybe not worded the way that [she] meant it," but that "[she knew] what [she] meant," (Ortiz Dep. at 285-86), the defendants made the decision to terminate the plaintiff, finding that her pre-planned day off, taken under the guise of FMLA leave based on her disability, was deceptive and dishonest. Throughout the HR department's investigation and related correspondence, the reason for recommending the plaintiff's termination remained her dishonest and deceptive behavior indicating that she had pre-planned a day off and chose to improperly use FMLA leave on the basis of her disability to accomplish this end. (Raup [*51]  Dep. at 169; Doc. 39-6, Exs. H, I). Thus, the defendants intended to take an adverse employment action against the plaintiff not for her use of FMLA leave, but for her apparent misuse of that leave. This is not actionable under the FMLA since there is no legal right to engage in leave abuse.
Attempting to prove that the defendants' decision was actually pretext to discriminate against her on the basis of her disability, we gather that the plaintiff argues that even if she had pre-planned the day off, she had still legitimately taken FMLA leave that day because she began her morning in pain due to her SPD and needed the day off to walk around; therefore, she had not been dishonest about her FMLA use and could not have been terminated for any reason other than the fact that she was disabled. Once again, we find that this argument fails.
The defendants were explicit that their reason for terminating the plaintiff was her pattern of deceptive conduct in attempting to pre-plan a day off from work through the conduit of inappropriately using her FMLA leave, regardless of what her reasons were after the fact. The fact that this deceitful plan may have accidentally ended up being legitimate [*52]  does not change its fundamental dishonesty. We reiterate that proving pretext requires a plaintiff to show "such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, incoherencies, or contradictions in the employer's proffered legitimate reasons" that a jury could find that the employer did not actually act for non-discriminatory reasons. Fuentes, 32 F.3d at 765. A plaintiff cannot merely show that the employer's decision was "wrong or mistaken," because the issue is the employer's motivation—not whether the decision was sound. Id. The defendants have made their motivations crystal clear throughout the record and the plaintiff has not proved anything more than her disagreement with the defendants' decision. This is insufficient to survive summary judgment and we accordingly recommend that summary judgment be granted as to the plaintiff's claim for retaliation under the FMLA.

IV. Recommendation
For the foregoing reasons it is RECOMMENDED that the defendants' motion for summary judgment (Doc. 36) be GRANTED.
The parties are hereby placed on notice that pursuant to Local Rule 72.3:
Any party may object to a magistrate judge's proposed findings, recommendations, or report addressing a motion or matter described in 28 U.S.C. § 636 (b)(1)(B) or making a recommendation [*53]  for the disposition of a prisoner case or a habeas corpus petition within fourteen (14) days after being served with a copy thereof. Such party shall file with the clerk of court, and serve on the magistrate judge and all parties, written objections which shall specifically identify the portions of the proposed findings, recommendations or report to which objection is made and the basis for such objections. The briefing requirements set forth in Local Rule 72.2 shall apply. A judge shall make a de novo determination of those portions of the report or specified proposed findings or recommendations to which objection is made and may accept, reject, or modify, in whole or in part, the findings or recommendations made by the magistrate judge. The judge, however, need conduct a new hearing only in his or her discretion or where required by law, and may consider the record developed before the magistrate judge, making his or her own determination on the basis of that record. The judge may also receive further evidence, recall witnesses, or recommit the matter to the magistrate judge with instructions.
Submitted this 6th day of March 2020.
/s/ Martin C. Carlson
Martin C. Carlson
United States Magistrate Judge [*54] 


End of Document

