Parks v. Wheatland Elec. Coop.
United States District Court for the District of Kansas
January 5, 2022, Decided; January 5, 2022, Filed
CIVIL ACTION No. 20-2459-KHV

Reporter
2022 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 34560 *; 2022 WL 517571
WAYNE PARKS, Plaintiff, v. WHEATLAND ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE, INC., Defendant.
Prior History: Parks v. Wheatland Elec. Coop., Inc., 2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 232534, 2021 WL 5769368 (D. Kan., Dec. 6, 2021)
Counsel:  [*1] For Wayne Parks, Plaintiff: Douglas L. Carter, LEAD ATTORNEY, Law Offices of Douglas L. Carter, PC, Kansas City, MO; Jonathan K. McCoy, Law Offices of Douglas L. Carter, PC, Kansas City, MO.
For Wheatland Electric Cooperative, Inc., Defendant: Ryan M. Peck, LEAD ATTORNEY, Morris, Laing, Evans, Brock & Kennedy, Chtd.--Wichita, Wichita, KS.
Judges: KATHRYN H. VRATIL, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: KATHRYN H. VRATIL
Opinion



ORDER
This matter comes before the Court on Defendant's Motion For Reconsideration (Doc. #85) filed December 20, 2021, and Plaintiff's Motion For Extension Of Time To File Opposition To Defendant's Motion For Reconsideration (Doc. #86) filed December 30, 2021. For reasons briefly stated below, both motions are overruled.1
Defendant asks the Court to reconsider its Memorandum and Order (Doc. #83) entered December 6, 2021, and hold that "the consumer services representative position was not a vacant, available position for reassignment as a matter of law," and on that premise enter summary judgment for defendant on each of plaintiff's three claims. Defendant argues that in overruling its motion for summary judgment, the Court erroneously held that "defendant should have offered this position [*2]  to plaintiff" in February of 2019, and that to fulfill this obligation, it had a duty to hold the position open from October 22, 2018, when it posted the opening, until February of 2019, when plaintiff's doctor released him to return to work and plaintiff stopped receiving temporary total disability benefits. This argument fundamentally mischaracterizes the Court's order and analysis, and it is otherwise without merit.
First, the Court never held that defendant should have offered the consumer services representative ["CSR"] position to plaintiff, either in October of 2018 or at any time thereafter. It held that the record presented a genuine issue of material fact whether in October of 2018 and thereafter, defendant considered whether plaintiff could perform the essential functions of the CSR position. Id. at 19. Also, the Court never held that defendant was required to hold the position open for any period of time.
The gist of defendant's motion to reconsider comes down to re-argument of a position which the Court has already rejected: that as a matter of law, prior to February of 2019, defendant had no duty to accommodate plaintiff's request for reassignment or to engage in the interactive [*3]  process of identifying possible alternatives that would accommodate plaintiff's disability. By October of 2018, defendant was well aware that plaintiff could not return to his former position.2 Arguably, defendant also knew that plaintiff wanted to return to work. Plaintiff preferred accommodations that would allow him to return to the journeyman lineman position.3 But at a minimum, as the Court noted, "the record reveals a genuine issue of material fact about when defendant was on notice of plaintiff's desire for reassignment, and what it understood his request to be" and "a reasonable jury could find that defendant's duty to identify vacant positions arose no later than October of 2018, continued through the time that defendant filled the consumer services representative position with another individual on December 6, 2018, and did not end until February 12, 2019 (at the earliest)." Id. at 19-20.
Defendant also argues that as a matter of law, it had no duty to consider reassignment until it first determined that "no reasonable accommodation could be made to keep the disabled employee in his present position" and that it could not make that determination until plaintiff was ready to [*4]  return to work, had received work restrictions and had stopped receiving temporary total disability benefits. This position ignores the factual record in this case. By August 14, 2018, defendant had determined that "no reasonable accommodation could be made to keep the disabled employee in his present position." Also, on October 24, 2018, defendant had the results of plaintiff's Functional Capacity Examination. While defendant waited six months to formalize its decision that plaintiff could not return to his former position, a reasonable jury could find that in October of 2018, defendant had sufficient information to trigger a duty to engage in the interactive process of identifying alternative positions which defendant might fill. Plaintiff may have been "insisting that he could be accommodated" as a journeyman lineman, but defendant disagreed and so far as the record shows, never gave serious consideration to plaintiff's so-called "insistence" that he could return to his old job.
As to the argument that defendant could not determine whether it could accommodate plaintiff in his current position until he was ready to return to work, had received work restrictions and had stopped receiving [*5]  temporary total disability benefits: (1) defendant actually made exactly that decision well before plaintiff had received work restrictions and stopped receiving temporary total disability benefits; (2) whether plaintiff was ready and able to return to work of course depended on the work to be assigned (an open issue before February of 2019, given the lack of interactive process to identify possible reassignments); and (3) defendant's obligations under the ADA are not co-terminous with its duties under the Kansas Worker's Compensation laws, nor are they necessarily in conflict. On the latter point, defendant seems to argue that compliance with state worker's compensation law immunizes it from liability under the ADA. If defendant has legal authority for that position, it has not cited such law. Defendant complains that under the Court's holding," it "was required to ask or mandate that plaintiff end his medical leave early and return to a different job" — as if such a conversation would be patently ludicrous within the context of a good faith interactive process to identify possible reassignments for plaintiff. A reasonable jury could conclude otherwise.
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED that [*6]  Defendant's Motion For Reconsideration (Doc. #85) filed December 20, 2021, be and hereby is OVERRULED.
IT IS HEREBY FURTHER ORDERED that Plaintiff's Motion For Extension Of Time To File Opposition To Defendant's Motion For Reconsideration (Doc. #86) filed December 30, 2021, be and hereby is OVERRULED AS MOOT.
Dated this 5th day of January, 2022 at Kansas City, Kansas.
/s/ Kathryn H. Vratil
KATHRYN H. VRATIL
United States District Judge


End of Document

