Pellot v. United States
United States District Court for the District of Puerto Rico
September 2, 2010, Decided; September 2, 2010, Filed
Civil No.:08-1297 (DRD)

Reporter
2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 158924 *
PEGGY PELLOT, Plaintiff, v. UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, et al, Defendants.
Prior History: Pellot v. United States, 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 158968 (D.P.R., July 14, 2010)
Counsel:  [*1] For Peggy Pellot, Plaintiff: Dimarie V. Mendez-Martino, LEAD ATTORNEY, Guaynabo, PR; Rene Arrillaga-Armendariz, LEAD ATTORNEY, Arrillaga & Arrillaga Law Office, San Juan, PR.
For United States of America, Department Of Defense, Secretary of the Department of Defense, Army & Air Force Exchange Service, Defendants: Fidel A. Sevillano-Del-Rio, LEAD ATTORNEY, United States Attorneys Office, District of Puerto Rico, San Juan, PR.
Judges: DANIEL R. DOMINGUEZ, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: DANIEL R. DOMINGUEZ
Opinion



OPINION AND ORDER

I. PROCEDURAL HISTORY
The instant case involves a claim arising under the Rehabilitation Act, 29 U.S.C. §701 et seq. for discrimination and retaliation based upon disability. Plaintiff filed her Complaint (Docket No. 1) in the instant action on March 12, 2008. Therein, Plaintiff alleged that she was discriminated against by her employer, the Army & Air Force Exchange Services ("AAFES"), because she is a diabetic. Further, Plaintiff alleged that she was dismissed in retaliation for requesting reasonable accommodations for the disability, namely periodic meal and snack breaks.
On August 21, 2008, Defendants in the instant case filed a motion for summary judgment (Docket Nos. 7-9), in which they alleged that [*2]  Plaintiff failed to exhaust the requisite administrative remedies. On February 2, 2009, the Honorable District Judge Acosta denied this motion (Docket No. 18), finding that Plaintiff had indeed exhausted the appropriate administrative remedies prior to filing her complaint in the instant case.
On August 26, 2009, Defendants also filed a motion to dismiss Plaintiff's complaint (Docket Nos. 10 & 11). Therein, Defendants argued that Plaintiff had not properly pled that the condition from which she suffers, diabetes, is a qualifying "disability" within the meaning ascribed by the Rehabilitation Act. Further, Defendants argued that Plaintiff did not plead that she was capable of performing the essential functions of her position. District Judge Acosta denied this motion, applying the "any set of facts" standard of Conley v. Gibson, 355 U.S. 41, 78 S.Ct. 99, 2 L. Ed. 2d 80 (1957)1 (Docket No. 19). Specifically, the Court found that diabetes could, in fact, constitute a qualifying disability, that Plaintiff indicated that she was capable of performing the essential functions of her position and that, if the general allegations Plaintiff made regarding harassment were substantiated, she could prevail upon a hostile work environment claim.
On December 7, 2009, Defendants filed the currently pending motion for summary judgment, accompanying memorandum of law and statement of uncontested material facts (Docket Nos. 37-39). Therein, Defendants argue that Plaintiff failed to establish a claim of employment discrimination under the Rehabilitation Act for failure to make reasonable accommodations because Plaintiff failed to provide a medical note specifying when she needed to take breaks, which was necessary in order to fully accommodate her meal and snack schedule. Further, Defendants assert that Plaintiff left her position because she did not want to perform the full spectrum of her articulated duties, not because her supervisor was hostile towards her. Thus, Defendants argue that Plaintiff can not prevail upon her hostile work environment claim.
On January 29, 2010, Plaintiff filed her opposition to Defendants' motion for summary judgment (Docket No. 46). Therein, Plaintiff mistakenly argues that she established a prima facie case previously at the motion to dismiss level2 and that, therefore, the burden rests with Defendants to articulate a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for its allegedly [*4]  discriminatory actions. Plaintiff further characterizes Defendants' proffered legitimate business reasons as "superficial." Plaintiff offers no other arguments against granting summary judgment based upon her failure to support a prima facie case of employment discrimination, but, rather, rests entirely upon Judge Acosta's opinion denying Defendants' motion to dismiss.
As to her hostile work environment claim, Plaintiff argues that an employee of AAFES, her second-line supervisor, Mr. Larry Bryant ("Bryant"), "yelled"3 at Plaintiff, that he changed Plaintiff's meal and break schedule which she had enjoyed during the time-period prior to the time when Bryant became her supervisor, and that he asked her to take a test, which he subsequently rescheduled for a later time. Plaintiff submits that this behavior affected her so greatly that she had to leave work because she was suffering from a nervous breakdown due to the stress placed upon her by Bryant. Rather than identifying any isolated genuine issue of material fact which would render the entry of brevis disposition inappropriate in the instant case, Plaintiff simply lists a series of contradictions4 between the testimony offered by [*5]  Bryant, by other deponents and by Plaintiff herself.
At the termination of her opposition, Plaintiff presents the Court with a laundry-list of inaccuracies which she believes are present in Defendants' motion for summary judgment. First, Plaintiff contends that the breaks which she took were not excessive as she is diabetic. Plaintiff also relies upon her previous enjoyment of unhindered breaks and an exclusively daytime schedule in an attempt to show that these concessions were unrelated to her ability to perform the duties of a foreman. Plaintiff also contends broadly that her diabetic state5 renders her disabled and that Bryant's request that Plaintiff notify him before taking a break caused Plaintiff to shake, a condition which affected her job performance. Plaintiff then states that, contrary to Defendants' argument that she was not performing the duties of her position, there were only two duties which she did not perform and that she claims willingness to perform them if necessary. Additionally, Plaintiff takes offense at Defendants' choice to highlight her failure to work night shifts, stating that "it wasn't as if Plaintiff had refuse (sic) to work a rotating schedule, she asked [*6]  of her supervisors to give her the morning schedule so she could take care of her sick husband." Docket No. 46, p. 20. Finally, Plaintiff contends that she left work because she had a nervous breakdown after Bryant rescheduled a test which he previously asked her to take. Plaintiff asserts that this nervous breakdown was induced by anticipatory stress attributable to Bryant's previous behavior when he "yelled" at her.
On February 9, 2010, the instant case was randomly re-assigned to the undersigned District Judge due to the retirement of the Honorable District Judge Acosta.
Defendants subsequently filed a reply to Plaintiff's opposition (Docket No. 49) on February 25, 2010. Therein, Defendants argue that Plaintiff failed to identify any adverse action taken against her, let alone link such an adverse action to her disability. Further, Defendants assert that Plaintiff failed to identify any reasonable accommodation request that was denied. Defendants also note that "Plaintiff alleges that Mr. Bryant created a hostile work environment in the short period — approximately one month — that he was her second-line supervisor." Docket No. 49, p. 6. Defendants assert that Plaintiff's only evidence [*7]  regarding the allegedly hostile work environment is constituted of the modification of her work schedule by one hour, that Bryant watched her and complained about her break schedule, that Bryant required Plaintiff to notify him when she went on break and that Bryant confronted her during unapproved breaks. Defendants argue that the evidence is, therefore, insufficient to show that the conditions of Plaintiff's employment were altered or that an abusive work environment was created. Further, Defendants argue that Plaintiff has utterly failed to connect any of the aforementioned acts with her diabetic condition. Finally, although Plaintiff did not allege constructive discharge in her complaint, but because Plaintiff links her failure to return to work due to the allegedly hostile work environment, Defendant notes that she could not succeed on such a claim because the conditions of her employment were not sufficiently intolerable that a reasonable person would have felt compelled to leave work without the intention of returning.6
Plaintiff filed a surreply (Docket No. 56) on March 23, 2010. Therein, Plaintiff once again asserts her clearly erroneous presumption that, because the Court [*8]  previously ruled that she had stated under the allegations of the complaint a prima facie case of discrimination, she did not have to further support her claims of discrimination. However, Plaintiff does proceed to argue that she was discriminated against in an attempt to "get rid of her" when her working hours were changed, when she was not provided with the same meal breaks which she previously enjoyed and was generally subject to constant harassment. Plaintiff's only specified example of this alleged harassment is that Bryant watched her during her breaks. Plaintiff also alleges that this behavior was linked to her disability, although she does not cite to any evidence which supports such a link. Plaintiff also argues that Defendants were aware of her diabetes as well as her need to take regularly scheduled meal and snack breaks and, nevertheless, changed her meal schedule.
Plaintiff also asserts that Bryant's attitude towards her, "yelling at her" and his habit of watching Plaintiff while she was eating, as well as his decision to change her meal schedule, caused Plaintiff to take her meal breaks in her vehicle. Further, Plaintiff baldly alleges without any citation to evidence, [*9]  that Bryant's behavior caused her to have a nervous breakdown and leave her position of employment and that she does not proceed under a constructive discharge theory.
On April 12, 2010, the Court referred the motion for summary judgment to Chief Magistrate Judge Justo Arenas for a report and recommendation (Docket No. 12). On July 14, 2010, the Magistrate Judge returned his Report and Recommendation (Docket No. 59), in which he recommended that Defendants' motion for summary judgment be granted. After noting that Defendants do not challenge compliance with the first two prongs of the test for failure to provide reasonable accommodation, the Magistrate Judge found that Plaintiff had failed to establish a genuine issue of material fact as to the third element. Specifically, the Magistrate Judge found that Defendants did not deny Plaintiff from taking breaks, but only requested that she seek approval from Bryant prior to doing so. Further, the Magistrate Judge found that Plaintiff's statement that Defendants changed her breaks was unsupported and that, even if it were, she failed to allege, let alone provide factual support for, the proposition that the ability to take breaks without [*10]  approval was a part of her requested accommodation. Ultimately, the Chief Magistrate found evidence that Defendants engaged in the process of trying to provide reasonable accommodation to Plaintiff, but that Plaintiff withdrew from the process by failing to return to work prior to the termination of that process.
Additionally, the Magistrate Judge found that, even if Plaintiff had established a prima facie case of discrimination, Defendant's motion would still be granted as Defendant provided a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for requiring medical documentation providing specific times for breaks and information necessary to appropriately change Plaintiff's schedule. He noted that it is company policy to require a medical certificate documenting an employee's disability and describing the type of accommodation required. Further, the Magistrate Judge noted that Plaintiff was aware of this policy. Finally, Magistrate Judge Arenas stated that Bryant's actions were conducted in compliance with the company policy. Thus, the Chief Magistrate concluded, even if Plaintiff had established a prima facie case of discrimination, her claim would fail on the second step of the relevant burden-shifting [*11]  analysis.
The Magistrate Judge then proceeded to analyze Plaintiff's claim of a hostile work environment. Ultimately, after reviewing Plaintiff's allegations,7 he concluded that "[a]lthogh Mr. Bryant may have created an unpleasant environment for plaintiff, that is not sufficient to establish the kind of pervasive and severe hostility resulting from protected activity as required to sustain a hostile environment claim." Docket No. 59, p. 23 (internal quotation and citation omitted). Ultimately, Magistrate Judge Arenas recommended that the motion for summary judgment be granted as to Plaintiff's hostile work environment claim because she "failed to provide facts demonstrating the severity or frequency of the alleged harassment." Docket No. 59, p. 24 (internal quotation and citation omitted). Thus, the Chief Magistrate Judge found that Plaintiff had failed to establish the existence of a genuine issue of material fact as to her claim of a hostile work environment. Ultimately, the Magistrate Judge recommended that the Court grant Defendant's motion for summary judgment as to all Plaintiff's claims. The Magistrate granted fourteen days within which to object to his Report and Recommendation [*12] 
Plaintiff filed a request for extension of time to file objections to the Report and Recommendation (Docket No. 60), which the Court denied (Docket No. 61). However, upon reconsideration, and acting out of an abundance of caution, the Court granted Plaintiff seven additional days to file objections (Docket No. 63).
Plaintiff filed the opposition to the Magistrate's Report and Recommendation (Docket No. 67) on August 16, 2010. Plaintiff first objects to the Magistrate's factual determination that correct agency procedure was followed, contending that Defendants proffered insufficient evidence as to this point. Plaintiff also broadly alleges without any citation to supporting case law that the events in the instant case did not constitute an interactive process for reaching a reasonable accommodation. Additionally, [*13]  Plaintiff asserts that the events of January 11th were, standing alone, sufficient to constitute a hostile work environment and points to her continuing emotional disability as proof. Further, Plaintiff contests the Magistrate Judge's determination that Bryant's treatment of her over a one-month period was insufficient to constitute a hostile work environment. Plaintiff also argues that the Chief Magistrate Judge failed to address her claim that Bryant threw Plaintiff's first medical certificate into the trash.8 Finally, Plaintiff links her inability to leave for meal breaks without requesting authorization to a failure to provide accommodation on Defendants' part.
Upon a thorough de novo review of the record, the Court finds that the Magistrate's findings of fact, as well as the conclusions drawn therefrom are substantively correct. Accordingly, the Court hereby adopts the Magistrate's Report and Recommendation and GRANTS Defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment. The Court elaborates below.

II. REFERRAL TO MAGISTRATE JUDGE
The Court may refer dispositive motions to a United States Magistrate Judge for a Report and Recommendation pursuant to 28 U.S.C. §636(b)(1)(B). See also FED.R.CIV.P. 72(b); Local Rule 72(a); Matthews v. Weber, 423 U.S. 261 (1976). An adversely affected party [*14]  may contest the Magistrate's Report and Recommendation by filing its objections. See Local Rule FED.R.CIV.P. 72(b); 72(d). Moreover, 28 U.S.C. §636(b)(1), in pertinent part, provides that
[A]ny party may serve and file written objections to such proposed findings and recommendations as provided by rules of court. A judge of the court shall make a de novo determination of those portions of the report or specified proposed findings or recommendations to which objection is made. A judge of the court may accept, reject, or modify, in whole or in part, the findings or recommendations made by the magistrate.
"Absent objection, . . . [a] district court ha[s] a right to assume that [the affected party] agree[s] to the magistrate's recommendation." Templeman v. Chris Craft Corp., 770 F.2d 245, 247 (1st Cir. 1985), cert denied, 474 U.S. 1021 (1985). Moreover, "failure to raise objections to the Report and Recommendation waives that party's right to review in the district court and those claims not preserved by such objections are precluded upon appeal." Davet v. Maccarone, 973 F.2d 22, 30-31 (1st Cir. 1992); see also Henley Drilling Co. V. McGee, 36 F.3d 143, 150-51 (1st Cir. 1994)(holding that objections are required when challenging findings actually set out in a magistrate's recommendation, as well as the magistrate's failure to make additional findings); Lewry v. Town of Standish, 984 F.2d 25, 27 (1st Cir. 1993)(stating that "[o]bjection to a magistrate's report preserves only those [*15]  objections that are specified"); Borden v. Sec. of H.H.S., 836 F.2d 4, 6 (1st Cir. 1987)(holding that appellant was entitled to a de novo review, "however he was not entitled to a de novo review of an argument never raised"). Because Plaintiff timely filed an opposition to the Magistrate's Report and Recommendation, the Court will review de novo the objected-to portions.

III. SUMMARY JUDGMENT
Rule 56 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure provides that summary judgment should be entered where "the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." FED.R.CIV.P. 56(c); see Celotex Corp. V. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 324-325, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). Pursuant to the clear language of the rule, the moving party bears a two-fold burden: it must show that there is "no genuine issue as to any material facts;" as well as that it is "entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Veda-Rodriguez v. Puerto Rico, 110 F.3d 174, 179 (1st Cir. 1997). A fact is "material" where it has the potential to change the outcome of the suit under governing law. See Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S.Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). A fact is "genuine" where a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party based on the evidence. Id. Thus, it is well settled that "the mere existence of a scintilla of evidence" is insufficient to [*16]  defeat a properly supported motion for summary judgment. Id.
After the moving party meets this burden, the onus shifts to the non-moving party to show that there still exists "a trial worthy issue as to some material facts." Cortes-Irizarry v. Corporacion Insular, 11 F.3d 184, 187 (1st Cir. 1997).
At the summary judgment stage, the trial court examines the record "in the light most flattering to the non-movant and indulges in all reasonable references in that party's favor. Only if the record, viewed in this manner and without regard to credibility determinations, reveals no genuine issue as to any material fact may the court enter summary judgment." Cadle Co. v. Hayes, 116 F.3d 957, 959-60 (1st Cir. 1997). "Credibility determinations, the weighing of the evidence, and the drawing of legitimate inferences from the facts are jury functions, not those of a judge." Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prod., 530 U.S. 133, 150, 120 S.Ct. 2097 (2000)(quoting Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 250-51, 106 S.Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986)). Summary judgment is inappropriate where there are issues of motive and intent as related to material facts. See Poller v. Columbia Broad. Sys., 369 U.S. 470, 473, 82 S.Ct. 486 (1962)(summary judgment is to be issued "sparingly" in litigation "where motive and intent play leading roles"); see also Pullman-Standard v. Swint, 456 U.S. 273, 288, 102 S.Ct. 1781, 72 L. Ed. 2d 66 (1982)("findings as to design, motive and intent with which men act [are] peculiarly factual issues for the trier of fact."); see also Dominguez-Cruz v. Suttle Caribe, Inc., 202 F.3d 424, 433 (1st Cir. 2000)(finding that "determinations of motive and intent . . . are questions better suited for [*17]  the jury "). Conversely, summary judgment is appropriate where the nonmoving party rests solely upon "conclusory allegations, improbable inferences and unsupported speculation." Ayala-Gerena v. Bristol Myers-Squibb Co., 85 F.3d 86, 95 (1st Cir. 1996).
Moreover, "[i]f the adverse party does not [file an opposition], summary judgment, if appropriate, shall be entered against the adverse party." FED.R.CIV.P. 56(e). Failure to timely oppose a motion for summary judgment, in and of itself, does not justify entry of summary judgment against a party; therefore, a District Court is "obliged to consider the motion on the merits, in light of the record as constituted, in order to determine whether judgment would be legally appropriate." Kelly v. U.S., 924 F.2d 355, 358 (1st Cir. 1991); see also Lopez v. Corp. Azucarera de Puerto Rico, 938 F.2d 1510, 1517 (1st Cir. 1991)(holding that, before granting an unopposed summary judgment motion, the court must inquire whether the moving party has met its burden to demonstrate undisputed facts entitling it to summary judgment as a matter of law). Thus, a party that fails to oppose a motion for summary judgment does so at its own peril. See Corrada Betances v. Sea-Land Svcs., Inc., 248 F.3d 40, 43 (1st Cir. 2001); see also Herbert v. Wicklund, 744 F.2d 218, 233 (1st Cir. 1994). However, even though there is no opposition to a summary judgment, the Court must entertain the motion on the merits and may not grant the motion as a sanction for failure to file an opposition. See De la Vega v. San Juan Star, 377 F.3d 111 (1st Cir. 2004).

IV. FACTUAL BACKGROUND [*18] 
When analyzing a motion for summary judgment, the Court must view the facts in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, in this case favoring Plaintiff. See Cadle Co., 116 F.3d at 959-60. The Court will not consider hearsay statements nor allegations presented by parties that do not properly provide specific reference to the record. See L.CIV.R. 56(e)("The [C]ourt may disregard any statement of fact not supported by a specific citation to record material properly considered on summary judgment. The [C]ourt shall have no independent duty to search or consider any part of the record not specifically referenced."); see also A.C. Orssleff EFTF, 246 F.3d at 33 (finding that, where a party fails to buttress factual issues with proper record citations, judgment against that party may be appropriate); see also Garside, 895 F.2d at 50 ("Hearsay evidence, inadmissible at trial, cannot be considered on a motion for summary judgment.").
The Court thus recites the relevant facts in the manner described above. Plaintiff began her employment with AAFES in 1992. In 2001, Plaintiff became a food account foreman at the Popeyes administered by AAFES at Fort Buchannan. During a period of between seven and eleven years prior to November of 2006, Plaintiff's second-line supervisor, Mr. Joseph Ferrera [*19]  ("Ferrera") allowed Plaintiff to work the day shift so that she could care for her sick husband at night. While working the day shift, Plaintiff was scheduled to work from 7:00 AM until 4:30 PM from Monday through Friday. During her employment with AAFES, Plaintiff received several certificates of recognition for guest services and for years of service, and received consistent evaluations of "outstanding" in performance reports. Further, Plaintiff enjoyed a good working relationship with her co-workers and supervisors. However, Plaintiff never performed two of the duties required of her as a food activity foreman as she neither worked night and weekend shifts nor prepared, maintained and processed accounting and management reports.
Plaintiff is a diabetic who, due to her condition, must take breaks to eat as specific times throughout the day in order to control her blood sugar level. Prior to December of 2006, Plaintiff was allowed to take frequent breaks without seeking particular supervisor approval throughout her shift.
In November of 2006, Bryant replaced Ferrera as the Food Court Manager at Fort Buchanan, and, thus, became Plaintiff's second-line supervisor. Bryant observed that [*20]  Plaintiff was not performing all the duties attributed to employees holding her position as she did not work a rotating schedule or prepare, maintain and process accounting and management reports. Between December of 2006 and January of 2007, Bryant became aware of Plaintiff's diabetes and need to take meal and snack breaks throughout her shifts, but never received any indication that Plaintiff was unable to perform the duties which pertain to her position of employment.
Although Bryant discussed changing Plaintiff to a rotating work schedule, as required by her position, with Plaintiff's first-line supervisor, Ms. Annelise Cusani ("Cusani"), this change never came to fruition. Rather, Bryant changed Plaintiff's schedule from 7:00 AM to 3:30 PM to 8:00 AM to 4:30 PM from Monday through Friday, which resulted in Plaintiff leaving work one hour later every afternoon.9
In accordance with agency procedure,10 once Bryant received notice of Plaintiff's disability and her particular need for breaks to control her blood sugar, he requested a medical certificate documenting her medical condition, as well as specifying her need for breaks. On January 8, 2007, Plaintiff submitted a medical certificate. [*21]  However, this certificate did not specify the times when Plaintiff needed to take breaks.11 Accordingly, Bryant requested that Plaintiff provide a more detailed medical certificate, including a time schedule of the breaks to be provided to Plaintiff. Mr. Robert Baker ("Baker"), the General Manager at Fort Buchanan, who was Plaintiff's third-line supervisor, agreed that the second medical certificate was necessary. Ms. Maria Delgado ("Delgado"), who was the Human Resources Manager at Fort Buchanan, discussed the request for a medical certificate with Plaintiff and notified Plaintiff that the request was in line with accepted procedure. Further, Delgado herself called Plaintiff's doctor to request the second medical certificate and explained to the doctor why a listing of specific break times was necessary. In the meantime, Bryant required that Plaintiff seek approval from him before taking snack and meal breaks, rather than allowing her to continue with the previous break schedule which Ferrera had authorized.
On January 11, 2007, Bryant informed Plaintiff that he needed her to take a test. At that time, Plaintiff had not yet taken her break, so Bryant allowed her to take the break prior [*22]  to completing the test. However, once Plaintiff returned from her break and indicated that she was prepared to take the test, Bryant told her to return to work and come back later. Once Plaintiff returned to work, she became very anxious. She was unable to continue working and called her husband to pick her up. She left work that day to seek medical treatment for her anxiety and stress and never returned. On February 5, 2007, her doctor provided the second medical note, which outlined the breaks which Plaintiff needed to take in order to control her blood sugar.
On January 15, 2008, Plaintiff signed an agreement whose effective date was June 2, 2007, agreeing that she could not be on leave without pay for a period in excess of one year. On October 31, 2008, Plaintiff was terminated from employment because she exceeded the one year period for leave without pay status.

V. REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION CLAIM
As does the Americans with Disabilities Act,12 the Rehabilitation Act "impose[s] an affirmative duty on employers to offer a reasonable accommodation to a disabled employee." Enica v. Principi, 544 F.3d 328, 338 (1st Cir.2008)(quoting Calero-Cerezo v. U.S. Dept. of Justice, 355 F.3d 6, 19-20 (1st Cir.2004)). Where, as here, no direct evidence is available of discrimination based upon disability, the Court utilizes [*23]  the McDonnell Douglas13 burden-shifting framework. See Rios-Jimenez v. Principi, 520 F.3d 31, 40 (1st Cir.2008).
Under the first step of this burden-shifting framework, a plaintiff must establish a prima facie case of failure to accommodate. See Rios-Jimenez. 520 F.3d at 41. Specifically, a plaintiff
must establish that she (1) suffers from a 'disability' within the meaning of the statute; (2) is a qualified individual inasmuch as she is able to perform the essential functions of her job, with or without reasonable accommodation, and (3) that, despite its knowledge of her disability, [her employer] did not offer a reasonable accommodation.
Enica, 544 F.3d at 338 (citing Calero-Cerezo, 355 F.3d at 20). The third prong of the prima facie case, in turn, is split in two parts. Id. (citing Reed v. LePage Bakeries, Inc., 244 F.3d 254 (1st Cir.2001)). First, the plaintiff "must show not only that the proposed accommodation would enable her to perform the essential functions of her job, but also that . . . it is feasible for the employer under the circumstances." Id. (internal quotation omitted). Then the plaintiff "must prove that the request was sufficiently direct and specific so as to put the employer on notice of the need for accommodation." Id.
Under certain circumstances, "a request for reasonable accommodation may trigger a responsibility on the part of the employer [*24]  to enter into an interactive process with the employee to determine an appropriate accommodation." Calero-Cerezo, 355 F.3d at 23. This process has been described as "informal [and] interactive" and is performed with an eye to determining the precise contours of the necessary accommodation. See id. at 23-24. A fundamental characteristic of this process is the necessity of "a great deal of communication between the employee and the employer." Id. at 23. Both the employer and the employee have a duty to participate in the process in order to ensure that a reasonable accommodation is reached. See id. Thus, the process "requires open participation by both parties, and an employer will not be held liable if it makes reasonable efforts both to communicate with the employee and provide accommodations based on the information it possessed." Enica, 544 F.3d at 339 (internal quotation omitted). Where a breakdown in the process occurs, the Court should look for a lack of good faith in the form of delay or obstruction of the process in order to determine who is culpable for the process' failure. Id.
Once a plaintiff thus establishes a prima facie case of failure to accommodate, the burden then shifts to the defendant to articulate and provide credible evidence to support [*25]  a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the failure to accommodate. Rios-Jimenez, 520 F.3d at 41. Once the defendant meets its burden, the burden shifts back to the plaintiff to "establish that the proffered reason is pretext intended to conceal discriminatory intent." Id. In this manner, although the burden of production shifts to defendant, the burden of persuasion as to unlawful action rests at all times with the plaintiff. See id.
In the instant case, it remains undisputed that Plaintiff has fulfilled the first two prongs of the prima facie case. Thus, the first dispute which arises pertains to the third prong of the prima facie case. Magistrate Judge Arenas correctly noted in his Report and Recommendation that, in the instant case, the parties needed to, and indeed began to, undertake an interactive process to determine exactly what accommodations Plaintiff needed in order to complete the duties of her position. See Docket No. 59, p. 17. After being notified of Plaintiff's need for regular meal and snack breaks due to her diabetic condition,14 Defendants "engaged in an interactive process to determine the precise accommodation needed." See id. Specifically, Defendants requested that Plaintiff provide a [*26]  medical certificate outlining the specific times when she needed to take breaks so that Defendants could institute a regular break schedule for Plaintiff in accordance with her medical needs. Further, even while Defendants were waiting for Plaintiff's doctor to produce such a document, they continued to allow Plaintiff to take meal and snack breaks as necessary, with the sole proviso that she inform her supervisor prior to beginning such breaks. At no time was Plaintiff forbidden from taking medically necessary breaks.
Presumably, this interactive process, which involved communication with both Plaintiff and her physician, would have terminated after Defendants received the second medical certificate and instituted the requisite breaks. No evidence on the record suggests otherwise. However, the second medical certificate, that which enumerated the specific break times which Plaintiff needed to take due to her diabetic condition, was not completed until February 5, 2007. Plaintiff never returned to work after January 11, 2007. Thus, the Chief Magistrate correctly found that Plaintiff withdrew from the workplace before the interactive process concluded and that "[t]he interactive process [*27]  broke down because she never returned to work." See Docket No. 59, p. 18. Accordingly, Plaintiff cannot fulfill the third prong of the prima facie case for failure to accommodate because she withdrew from the interactive process before it concluded and because she was never actually denied medically necessary breaks while the interactive process remained active. See Beck v. Univ. of Wis. Bd. of Regents, 75 F.3d 1130, 1137 (7th Cir.1996)(finding that an employee who is responsible for the failure of the interactive process may not later inflict liability on her employer for failure to accommodate). Thus, Plaintiff has established no genuine issue of material fact which would render the entry of summary judgment as to her reasonable accommodation claim inappropriate.
Further, even if Plaintiff had successfully established the prima facie case of failure to accommodate, Defendant indeed articulated and supported a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the questioned employment action. As noted by the Magistrate and admitted by Plaintiff in her opposing statement of material facts, "it is company policy to have a medical certification documenting an employee's disability and describing the type of accommodation he or she requires." See Docket No. 59, p. [*28]  19. Accordingly, the requirement that Plaintiff provide a medical certificate outlining her disability and the reasonable accommodations necessary to allow her to perform her duties was not discriminatory, but, rather, complied with company policy. Consequently, Defendants have articulated and supported a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the disputed employment action and the burden shifted to Plaintiff to prove that this proffered reason was actually pretextual. See Rios-Jimenez, 520 F.3d at 41. As Plaintiff has not established a genuine issue of material fact as to Defendant's proffered reason, she fails to present the Court with a trial-worthy claim of failure to accommodate. Thus, Plaintiff has doubly failed to convince the Court that entry of brevis disposition as to her reasonable accommodation claim is inappropriate. As to the instant claim, all roads indeed lead to Rome. Accordingly, the Court hereby ADOPTS AND INCORPORATES BY REFERENCE the Chief Magistrate Judge's Report and Recommendation as to this issue in toto and GRANTS Defendant's motion for summary judgment (Docket No. 37) as to this claim.

VI. HOSTILE WORK ENVIRONMENT
In order for a plaintiff to "succeed on her hostile work environment [*29]  claim, she must demonstrate that the complained-of conduct was so severe or pervasive that it altered the terms of her employment." Carmon-Rivera v. Puerto Rico, 464 F.3d 14, 19 (1st Cir.2006)(internal quotation omitted); see also Rios-Jimenez, 520 F.3d at 43 (quoting Quiles-Quiles v. Henderson, 439 F.3d 1, 7 (1st Cir.2006) to find that a workplace must be "permeated with discriminatory intimidation, ridicule and insult that was sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of employment and create an abusive working environment"). When evaluating the sufficiency of such a claim, the Court pays particular attention to "the frequency of the discriminatory conduct; its severity; whether it was physically threatening or humiliating, or a mere offensive utterance; and whether it unreasonably interfered with an employee's work performance." Pomales v. Celulares Telefonica, Inc., 447 F.3d 79, 83 (1st Cir.2006). The complained-of behavior must be both subjectively and objectively offensive, so that a reasonable person would find it abusive or hostile. Carmon-Rivera, 464 F.3d at 19.
In the instant case, Plaintiff has complained of a variety of incidents and behavioral patterns that are claimed to create a hostile work environment which, ultimately, caused Plaintiff to leave her position of employment. First among these complaints is a claim that her schedule15 was unreasonably changed. However, Plaintiff herself has admitted [*30]  that this change of one hour was not "a big deal" to her. See Docket No. 45-2, p. 49-50. Thus, this change cannot form the basis for Plaintiff's hostile work environment claim as it was not subjectively offensive. See Carmon-Rivera, 464 F.3d at 19.
Plaintiff also contends that Bryant complained about her break schedule, required her to notify him when she needed to take breaks and watched her during breaks. The crux of Plaintiff's argument as to this behavior, however, was the allegation that Bryant "yelled" at her, which the Court previously determined was unsupported by the evidence of record. Thus, Plaintiff can only claim that her second-line supervisor required her to authorize breaks with him, confronted her when he caught her taking unauthorized breaks and watched her during authorized breaks. Nothing in the complained-of behavior arises to the level of objectively offensive or hostile as determined by a reasonable person. See e.g. Rios-Jimenez, 520 F.3d at 44 ("[T]he federal employment laws do not establish a general civility code for the workplace.") Thus, the Magistrate correctly found that "[a]lthough Mr. Bryant may have created an unpleasant environment for plaintiff, that is not sufficient to establish the kind of pervasive and [*31]  severe hostility resulting from protected activity as required to sustain a hostile environment claim." Docket No. 59, p. 23 (quoting Colon-Fontanez v. Municipality of San Juan, 671 F.Supp. 2d 300, 337 (D.P.R.2009))(internal quotation omitted).
Further, Plaintiff utterly neglected to connect the complained-of behavior to her disability. Thus, her claim that Bryant's behavior relating to her breaks during the one month period when he was her supervisor created a hostile work environment must fail. See Rios-Jimenez, 520 F.3d at 44 (noting that plaintiff "was required to show that the alleged hostile conduct was directed at her because of a characteristic protected by a federal anti-discrimination statute" in order to render her hostile work environment claim actionable).
Consequently, Plaintiff's only remaining claim of a hostile work environment stems from the January 11, 2007 incident which she claims so negatively affected her that she was forced to leave work, never to return. However, even if the Court were to agree with Plaintiff's assertion that Bryant's delay of the test which he requested that she take constituted objectively offensive conduct, Plaintiff's claim would still fail, as such an "isolated incident" is patently insufficient to establish a hostile work environment claim. See [*32]  e.g Mojica v. El Conquistador Resort and Golden Door Spa, 714 F. Supp. 2d 241, 2010 WL 1992575 at *15 (D.P.R. 2010)(citing Faragher v. City of Boca Raton, 524 U.S. 775, 788, 118 S.Ct. 2275, 141 L. Ed. 2d 662 (1998), in an ADEA case as to a hostile work environment claim); see also Cardalda-Sanchez v. Universidad Carlos Albizu, Civ. 08-1819, 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 13140, 2010 WL 597429 at *7 (D.P.R. Feb. 16, 2010)(citing the same in an ADA case). Accordingly, Plaintiff has failed to demonstrate that any trial-worthy issue of material fact exists as to her hostile work environment claim. Thus, the Court ADOPTS AND INCORPORATES BY REFERENCE the Chief Magistrate Judge's Report and Recommendation as to this issue in toto and GRANTS Defendant's motion for summary judgment (Docket No. 37) as to this claim.

VII. CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated above, the Court hereby ADOPTS AND INCORPORATES BY REFERENCE the Chief Magistrate Judge's Report and Recommendation in toto and GRANTS DEFENDANTS' MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT (Docket No. 37). Accordingly all Plaintiffs' claims are hereby DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE. Judgment shall be entered accordingly.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
In San Juan, Puerto Rico, this 2nd day of September, 2010.
/s/ DANIEL R. DOMINGUEZ
DANIEL R. DOMINGUEZ
U.S. District Judge

JUDGMENT
Pursuant to the Court's Opinion and Order (Docket No. 68) of this same date, the Court hereby DISMISSES WITH PREJUDICE the instant action.
THIS CASE IS NOW CLOSED FOR ALL ADMINISTRATIVE AND STATISTICAL PURPOSES.
IT IS SO ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED [*33] .
In San Juan, Puerto Rico, this 2nd day of September, 2010.
/s/ DANIEL R. DOMINGUEZ
DANIEL R. DOMINGUEZ
U.S. District Judge


End of Document

