Perez v. Lake Cty. Rowing Ass'n
United States District Court for the Middle District of Florida, Ocala Division
January 5, 2021, Decided; January 5, 2021, Filed
Case No: 5:19-cv-661-Oc-30PRL

Reporter
2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 23945 *; 2021 WL 405505
EVELYN PEREZ, as next friend of minor F.V., Plaintiff, v. LAKE COUNTY ROWING ASSOCIATION and THE CITY OF CLERMONT, FLORIDA, Defendants.
Subsequent History: Affirmed by Perez v. Lake Ct.y Rowing Ass'n, 2021 U.S. App. LEXIS 29886 (11th Cir. Fla., Oct. 5, 2021)
Prior History: Perez v. Lake Cty. Rowing Ass'n, 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 65332, 2020 WL 1853655 (M.D. Fla., Mar. 5, 2020)
Counsel:  [*1] For Evelyn Perez, as next friend of minor F.V., Plaintiff: Sharon Caserta, Morgan & Morgan PA, Jacksonville, FL.
For Lake County Rowing Association, Defendant, Cross Defendant: Brian Jeffrey Aull, Zachary Jackson Brewer, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Cole Scott & Kissane PA, Jacksonville, FL.
For The City of Clermont Florida, Defendant, Cross Claimant: Douglas T. Noah, Patricia Maria Rego Chapman, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Dean Ringers Morgan & Lawton PA, Orlando, FL.
Judges: JAMES S. MOODY, JR., UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: JAMES S. MOODY, JR.
Opinion



ORDER
THIS CAUSE comes before the Court upon Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment against the City of Clermont (Dkt. 56), Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment against Lake County Rowing Association (Dkt. 57), Plaintiff's Daubert Motion to Exclude Opinions of Defendant's Expert Witness Dr. Jill Kelderman (Dkt. 58), Defendant Lake County Rowing Association's Motion for Final Summary Judgment (Dkt. 59), Defendant Lake County Rowing Association's Motion for Summary Judgment on the City of Clermont's Crossclaim (Dkt. 60), Defendant City of Clermont's Motion for Summary Judgment (Dkt. 61), and Plaintiff's Motion to Strike the Declaration of Pamela Brosonski (Dkt. 72). The Court, [*2]  having reviewed the motions, responses in opposition, and record evidence, concludes the City of Clermont and the Lake County Rowing Association are entitled to summary judgment in their favor with regard to Plaintiff's claims for violations of the American with Disabilities Act and the Rehabilitation Act. The Court further concludes that Plaintiff's Daubert motion should be denied.

RELEVANT FACTS
Evelyn Perez, as next friend and grandmother of minor F.V., filed suit against Lake County Rowing Association ("LCRA"), a Florida non-profit corporation, and the City of Clermont ("the City") asserting claims for failure to accommodate under the American with Disabilities Act ("ADA") (Counts I and II). Plaintiff also asserts a claim for violation of Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act against the City (Count III). The City filed a crossclaim against LCRA for indemnification and breach of contract.
LCRA was formed on December 11, 2012, as part of an economic development project developed by the Leadership Lake County Class of 2010. The stated purpose of LCRA is "to educate the public about non-motorized boats and rowing sports; to increase community involvement in the same while at the same time effectuating [*3]  the economic development of Lake County through recruiting and coordinating athletic events; and, to undertake such activities as will further the general purposes described herein." (Dkt. 61-16). As part of its purpose, LCRA is tasked with hosting at least one regatta per year in which multiple rowing crews would be invited to participate in a 5k race. LCRA also offers summer camp and after-school programs. LCRA utilizes the City's boathouse for carrying out its events and programs.
In 2014, the City built the boathouse, boat dock system, and related infrastructure. The City entered into a Capital Projects Funding Program with Lake County and applied to Lake County for Tourist Development Taxes to assist with financing the construction of the rowing infrastructure. (Dkt. 61-17). The boathouse was constructed to assist with economic development of Lake County, permitting LCRA, Central Florida Sports Commission, and Lake County Sports Development to host a variety of rowing events. The City owns the boathouse and provides general building and property maintenance for it.
On or about December 9, 2014, the City and LCRA entered into a Management Agreement for a term of five (5) years, which [*4]  outlines their obligations as to the operations of the boathouse and the related rowing infrastructure. LCRA agreed to pay the City $500 per month and be responsible for "managing, directing, operating and coordinating the daily activities" at the boathouse. (Dkt. 61-17). LCRA has "exclusive right to possession and management of all interior areas" of the boathouse, subject only to "City's right to use the outside surrounding areas and its right to enter for maintenance, repair, and use of any docks or mooring facilities located on the lake adjacent to or near" the boathouse. (Dkt. 61-17). The Management Agreement also requires LCRA to ensure that the City complied with its obligations under its agreement with Lake County for the Capital Projects Funding Program. Under the agreement, the City maintains responsibility for the unpaved grounds around the boathouse, landscaping, maintenance of restrooms, utilities, and structural issues arising out of or related to the boathouse (HVAC, plumbing, structural integrity, roof, etc.).
LCRA hosts a "Learn to Row" summer camp and an after-school program at the boathouse. The summer camp is designed to teach students how to row. The after-school [*5]  program is a competitive program that involves traveling throughout the state and southeast to compete against other teams. Justin Knutz and Matt Outlaw, LCRA employees, coach the programs.
F.V., a minor diagnosed with autism, participated in LCRA's summer camp beginning mid-July 2018 through the beginning of August 2018. Jorge Vargas, F.V.'s uncle, enrolled F.V. in the summer camp. According to Mr. Vargas, at the time of enrollment, he informed two females who were taking completed applications that F.V. was autistic. Coach Knutz, however, did not know that F.V. was autistic, but noticed that something was different with F.V. when he started working with him. According to Coach Knutz, during camp F.V. made violent comments about "guns and shooting and blood." (Dkt. 56-15, 29:5-6). Coach Knutz requested that F.V. stop making those comments, but F.V. was non-responsive. F.V. was non-responsive to the coaches the entire time he was in the program. The coaches decided to pair F.V. with an older partner. The coaches believed the older and more mature athletes would not react to F.V. and would provide rowing support for him, as well.
On the last day of the summer camp, Ms. Perez learned that [*6]  LCRA offered an after-school program. She expressed an interest to Coach Knutz in enrolling F.V. in the program. Coach Knutz told Ms. Perez that F.V. could not attend the after-school program. (Dkt. 56-15, 34:25-35:1-2). Coach Knutz explained that the after-school program did not have the resources to supervise F.V. with the other students. Specifically, Coach Knutz stated that they try to keep a specific coach to rower ratio. Coach Outlaw also agreed that F.V. was not capable of rowing in team boats in a competitive program. Because F.V. was not following directions and non-responsive in the summer program, F.V. would need to have his own coach when in the boat and direct supervision when the team was doing its exercise on land. According to Ms. Perez, Coach Knutz stated, "I don't think it is a good idea, [F.V.] is not competition material, competition ready to row, and it is just not a good idea." (Dkt. 61-14, 73:2-4).
Ms. Perez decided not to submit an application for F.V. to participate in LCRA's after-school program. F.V. was, however, invited to participate in LCRA's summer camp again.
On August 13, 2018, Ms. Perez submitted an ADA complaint with the City. Stoney Brunson, the City's [*7]  Public Works Director, responded to Ms. Perez's complaint and informed her that her complaint relates to a program offered by LCRA, which is an entity separate from the City. The City informed Melissa Coleman, the President of LCRA at the time, of Ms. Perez's complaint. Coleman, Paul McPherson (founding member of LCRA), and Coach Knutz subsequently met with Ms. Perez to discuss her complaint.
Ms. Coleman agreed to include F.V. in the after-school program and provide F.V. individual lessons. Ms. Coleman stated that LCRA would "still have him practice, be part of the team, be able to get the uniform, [and] be able to take part in off-the-water activities together." (Dkt. 61-8, 36:22-25). But, F.V. would have to have one-to-one instruction for the safety of the rowers.
According to Ms. Perez, she was not seeking an accommodation for F.V. so that he could participate in the after-school program. (Dkt. 61-14, 83:20-84:2; 91-92). She denied seeking any accommodation from LCRA and any modifications in the training of LCRA's personnel. (Dkt. 61-14, 92:3-12). Ms. Perez only sought to have LCRA integrate F.V. into the after-school program. Specifically, she stated that she "just wanted him to [*8]  row after school" and that "[h]e doesn't need any accommodations to row" because he can row. (Dkt. 61-14, 84:1-2, 18). Ms. Perez stated that she would like F.V. "to be with his peers and in a team setting and be accepted and not segregated and go off on a boat by himself and row with a man that [he doesn't] even know." (Dkt. 61-14, 104:20-23). She stated that she did not request any accommodations for F.V. because, in her opinion, he did not need any accommodations to participate in the after-school program.
Ms. Perez also denied seeking a modification to any of the City's policies, practices or procedures. Ms. Perez states that she is seeking from the City the same thing she is seeking from LCRA. She is only requesting that F.V. "to be accepted like any other child." (Dkt. 61-14, 106:14-15).
A resolution was not reached at the meeting and Ms. Perez did not get back to LCRA about its proposal. LCRA tried to coordinate a follow-up meeting with F.V.'s family, but there was no response.

DISCUSSION

I. Daubert Motion

A. Legal Standard
Expert opinions must meet the admissibility guidelines announced by the Supreme Court in Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. 579, 113 S. Ct. 2786, 125 L. Ed. 2d 469 (1993), and Federal Rule of Evidence 702. Under Rule 702:
If scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge [*9]  will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue, a witness qualified as an expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education, may testify thereto in the form of an opinion or otherwise, if (1) the testimony is based upon sufficient facts or data, (2) the testimony is the product of reliable principles and methods, and (3) the witness has applied the principles and methods reliably to the facts of the case.
Fed. R. Evid. 702.
Before permitting expert opinion testimony, the court must make certain that the expert employs "in the courtroom the same level of intellectual rigor that characterizes the practice of the expert in the field." Kumho Tire Co. v. Carmichael, 526 U.S. 137, 152, 119 S. Ct. 1167, 143 L. Ed. 2d 238 (1999). The court must act as gatekeeper to prevent speculative and unreliable "expert" testimony from reaching the jury. See Rink v. Cheminova, Inc., 400 F.3d 1286, 1291 (11th Cir. 2005) (noting that the "task of evaluating the reliability of expert testimony is uniquely entrusted to the district court under Daubert"). The gatekeeping role is "significant" because an "expert's opinion 'can be both powerful and quite misleading.'" United States v. Frazier, 387 F.3d 1244, 1260 (11th Cir. 2004) (quoting Daubert, 509 U.S. at 595).
As gatekeeper, the court makes three inquiries: (1) first, whether the expert is qualified to testify competently regarding the matters that he [*10]  intends to address; (2) second, whether the methodology by which the expert reaches his conclusions is sufficiently reliable as determined by the sort of inquiry mandated in Daubert; and (3) third, whether the testimony will assist the trier of fact, through the application of scientific, technical, or specialized expertise, to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue. City of Tuscaloosa v. Harcros Chems., Inc., 158 F.3d 548, 562-63 (11th Cir. 1998); see also Cooper v. Marten Transp., Ltd., 539 Fed. Appx. 963, 965-67 (11th Cir. 2013). The party offering the expert opinion testimony bears the burden of establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, the expert's qualification, reliability, and helpfulness. See Kilpatrick v. Breg, Inc., 613 F.3d 1329, 1335 (11th Cir. 2010) (citing McCorvey v. Baxter Healthcare Corp., 298 F.3d 1253, 1256 (11th Cir. 2002)); see also Sumner v. Biomet, Inc., 434 Fed. Appx. 834, 841 (11th Cir. 2011); Frazier, 387 F.3d at 1260.
Importantly, although rulings on admissibility under Daubert inherently require the court to conduct an exacting analysis of the proffered expert's methodology, it is not the court's role to make ultimate conclusions as to the persuasiveness of the proffered evidence. Quiet Tech. DC-8, Inc. v. Hurel-Dubois UK Ltd., 326 F.3d 1333, 1341 (11th Cir. 2003). Indeed, the gatekeeper role is not intended to supplant the adversary system or the role of the jury. See id. "Vigorous cross-examination, presentation of contrary evidence, and careful instruction on the burden of proof are the traditional and appropriate means of attacking shaky but admissible evidence." Daubert, 509 U.S. at 596; see also U.S. v. Ala. Power Co., 730 F.3d 1278, 1282-85 (11th Cir. 2013) (explaining [*11]  that the Daubert inquiry "is not intended to supplant" cross-examination and presentation of contrary evidence); Costa v. Wyeth, Inc., No. 8:04-cv-2599-T-27MAP, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 43408, 2012 WL 1069189, at *2 (M.D. Fla. Mar. 29, 2012). According to Rule 702's Advisory Committee Notes on the 2000 Amendments, since Daubert was decided, "the rejection of expert testimony is the exception rather than the rule." Fed. R. Evid. 702.

B. Discussion
Ms. Perez filed a Daubert motion to exclude the opinions of LCRA's expert, Dr. Jill Kelderman. Dr. Kelderman was retained to provide an overview of the Autism Spectrum Disorder and to opine on what type of accommodations, if any, F.V. requires in order to participate in LCRA's after-school program. (Dkt. 58-1). Dr. Kelderman is a pediatric neuropsychologist and board certified in clinical neuropsychology. (Dkt. 58-1). Dr. Kelderman opined that F.V. has significant skill deficits that impact his ability to independently function successfully in a competitive after-school program and that he requires individual coaching and instruction which incorporates Applied Behavior Analysis ("ABA")1 to potentially develop adequate rowing skills. (Dkt. 58-1).
Ms. Perez claims that Dr. Kelderman never met with F.V. or interviewed any of his family members to determine [*12]  his capacity outside of an academic setting. Ms. Perez further claims that Dr. Kelderman testimony is speculative because she relied upon F.V.'s school records. Ms. Perez does not challenge Dr. Kelderman's qualification to assess individuals with autism. Rather, Ms. Perez appears to claim that Dr. Kelderman does not provide any opinion on integrating F.V. into the rowing program. The Court concludes that this challenge is without merit. Dr. Kelderman opined that F.V. requires individual coaching and instruction with an individualized plan and that an evidence-based strategy, such as ABA, would be helpful to developing an individual plan for him. (Dkt. 58-1; Dkt. 58-3, 50:2-24).
The Court further concludes that the remaining challenges raised by Ms. Perez go to the weight of Dr. Kelderman's opinion, rather than its admissibility. Quiet Tech., 326 F. 3d at 1345 ("in most cases, objections to the inadequacies of a study are more appropriately considered an objection going to the weight of the evidence rather than its admissibility"); Derochers v. Amica Mut. Ins. Co., No. 6:15-cv-2151-Orl-DCI, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 234781, 2018 WL 1988861, at *4 (M.D. Fla. Feb. 6, 2018) (concluding that Plaintiff's challenges to perceived deficiencies in the experts' methodologies — the failure to inspect the accident [*13]  site, the failure to take photographs, the failure to personally inspect the vehicles, the failure to verify the accuracy of the repair estimates, the failure to review depositions, and the failure to consider all of the plaintiff's medical records — go to the weight of the experts' testimony and do not warrant exclusion of their testimony under Daubert); Rahmings v. Essary, No. 10-cv-716, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 197535, 2012 WL 12910264, at *4 (M.D. Fla. Feb. 23, 2012) (finding that the expert's failure to conduct experiments and reliance on photographs from the accident scene to form his conclusions will affect the weight the jury gives to his testimony, but does not render his testimony inadmissible). The Court concludes that Plaintiff's Daubert motion should be denied.

II. Motions for Summary Judgment

A. Legal Standard
Motions for summary judgment should be granted only when the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, show there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c); Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). The existence of some factual disputes between the litigants will not defeat an otherwise properly supported summary judgment motion; the requirement is [*14]  that there be no genuine issue of material fact. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby,Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986) (emphasis in original). The substantive law applicable to the claimed causes of action will identify which facts are material. Id. Throughout this analysis, the court must examine the evidence in the light most favorable to the non-movant and draw all justifiable inferences in its favor. Id. at 255.
Once a party properly makes a summary judgment motion by demonstrating the absence of a genuine issue of material fact, whether or not accompanied by affidavits, the nonmoving party must go beyond the pleadings through the use of affidavits, depositions, answers to interrogatories and admissions on file, and designate specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial. Celotex, 477 U.S. at 324. The evidence must be significantly probative to support the claims. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248-49 (1986).
This Court may not decide a genuine factual dispute at the summary judgment stage. Fernandez v. Bankers Nat'l Life Ins. Co., 906 F.2d 559, 564 (11th Cir. 1990). [I]f factual issues are present, the Court must deny the motion and proceed to trial. Warrior Tombigbee Transp. Co. v. M/V Nan Fung, 695 F.2d 1294, 1296 (11th Cir. 1983). A dispute about a material fact is genuine and summary judgment is inappropriate if the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248; Hoffman v. Allied Corp., 912 F.2d 1379 (11th Cir. 1990). However, there must exist a conflict in substantial [*15]  evidence to pose a jury question. Verbraeken v. Westinghouse Elec. Corp., 881 F.2d 1041, 1045 (11th Cir. 1989).
"The ADA covers three main types of discrimination, each of which is addressed in one of the statute's three main subchapters: Title I prohibits discrimination in private employment; Title II prohibits discrimination by public entities (state or local governments); and Title III prohibits discrimination by a 'place of public accommodation,' which is a private entity that offers commercial services to the public." A.L. v. Walt Disney Parks & Resorts US, Inc., 900 F.3d 1270, 1289 (11th Cir. 2018). The claims in this case involve Title II (claim against the City) and Title III (claim against LCRA). The Court will separately address the claims against the City and LCRA below.

B. Violations of Title II of the ADA and § 504 against the City (Counts I and III)
Plaintiff and the City filed cross-motions for summary judgment with respect to the claims asserted against the City for violations of Title II under the ADA and § 504. Under Title II, "no qualified individual with a disability shall, by reason of such disability, be excluded from participation in or be denied the benefits of the services, programs, or activities of a public entity, or be subjected to discrimination by any such entity." 42 U.S.C. § 12132. Section 504 is similar to Title II under the [*16]  ADA, but applies to "any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance."2 29 U.S.C. § 794(a). The same standards govern both statutes given their similarities and cases construing Title II and § 504 are relied upon interchangeably. Silberman v. Miami Dade Transit, 927 F.3d 1123, 1133 (11th Cir. 2019). Also, where, as here, Plaintiff alleges discrimination based on a public entity's refusal to provide reasonable accommodation, Plaintiff must also establish that Plaintiff requested an accommodation and that the public entity failed to provide a reasonable accommodation.
Title II and § 504 require a plaintiff to establish the following: "(1) that he is a qualified individual with a disability; (2) that he was either excluded from participation in or denied the benefits of a public entity's services, programs, or activities, or was otherwise discriminated against by the pubic entity; and (3) that the exclusion, denial of benefit, or discrimination was by reason of the plaintiff's disability." Silberman, 927 F.3d at 1134. Proof of a Title II or § 504 violation entitles a plaintiff only to injunctive relief. Silva v. Baptist Health S. Fla., Inc., 856 F.3d 824, 831 (11th Cir. 2017). To obtain damages, as Plaintiff seeks here, Plaintiff must prove that the entity sued engaged in intentional discrimination, which requires a showing of "deliberate indifference." Liese v. Indian River Cty. Hosp. Dist., 701 F.3d 334, 348 (11th Cir. 2012). "Deliberate indifference" [*17]  requires proof that "the defendant knew that harm to a federally protected right was substantially likely and . . . failed to act on that likelihood." Id. at 344.

1. Title II of the ADA
Individuals and private entities are not subject to liability under Title II of the ADA. Edison v. Douberly, 604 F.3d 1307, 1308 (11th Cir. 2010). Title II of the ADA only governs the actions of a "public entity." The City does not dispute that it is a "public entity."
The City challenges the second and third elements of Plaintiff's claim. Title II applies to "all services, programs, or activities provided or made available by public entities." The ADA does not define "services, programs, or activities." The Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals has construed the statute broadly and does not limit its application only to "programs, services, or activities" of a public entity, but also includes "all discrimination by a public entity, regardless of the context." Bledsoe v. Palm Beach Cnty. Soil & Water Conservation Dist., 133 F.3d 816, 822 (11th Cir. 1998).
Ms. Perez contends that F.V. was excluded from participating in the after-school rowing program because LCRA recommended a separate program with a special needs coach to be with F.V. in a segregated class. Plaintiff raises two arguments in support of the claim that the City is liable for discrimination: (1) the after-school [*18]  rowing program is a service the City provides, and (2) the City is the owner and landlord of the boathouse. The Court concludes that Plaintiff's arguments in support of the claim that the City is liable for discrimination under the ADA are without merit and that the City is entitled to summary judgment in its favor.
With regard to Plaintiff's claim that the City is liable for discrimination because the after-school program is a program or service of the City, Plaintiff relies upon the testimony of Darren Gray, the City Manager, noting that one of Lake County's priorities at the time was to increase tourism in the county. Plaintiff also directs the Court to Mr. Gray's testimony explaining that the City pays for electric, sewage, landscaping, security, and maintenance of the boathouse. Plaintiff, however, does not demonstrate how the City's responsibility for those expenses or the county's interest in increasing tourism supports the conclusion that the after-school program at issue is a program offered by the City. The Court notes that, while the City maintains responsibility for the maintenance of the exterior of the boathouse, structural issues, and utilities under the Management Agreement, [*19]  LCRA is responsible for "managing, directing, operating, and coordinating the daily activities" at the boathouse and pays the City to use it. (Dkt. 61-17).
Alison Strange, one of the founders and former president of LCRA, testified that LCRA, not the City, offers the rowing programs and that LCRA only utilizes the City's boathouse to facilitate its programs. (Dkt. 61-15, 29-30). Ms. Strange further testified that the intent of the Management Agreement between the City and LCRA is to memorialize the agreement "with respect to the use of the boathouse and the tourism development council fund application and requirements." (Dkt. 61-15, 32:21-33:1). The record does not establish that the City contractually delegated its responsibility for the operation of services, activities, and programs which the City would have otherwise been responsible for itself. Rather, the record only establishes that the City contractually agreed to provide the venue for LCRA to host its rowing events.
With regard to Plaintiff's argument that the City is liable merely because of its status as the owner of the boathouse, the Court concludes that the decision in Haynes v. Wilder Corp. of Delaware, 721 F.Supp.2d 1218, 1228 (M.D. Fla. 2010) is instructive here. In Haynes, the plaintiff pursued [*20]  ADA violations against the owner of the facility because she was allegedly denied equal participation in the RV resort activities taking place on their premises. The court noted that "the ADA does not require a landlord to ensure that a tenant (or group of tenants) includes every neighbor at an event." Haynes, 721 F.Supp.2d at 1228. "A landlord incurs liability only if the landlord implements a discriminatory policy, practice, or procedure." Id. Because the defendant did not manage, organize, supervise, implement, or enforce the alleged "segregation" of the handicapped residents, the court concluded that the landlord was entitled to summary judgment. Id.
Here, the City's only connection to the after-school program at issue is the City's ownership of the boathouse. Plaintiff claims that the City has an independent liability as the owner or lessor of the boathouse and relies upon Association for Disabled Americans v. City of Orlando, 153 F.Supp.2d 1310 (M.D. Fla. 2001), among others, wherein courts noted that a public entity is subject to Title II liability because it is considered to be a landlord. The Court concludes that the cases Plaintiff relies upon are distinguishable from the facts here. As the City notes, the lack of accessibility to facilities was the discrimination complained of in the cases [*21]  that Plaintiff relies upon. Specifically, the issue presented in Association for Disability Americans involved disabled patrons' accessibility to a theater and sports arena owned by the City. But, as the City points out, here Plaintiff does not claim that F.V. was excluded or denied access to the boathouse. Plaintiff only takes issue F.V.'s ability to participate as a competitor in LCRA's after-school program. The annual regatta, summer camps, and after-school programs are programs provided by LCRA, not the City.
Mr. Gray (the City Manager) testified that the purpose of the boathouse was for the City to rent it. Mr. Gray stated that any individuals who participate in any of the activities of LCRA do not sign a waiver with the City. He further explained that the City essentially functions as a landlord and does not control what LCRA does inside the boathouse.
Even if the after-school program is not a program offered by the City, Plaintiff contends that the statute prohibits all discrimination by a public entity, regardless of the context. But, as the City notes, Plaintiff has not provided any evidence to suggest that F.V. was subject to any discrimination by the City. Plaintiff has not [*22]  identified any discriminatory policy, practice, or procedure of the City.

2. The Rehabilitation Act
"The Rehabilitation Act makes it unlawful for any "program or activity" receiving federal financial assistance to discriminate on the basis of disability." McMullen v. Wakulla County Bd. of Cnty. Comm., 650 Fed.Appx. 703, 704 (11th Cir. 2016). This includes "all of the operations of a . . . department, agency, special purpose district, or other instrumentality of a State or of a local government." Id. at 706. But, it does not include funds received by other departments unconnected to the claim at issue. Id.
Plaintiff claims that the City's Parks and Recreation Department, Public Works Department, and Finance Department are involved with the operations of the boathouse. But, Plaintiff directs the Court to testimony illustrating that those departments are only involved with the repairs and maintenance of the exterior of the boathouse. Plaintiff has not provided any evidence that those departments, or any other department of the City, are actually involved with LCRA's after-school rowing programs at the boathouse. Moreover, Plaintiff has not established that those departments received federal funding at the time F.V. was seeking to participate in the after-school program. Because the [*23]  record is void of evidence of any of City department's involvement with LCRA's after-school program and any department receiving federal funding, the Court concludes that the City is entitled to summary judgment in its favor on this claim.

C. Violations of Title III of the ADA against LCRA (Count II)
Plaintiff and LCRA filed cross-motions for summary judgment with regard to the claim asserted against LCRA for violations of Title III of the ADA (Count II). Plaintiff claims that LCRA "intentionally failed to make reasonable modifications in its policies, practices, and/or procedures, upon repeated requests, as necessary to afford Plaintiff with its goods[,] services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations." (Dkt. 1, ¶ 41). "The plaintiff bears the burden of proving not only that he is disabled but also that his requested modification is both 'reasonable' and 'necessary.'" A.L. v. Walt Disney Parks & Resorts US, Inc., 900 F.3d 1270, 1292 (11th Cir. 2018). "No ADA violation occurs, however, when the private entity demonstrates that the requested modifications would 'fundamentally alter the nature of' its service and facilities." Id.
The Court notes that Plaintiff neither identified nor requested an accommodation. Ms. Perez repeatedly [*24]  acknowledged that she is not seeking an accommodation for F.V. Although Plaintiff admittedly never requested an accommodation from LCRA, Plaintiff claims that LCRA's suggestion to segregate, rather than integrate, F.V. in the after-school program, violates the ADA. Specifically, LCRA's coaches recommended that F.V. would benefit from a one-on-one instruction while in a single-person boat. LCRA's recommendation would still allow F.V. to be a part of the team, including wearing the uniform and participating in all team activities.
The record is void of evidence that LCRA denied F.V. reasonable participation in the after-school program because of his disability.3 Accordingly, the Court concludes that LCRA is entitled to summary judgment in its favor.

D. The City's Crossclaim against LCRA
The City's crossclaim asserts claims for indemnification and breach of contract against LCRA. LCRA filed a motion for summary judgment against the City on the City's crossclaim. Because the Court concludes that the City and LCRA are entitled to summary judgment in their favor, LCRA's motion for summary judgment against the City is denied as moot.
It is therefore ORDERED AND ADJUDGED that:
1. Plaintiff's Motion [*25]  for Summary Judgment against the City of Clermont (Dkt. 56) is denied.
2. Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment against Lake County Rowing Association (Dkt. 57) is denied.
3. Plaintiff's Daubert Motion to Exclude Opinions of Defendant's Expert Witness Dr. Jill Kelderman (Dkt. 58) is denied.
4. Defendant Lake County Rowing Association's Motion for Summary Judgment (Dkt. 59) is granted.
5. Defendant Lake County Rowing Association's Motion for Summary Judgment on the City of Clermont's Crossclaim (Dkt. 60) is denied as moot.
6. Defendant City of Clermont's Motion for Summary Judgment (Dkt. 61) is granted.
7. Plaintiff's Motion for Leave to File a Reply to the City's Response to Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment (Dkt. 71) is denied as moot.
8. Plaintiff's Motion to Strike the Declaration of Pamela Brosonski (Dkt. 72) is denied as moot.
9. The Clerk of Court is directed to enter Final Judgment in favor of Defendant City of Clermont and Defendant Lake County Rowing Association and against Plaintiff.
10. The Clerk of Court is further directed to close this case and terminate any pending motions as moot.
DONE and ORDERED in Tampa, Florida, this 5th day of January, 2021.
/s/ James S. Moody, Jr. [*26] 
JAMES S. MOODY, JR.
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

