Peritz v. Nassau Cnty. Bd. of Coop. Educ. Servs.
United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York
November 15, 2018, Decided; November 15, 2018, Filed
Case No. 16-cv-05478 (SFJ)(AYS)

Reporter
2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 249775 *; 2018 WL 11489221
DIANE PERITZ, Plaintiff, -v- NASSAU COUNTY BOARD OF COOPERATIVE EDUCATIONAL SERVICES, BONNIE HELLER, and JANET WEISEL, Defendants.
Counsel:  [*1] For Diane Peritz, Plaintiff: Jacob Narva, LEAD ATTORNEY, Sandelands EYet, LLP, Bedminster, NJ USA; Mindy L. Kallus, LEAD ATTORNEY, Sandelands Eyet LLP, Bedminster, NJ USA.
For Nassau County Board of Cooperative Educational Services, Defendant: Caroline Beth Lineen, Karen Chana Rudnicki, Lewis R. Silverman, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Silverman & Associates, White Plains, NY USA; Lewis R. Silverman, LEAD ATTORNEY, Silverman & Associates.
Judges: Sandra J. Feuerstein, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Sandra J. Feuerstein
Opinion



Memorandum and Order
FEUERSTEIN, S., Senior District Judge
I. Introduction
Plaintiff Diane Peritz ("Plaintiff" or "Peritz") commenced this action against Defendants Nassau County Board of Cooperative Educational Services ("BOCES"), Bonnie Heller ("Heller"), and Janet Weisel ("Weisel"; together with BOCES and Heller, the "Defendants") claiming failure to accommodate her alleged disability in violation of the Americans with Disability Act ("ADA"), retaliation in violation of the ADA and the New York State Human Rights Law ("NYSHRL"), and unlawful discharge in violation of the NYSHRL. (See Complaint (ECF No. 1.) Presently before the Court is the Defendants' motion seeking summary judgment in their favor on all of Plaintiff's claims (hereafter, [*2]  "Summary Judgment Motion") (see ECF No. 26), which Plaintiff opposes (hereafter, "Opposition" or "Opp'n") (see ECF No. 32). For the reasons that follow, Defendants' Summary Judgment Motion is granted in part and denied in part.
II. Background

A. Factual Background1
Plaintiff was an Occupational Therapist ("OT") (see Defs.' 56.1 Statement ¶2) who, on March 5, 2015, was hired by BOCES, an educational organization that provides educational programs, services, and therapists to children with disabilities, on a probationary basis as a part-time OT to work with BOCES's pupils. (See Ex. O (ECF No. 28-15), attached to Lineen Decl2; see also Defs.' 56.1 Statement ¶¶3, 10-11.) On April 14, 2015, Plaintiff became a full-time BOCES OT, albeit subject to a new twenty-six (26) week probationary period. (See Ex. O; see also Defs.' 56.1 Statement ¶¶14-15.) At all relevant times, Plaintiff's direct supervisor was Weisel (Defs.'s 56.1 Statement ¶7), who observed Plaintiff's OT sessions on four different occasions so as to make a recommendation whether BOCES should hire Plaintiff on a permanent basis. (Id. at ¶17.)
In May 2015, Weisel conducted her first observation of Plaintiff with a pupil. ( [*3] See id. at ¶18.) While Weisel testified that she felt the observation did not go well, she also stated she did not give much weight to initial observations. (See Ex. E (ECF No. 28-5) (Weisel Depo. Tr.) at 29:20-23, 38:3-8.) There was no written report from this initial observation. (See id. at 29:1-4, 32:5-10.) Weisel rated Plaintiff "Satisfactory" in all areas of review3 in her year-end "Classified Employee Evaluation Report", with a "SUMMARY" rating of "Satisfactory". (Ex. I (ECF No. 28-9).)
Plaintiff continued to work as an OT during BOCES' 2015 summer session at the Center for Community Adjustment ("CCA"). (See Defs.' 56.1 Statement ¶23.) Weisel did not perform observations of therapists during summer sessions. (See id. at ¶24.)
On August 11, 2015, Plaintiff awoke in great pain preventing her from working that day or for the balance of the summer session. (See id. at ¶¶42-43.) Although she volunteered to return to CCA to complete her paperwork for the session, which would require her to use a wheelchair, due to safety concerns, Weisel helped Plaintiff finish her required paperwork by telephone. (See id. at ¶44; Ex. D (ECF No. 28-4) (Pl.'s Depo. Tr.) at 99:12-102:2.) When [*4]  Plaintiff articulated concerns about not being able to return to work in time for the beginning of the regular school session (hereafter, the "2015 School Year"), i.e., the first week of September 2015, Weisel suggested that Plaintiff get a letter from her doctor stating Plaintiff's need for an accommodation. (See id. at 106-108.)
On August 31, 2018, Plaintiff's doctor issued a letter recommending Plaintiff be granted a medical accommodation as she was prohibited from lifting more than ten (10) pounds (hereafter, the "First Accommodation Letter") (see Ex. 9 (ECF No. 31-9) at 1), which Plaintiff submitted on September 4, 2014 (see Ex. G (ECF No. 28-7) (Stoddard Decl.) ¶4). In response, a September 11, 2015 meeting was scheduled to discuss the First Accommodation Letter and the accommodations BOCES would make to fully meet Plaintiff's needs. (See id. at ¶ 5, and Ex. 2, attached to Ex. G.) Among others, Plaintiff, Weisel, and the principals of CCA and Rosemary Kennedy School ("RKS"), the two schools where Plaintiff was assigned for the 2015 School Year, attended that meeting. (See Ex. G. ¶5.) Afterward, a confirming email was sent to Plaintiff stating, inter alia:
According to the medical [*5]  note you submitted, you are "prohibited from lifting more than 10 pounds until further notice." You explained that you do not anticipate having any difficulties during your assignment at CCA, but you foresee a potential problem if students with behavioral issues at RKS drop to the floor.
As we discussed, you will not be lifting more than 10 pounds; in the event that a student falls to the floor, you will request assistance. Also, John Picarello [("Picarello") i.e., the RKS principal] indicated that a teacher aide usually accompanies OTs when they are walking with students. As this is standard practice, it will continue. If, however, you need additional support during any part of your work day, please notify Mr. Picarello immediately and he will work with my office [i.e., Human Resources] to make the necessary adjustments.
(Ex. 3 at 2-3, attached to Ex. G (Email from S. Stoddard, Esq., Asst. Dir. H.R., BOCES, to Pl. (Sept. 11, 2015).)
On September 28, 2015, Dr. Tracey Nekulak ("Nekulak"), the Executive Director of BOCES Human Resources Department (hereafter, "HR"), sent an interoffice memorandum to Karen Ellis, the Executive Director of BOCES Special Education Department, regarding Plaintiff's [*6]  completion of her probationary period, identifying November 6, 2015 as Plaintiff's probation completion date (hereafter, the "Nekulak Memo"). (See Ex. 1, attached to Ex. H (ECF No. 28-8) (Nekulak Decl.).) Attached to the Nekulak Memo was an "Employee Evaluation" form which was to be completed and returned to HR no later than October 8, 2015, which date was emphasized, with the following information:
Completion of probation recommendations must be submitted to the Board of Education prior to the completion of probation date, and the Nassau County Civil Service Commission must be made aware of our intentions two weeks prior to the completion date of the probationary period.
Failure to submit forms in time will result in our inability to exercise the right of termination inherent in the probationary period concept.
(Id. (emphasis added).)
On September 30, 2018, Weisel conducted her second observation of Plaintiff with a pupil at RKS (hereafter, the "September Observation"). (See Exs. J (ECF No. 28-10)(Weisel's hand-written notes) & K (ECF No. 28-11)(Weisel's typed notes).) Among other things, Weisel noted: that Plaintiff "did not know where she was going to work with the student"; that the [*7]  pupil "was sound asleep" when Plaintiff arrived for the session; that the pupil required toileting before the session could begin; that the pupil "attempted on several occasions to go back to sleep"; that she "[t]old [Plaintiff] to know work area PRIOR to entering room — will talk to Celina4 regarding a permanent spot"; that Plaintiff did not know the pupil's Behavior Intervention Plan ("BIP"); that she instructed Plaintiff to speak with the pupil's teacher about whether the pupil was on medications which caused sleepiness; that the Plaintiff did not utilized the one-to-one aide and, when asked why that was, the Plaintiff stated she was embarrassed to ask for help; that Plaintiff agreed the session was unsuccessful and "that she had no control over the student"; that Plaintiff "complained that the RKS staff was unfriendly"; and that she "would do another observation both in CCA and in RKS". (Ex. K at 1.)
The next day, October 1, 2015, Weisel conducted her third observation of Plaintiff with a pupil at CCA. (See Exs. J & K.) Among other things, Weisel noted: that Plaintiff "provided too much support"; that Plaintiff did not address pupil's very poor posture; that Plaintiff provided clear [*8]  critique on a math problem, but no specific feedback on the pupil's writing; that Plaintiff would occasionally start a sentence but not finish it; that she and Plaintiff discussed her observations "in detail including need for consistent and specific feedback"; and that she and Plaintiff "further discussed [the September O]bservation and possible impact on tenure"; that Plaintiff "again stated that people are unfriendly to her" at RKS; that she told the Plaintiff about others telling her (Weisel) of Plaintiff stating "she is a seasoned therapist and doesn't need any assistance" and Plaintiff responding "that she is a seasoned therapist and knows how to be an OT, but doesn't believe that she stated that to others"; and advising the Plaintiff to spend more time with her mentor at RKS. (Ex. K at 2.)
On October 2, 2015, Plaintiff received a letter from Heller directing her to attend an October 5, 2015 disciplinary meeting (hereafter, the "Disciplinary Meeting") (see Ex. M (ECF No. 28-13) ¶28, Ex. N (ECF No. 28-14) at (unnumbered) 4), which was attended by Heller, Weisel, Supervisor Barbara Longo, Plaintiff, and Plaintiff's union representative, Robert Dreaper. (See Ex. S (ECF No. 28-19).) [*9]  In an October 5, 2015 letter summarizing the meeting (hereafter, the "October Recap Letter"), Heller wrote that the meeting was held to discuss Plaintiff's professional conduct and that "[w]e discussed concerns that were raised by a teacher and a teacher aide regarding your interactions with students at the [RKS]," in particular, not following BIPs, "not holding students' hands while transitioning through the hallway, giving the impression of being fearful by not engaging with the students, not establishing behavioral control during a treatment session and not appropriately utilizing a one-to-one aide." (Id.) Heller noted Plaintiff stating: that she was "being cautious about holding the student's hand" because she did not want the student to pull on her arm; "that the aide in that particular room does not like" Plaintiff; and that the aide had made inappropriate comments to Plaintiff. (Id.). Heller also reiterated Plaintiff's referencing of "the medical accommodation put into place at a meeting on September 11, 2015," i.e., the ten-pound lifting restriction, but reminding her that if she did not receive adequate assistance, she was to communicate that to Picarello. (Id. at (unnumbered) [*10]  2 ("[Y]ou are reminded to contact an administrator immediately if you feel as though you need additional support to effectively transition students to and from therapy session [sic] or provide service.").)
Heller's October Recap Letter also highlighted that at the meeting, there was discussion of Plaintiff's claim to have read forty (40) BIPs:
During our meeting, you stated that you read "20" BIPs and then your caseload was changed necessitating reading "20" additional BIPs, so that you did not know what each BIP stated. It is my understanding that only 3 of the students on your current [RKS] caseload and 5 of the students on your CCA caseload have BIPs. This discrepancy brings into question the information that you provided regarding the BIPs.
(Id. at (unnumbered) 1.) Ultimately, Plaintiff was "directed to read and follow the BIPs" provided for the three students on her then-current RKS caseload. (Id. at (unnumbered) 2.) Relatedly, the October Recap Letter memorialized the September Observation. (See id. at (unnumbered) 1-2.) Heller wrote, inter alia: that Plaintiff acknowledged that the September Observation "was problematic, but noted that the student had been sleeping prior to the [*11]  session"; that Weisel observed Plaintiff "did not provide therapeutic input or instruction"; that Plaintiff was unaware what the particular student's BIP entailed, but that she had twenty years of experience, describing her "work history as including working with students similar to those attending RKS." (Id. at (unnumbered) 1-2.) In the end, Plaintiff was instructed that if she had "questions regarding daily procedures or protocols" she was to "access" her assigned RKS or CCA mentor. (See id. at (unnumbered) 2.) She was further apprised that, per her request, she would "be observed providing occupational therapy services to an RKS student" on October 6, 2015. (Id.)
The October 6, 2015 observation occurred as scheduled with Weisel observing Plaintiff providing therapy to a pupil at RKS. (See Ex. J at (unnumbered) 3.) She made hand-written notes of her observations and her post-observation discussion with Plaintiff (see id. at (unnumbered) 3-5), which indicated, inter alia: she was unclear as to the purpose of a peg-board exercise Plaintiff performed with the pupil; that while the pupil was readily distracted, Plaintiff redirected him; that Plaintiff had the pupil use "theraputty"5 to [*12]  engage in hand-squeezing and hand-over-hand activities; that Plaintiff engaged the pupil in various color matching exercises, but guided the pupil to the matches; and, that in a writing exercise, Plaintiff guided the pupil's pencil. Weisel also made some notes after a "Discussion" heading, including, inter alia: "your impression—"; "resists touch—"; and "writing—on teacher request—". She testified that her notes were "sketchy" having been prepared on October 6, 2015 to be helpful to her then, not years later. Thus, for example, she was not sure what she was referring to when she wrote "your impression" or "resist touch". (See Ex. E (Weisel Depo. Tr.) at 55:24-56:16.)
On October 8, 2015, Plaintiff submitted a second doctor's note, dated October 7, 2015, advising, inter alia: that she continued to receive medical care for a lumbar spine and hip condition; that she must continue to refrain from lifting more than ten (10) pounds; and that she should not pull/push or be pulled/pushed (hereafter, the "Second Accommodation Letter"). (See Ex. 9 (ECF No. 31-9) at 2; see also Ex. G ¶11.) The doctor further stated that "[i]f there is a situation in which [Plaintiff] feels medically unsafe, [*13]  she should be exempted from such activities." (Second Accommodation Letter.) In response, a telephone conference was scheduled and held on October 9, 2015 to discuss Plaintiff's condition and whether any adjustments to her accommodation were necessary; among others, Plaintiff, Weisel, and Picarello participated in the conference. (See Ex. G ¶¶12-13, further citing Ex. 3 (Email from S. Stoddard, Esq., Asst. Dir. H.R., BOCES, to Pl. (Oct. 9, 2015)), attached thereto.) Upon inquiry, Plaintiff stated she did not need full-time support, but might need additional support if faced with hard pushes or pulls. (See Ex. G ¶13.) It was decided that Plaintiff would make that determination on a case-by-case basis, requesting assistance as needed. It was also clarified, apparently in response to Plaintiff's earlier email inquiry, that Plaintiff would share certain information about her accommodation with some colleagues and inform Picarello about the shared information so he could direct staff to meet Plaintiff's accommodation without compromising her privacy. (Cf. Ex. G ¶ 13, with Ex. 3 at 3 (ECF 28-7 at 11), attached to Ex. G (Email from Pl. to Stoddard (Oct. 9, 2015 at 10:53 AM)) ("Quick question, [*14]  once the accommodations are in place what is the [p]rotocol. [sic] How do people find out what they are? I ask because that appears to be part of what was the problem. John [Picarello] knew but no one else and I didn't tell any one [sic]. Please tell me how I should proceed after the conference.").) Thereafter, HR sent Plaintiff a follow-up email reiterating what was discussed and agreed. (See Ex. G. ¶14; Ex. 3 at 1 (ECF 28-7 at 10), attached to Ex. G.)
Also on October 9, 2015, Karen Ellis, Executive Director of Special Education, wrote Dr. Robert Hanna, Deputy Superintendent, stating, inter alia:
Ms. Peritz had difficulty this school year in providing occupational therapy (OT) during a session as was observed by her supervisor, Ms. Janet Weisel, on September 30, 2015. She failed to remain engaged with the student she was providing related services to and was unable to demonstrate instructional control and direction of her lesson with a student during this observation. She failed to provide therapeutic input, direction and instruction and allowed a student to take control of the session where the student pushed away materials and preceded to take off his shoes and socks. Ms. Peritz did [*15]  not intervene or seek the assistance of the student's 1:1 aide who was present in the session. Additionally, she did not address the student's IEP goals. Ms. Peritz demonstrated minimal therapeutic techniques, which were below the standard we expect from occupational therapists working at Nassau BOCES.
(Ex. 2 (ECF No. 28-8 at 8), attached to Ex. H (Memo from K. Ellis to Dr. R. Hanna (Oct. 9, 2015))(emphasis added).) (Hereafter, the "Ellis Memo".) Ms. Ellis' memorandum also addressed Plaintiff's claim of having initially read twenty (20) BIPs and then having to read an additional twenty (20) BIPs, which stood in contrast to the total of eight (8) students on her caseload with BIPs and "called to question her knowledge, accuracy and veracity of what she reported" at the Disciplinary Meeting. (Id.) Hence, Plaintiff was not recommended for continued employment with BOCES because she had not successfully completed her probationary period. (See Ex. H ¶8; see also Exs. 1 & 2, attached to Ex. H.)
On October 11, 2015, in response to Heller's October Recap Letter regarding the Disciplinary Meeting "to discuss what was called [Plaintiff's] professional conduct," Plaintiff sent Heller a letter, [*16]  writing, inter alia:
The initial discussion was about concerns which were raised by the teacher and the teacher aide of [Room] 109A regarding my "reluctance to hold a students' [sic] hand while transitioning through the hallway which gave the impression of being fearful. I believe it was clarified that in fact my reluctance had to do with the fact that the student was pulling on my hand and that I had a medical accommodation in place and that it was not broad enough to encompass the fact that I could not be pulled or pushed. This was now clarified in a new medical accommodation. In fact the aide that had complained had given me a difficult time at the start because I was not able to pick up students who had dropped to the floor. It was discussed that I should have gone to administration about this aide's comments but I was first trying to solve the problem on my own with this room, the only classroom in which I have had problems.
(Ex 11 (ECF No. 31-11) at (unnumbered) 1.) (Hereafter, the "Explanatory Letter".) Plaintiff further noted that she was assigned to seven (7) other classrooms "with similar students with varying diagnoses and behavior issues but no other staff members" complained [*17]  about how Plaintiff performed her job or interacted with students. (Id.) Moreover, Plaintiff wrote, inter alia: that she would explain her accommodation to the Room 109A teacher and aide; that "Picarello will [then] go to discuss and clarify that it is not that I do not wish to do a part of the job, but rather that I currently have a medical condition which is preventing it;" that with the push/pull accommodation in place, she "will address it with [Room] 109A as well as with anyone else, should the need arise"; that she was pleased Heller was "now knowledgeable about my medical issues;" and that she was unaware that Heller had not been informed previously about Plaintiff's accommodation, which might have helped Heller understand Plaintiff's limited physical engagement with students. (Id. at (unnumbered) 1-2; see also id. at (unnumbered) 2 ("An assumption was made about my actions which was totally incorrect and based on my medical issue.").)
Moreover, by way of clarifying what Heller characterized as a "'discrepancy regarding the BIPs'", Plaintiff wrote: You mention that I said that I had read 20 BIPs but that I only have
5 students on my caseload. In fact I have 9 students on my caseload [*18]  at RKS. I had previously read as many files before my caseload was changed. While you are right there are only 3 students on my current caseload who have BIPS, I had read all psychological reports as well as behavioral plans. At CCA, I have 11 students. Again, only a few have BIPS but many have a behavioral plan and all have a psychological report. I generally read before I meet the students as required but then go back once I know the students better and read again so I can be sure to know the plans. As stated at CCA, we meet with the psychologists to discuss the BIPS and are given copies so that we are all consistent.
(Id.) Additionally, Plaintiff noted that the September Observation became one of the topics of the Disciplinary Meeting when the May 2015 observation "was not discussed and in fact was a good one." (Id.) Moreover, she highlighted: that the September Observation "was with a student who was in a deep sleep before the session;" that "it took several people and 10 minutes to rouse him"; that despite others' advise not to take that student for a session because they believed Plaintiff "'would get nothing from him'" and that she "'should tread lightly' so he would not react [*19]  badly", Plaintiff proceeded with the session because she was to be observed. (Id. at (unnumbered) 1-2.) Further, in response to BOCES's belief that Plaintiff did not follow this student's BIP, Plaintiff stated, "[i]n fact, he does not have a BIP except for one that refers to toileting procedures." (Id. at (unnumbered) 2 (emphasis added).) Plaintiff continued elucidating:
Last year I was at CCA and Jerusalem Avenue Schools. . . . In both schools, I did what I do, which is to initially read the BIPs and then reread them once I have worked with the students a couple of times. In both of those schools[,] meetings occur with the psychologists to go over the BIPs and in fact to sign off on it that one understands and will follow it. This has not happened at RKS but it is early in the year.
(Id.) Plaintiff also explained that at the time of the September Observation, she had not been assigned a regular work place at RKS, which assignment occurred afterwards, but that having a regular work place is "crucial for the consistency the students require." (Id.) Finally, while Plaintiff had an assigned mentor at CCA since the prior school year, she had only been assigned one at RKS "[i]n the last two [*20]  week" who, she assumed, would "help with the uniqueness of this program as each program has its own policies." (Id.) Plaintiff was hopeful the explanation she provided would lead to "a positive experience from now on with the staff and students at RKS." (Id.)
On October 15, 2015, the Plaintiff was directed to attend an October 20, 2015 meeting at BOCES's HR office with her union representative. (See Ex. H ¶9.) At the October 20th meeting, Plaintiff: was presented with a Classified Employee Evaluation Report for the 2015 School Year, which she refused to sign (see id. at ¶11; see also Ex. L); was told she was being administratively reassigned to her home effective October 21, 2015 (see id. at ¶10); and was advised that BOCES was seeking to terminate her employment (see id.). In an October 23, 2015 letter, HR informed Plaintiff that, at its October 22, 2018 meeting, BOCES voted to terminate her employment effective November 5, 2015. (See Ex. 5 (ECF No. 28-8) at 14, attached to Ex. H.) Plaintiff timely grieved her termination, which was denied. (See Ex. H ¶14.)

B. Procedural Background
On February 1, 2016, Plaintiff served her requisite Notice of Claim. (See Ex. M (ECF No. 28-13).) On April [*21]  21, 2016, she filed a charge of discrimination with the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC"), which issued Plaintiff a Right to Sue letter on July 27, 2016. (See Ex. N (ECF No. 28-14).)
Thereafter, on October 1, 2016, Plaintiff commenced this action, claiming: BOCES violated the ADA by failing to provide reasonable accommodations for Plaintiff's disability and by failing to engage interactively in the reasonable accommodation process (i.e., First Cause of Action (against BOCES), Complaint ¶¶44-51); BOCES violated the ADA when Plaintiff was subjected to retaliatory actions by BOCES soon after requesting an accommodation, e.g., receiving negative evaluations after a prior positive one, and termination (i.e., Second Cause of Action (against BOCES), Complaint ¶¶52-57); that despite suffering an actual physical impairment, Plaintiff was qualified as an OT and could perform the essential functions of that position with or without accommodations, but BOCES unlawfully terminated her because of her impairment and disability in violation of NYSHRL (i.e., Third Cause of Action (against Defendants), Complaint ¶¶58-61); that the Defendants retaliated against Plaintiff after [*22]  she requested an accommodation for her disability, thereby violating NYSHRL (i.e., Fourth Cause of Action (against Defendants), Complaint ¶¶62-65); and that, in violation of NYSHRL § 296(6), Heller and Weisel aided and abetted BOCES's discrimination of Plaintiff by refusing to accommodate Plaintiff's disability and issuing negative evaluations of her, leading to her termination (i.e., Fifth Cause of Action (against Defendants), Complaint ¶¶ 66-69). The Defendants answered Plaintiff's Complaint on November 1, 2016, denying Plaintiff's allegations and raising multiple affirmative defenses. (See Answer (ECF No. 14).) On October 27, 2017, they moved for summary judgment on all of Plaintiff's claims. (See ECF No. 26.)

C. The Parties' Positions
1. Defendants' Position
The Defendants contend that Plaintiff has failed to raise any triable issue of fact on her discrimination and retaliation claims because the evidence demonstrates that, once BOCES became aware of her disability and her request for accommodation, it fully engaged in the requisite interactive process with Plaintiff and, thereafter, implemented Plaintiff's requested accommodations, and that Plaintiff was terminated for legitimate, non-discriminatory [*23]  reasons.
2. Plaintiff's Position
In opposition, Plaintiff maintains that "the reasons proffered by Defendants were pre-textual because they relied upon reasons inextricably intertwined with Plaintiff's disability—inability to hold hands, refusing to touch students and standoffishness." (Opp'n at 11.) Moreover, she asserts that the Defendants scheduled observations in a manner which precluded the opportunity for improvement, "rush[ing] to schedule three observations in a row." (Id.). She contends "there are triable issues of fact relating to Defendants' discriminatory intent and the timing and sequence of events leading to termination" (id. at 12) precluding summary judgment.
III. Discussion

A. Standards of Review
1. Motion for Summary Judgment Standard
Pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56, a "court shall grant summary judgment if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a); see Tolbert v. Smith, 790 F.3d 427, 434 (2d Cir. 2015); Kwong v. Bloomberg, 723 F.3d 160, 164-65 (2d Cir. 2013); Viola v. Philips Med. SYS. of N. Am., 42 F.3d 712, 716 (2d Cir. 1994) (holding summary judgment appropriate only where admissible evidence in the form of affidavits, deposition transcripts, or other documentation demonstrates the absence of a genuine issue of material fact, and one party's entitlement to judgment [*24]  as a matter of law). No genuinely triable factual issue exists when the moving party demonstrates, on the basis of the pleadings and submitted evidence, and after drawing all inferences and resolving all ambiguities in favor of the nonmovant, that no rational jury could find in the nonmovant's favor. See Chertkova v. Conn. Gen'l Life Ins., Co., 92 F.3d 81, 86 (2d Cir. 1996). Although the evidence is viewed in favor of the non-moving party, see Willey v. Kirkpatrick, 801 F.3d 51, 62 (2d Cir. 2015), "the mere existence of a scintilla of evidence in support of the [nonmovant's] position will be insufficient; there must be evidence on which the [fact-finder] could reasonably find for the [non-movanat]." Jeffreys v. City of N.Y., 426 F.3d 549, 554 (2d Cir. 2005)(internal alterations and quotation marks omitted). It is insufficient to "rely on conclusory allegations or unsubstantiated speculation" to defeat a summary judgment motion. Id. (Internal quotation marks omitted). Instead, when the moving party has documented particular facts in the record, "the opposing party 'must set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial,'" Williams v. Smith, 781 F.2d 319, 323 (2d Cir. 1986)(quoting Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e)), which requires going beyond the allegations of the pleadings. See Weinstock v. Columbia Univ., 224 F.3d 33, 41 (2d Cir. 2000) (citation omitted). Furthermore, as a general rule, "district courts may not weigh evidence or assess the credibility of witnesses at the summary [*25]  judgment stage," as the "[a]ssessments of credibility and choices between conflicting versions of the events are matters for the jury, not for the court on summary judgment." Jeffreys v. City of N.Y., 426 F.3d 549, 551, 553-54 (2d Cir. 2005); see also Rule v. Brine, Inc., 85 F.3d 1002, 1011 (2d Cir. 1996) ("Assessments of credibility and choices between conflicting versions of the events are matters for the jury, not for the court on summary judgment.").
2. ADA Claims
Claims brought pursuant to the ADA
are analyzed under the three-step burden-shifting framework originally set forth in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed.2d 668 (1973). See, e.g., McBride v. BIC Consumer Products Mfg. Co., 583 F.3d 92, 96 (2d Cir. 2009) (ADA); see also Regional Economic Community Action Program, Inc. v. City of Middletown, 294 F.3d 35, 48-49 (2d Cir. 2002) (applying McDonnell Douglas framework to claims of intentional discrimination under the ADA . . .). Accordingly, a plaintiff alleging discrimination under [the ADA] must establish a prima facie case; if he does so, then ''the employer must offer through the introduction of admissible evidence a legitimate non-discriminatory reason for the [adverse action]; and the plaintiff must then produce evidence and carry the burden of persuasion that the proffered reason is a pretext.'' Sista v. CDC Ixis North America, Inc., 445 F.3d 161, 169 (2d Cir. 2006). ''[T]he ultimate burden rests with the plaintiff to offer evidence sufficient to support a reasonable inference that prohibited [disability] discrimination occurred.'' Woodman v. WWOR-TV, Inc., 411 F.3d 69, 76 (2d Cir. 2005) (quotation marks and citation omitted).
Castro v. City of N.Y., 24 F. Supp.3d 250, 260 (E.D.N.Y. 2014); see also [*26]  Graves v. Finch Pruyn & Co., Inc., 353 F. App'x 558, 560 (2d Cir. 2009).
(a.) Failure to Accommodate
To establish a prima facie case for failure to accommodate, a plaintiff must demonstrate that she is disabled within the meaning of the ADA, that her employer is a covered entity, that she could perform the essential functions of her job with an accommodation, and that the defendant[] refused to provide such an accommodation. See Hernandez v. Int'l Shoppes, LLC, 100 F. Supp.3d 232, 256 (E.D.N.Y. 2015); see also Castro, 24 F. Supp.3d at 267 (citing McBride, 583 F.3d at 96-97). "There must be a causal connection between the disability and the requested accommodation." Castro, 24 F. Supp.3d at 267 (citing Rogers v. Roosevelt Union Free Sch. Dist., No. 09-cv-3862, 2012 WL 6163130, at *6 (E.D.N.Y. Dec. 7, 2012)), aff'd 553 F. App'x 88 (2d Cir.2014)).
Although it is generally the responsibility of the individual with a disability to inform the employer that an accommodation is needed, under certain circumstances, an employer is required to act proactively and engage in an interactive process to accommodate the disability of an employee even if the employee does not request accommodation. Nevertheless, an employee may not recover based on his employer's failure to engage in an interactive process if he cannot show that a reasonable accommodation existed at the time of his dismissal.
McElwee v. County of Orange, 700 F.3d 635, 641-42 (2d Cir. 2012) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted).
(b.) Retaliation
"Retaliation claims are analyzed under the three-step McDonnell Douglas framework." Hernandez, 100 F. Supp.3d at 267 (citing Treglia v. Town of Manlius, 313 F.3d 713, 719 (2d Cir. 2002) ("Claims [*27]  for retaliation [under the ADA] are analyzed under the same burden-shifting framework established for Title VII cases."); further citation omitted).
If the plaintiff is able to establish a prima facie case of discrimination,6 the burden then shifts to the defendant to set forth "some legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason" for the complained-of conduct. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802; see also Fincher [v. Depository Trust & Clearing Corp.], 604 F.3d [712,] 720 [(2d Cir. 2010)] (stating that where the plaintiff succeeds in establishing a prima facie case, "then the presumption of retaliation arises and the employer must articulate a legitimate, non-retaliatory reason for the action that the plaintiff alleges was retaliatory"). Where the defendant articulates such a reason, the burden shifts back to plaintiff to establish that "but for the protected activity, [she] would not have been terminated." Moore v. Kingsbrook Jewish Med. Ctr., No. 11-CV-3625 (MKB), 2013 WL 3968748, at *14 (E.D.N.Y. July 30, 2013); see also Univ. of Texas Sw. Med. Ctr. v. Nassar, 133 S. Ct. 2517, 2534 (2013)(stating that a plaintiff "must establish that his or her protected activity was a but-for cause of the alleged adverse action by the employer.").
Graham v. Three Village Cent. Sch. Dist., No. 11-cv-5182 (JFB), 2013 WL 5445736, at *21 (E.D.N.Y. Sept. 30, 2013) (first set of brackets added).
A plaintiff may prove that retaliation was a but-for cause of an adverse employment action by demonstrating weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, or contradictions in the employer's proffered legitimate, nonretaliatory [*28]  reasons for its action. From such discrepancies, a reasonable juror could conclude that the explanations were a pretext for a prohibited reason. "But-for" causation does not require proof that retaliation was the only cause of the employer's action. but only that the adverse action would not have occurred in the absence of the retaliatory motive.
Dudley v. N.Y.C. Hous. Auth., No. 14-cv-5116, 2017 WL 4315010, at *19 (S.D.N.Y. Sept. 25, 2017 )(quoting Zann Kwan v. Andalex Grp. LLC, 737 F.3d 834, 846 (2d Cir. 2013); internal citations and quotation marks omitted; emphasis added).
3. NYSHRL Claims
Plaintiff' has also brought claims of unlawful discharge, retaliation, and aider and abettor liability under the NYSHRL (see Complaint, Third, Fourth, and Fifth Causes of Action).
(a.) Unlawful Discharge
The NYSHRL provides, in relevant part:
[i]t shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice . . . [f]or an employer . . . because of an individual's . . . disability . . . to discharge from employment such individual or to discriminate against such individual [*29]  in compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment.
N.Y. Exec. Law § 296(1)(a); see also Hernandez, 100 F. Supp.3d at 252 ("Under NYSHRL, it is unlawful for an employer to discharge or discriminate against an individual because of a disability."). "Courts in this Circuit analyze the merits of NYSHRL employment discrimination claims using the burden-shifting framework articulated in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 . . . (1973)." Gorman v. Covidien, LLC, 146 F. Supp.3d 509, 523 (S.D.N.Y. 2015) (citing Spiegel v. Schulmann, 604 F.3d 72, 80 (2d Cir. 2010); further citation omitted). Further, while "the definition of disability is broader under the NYSHRL," Penberg v. Healthbridge Mgmt., 823 F. Supp.2d 166, 181 (E.D.N.Y. 2011) (quoting Levine v. Smithtown Cent. Sch. Dist., 565 F. Supp.2d 407, 428 (E.D.N.Y. 2008)), "[d]isability discrimination claims under the NYSHRL 'are governed by the same legal standards as such claims under the ADA.'" Id. (quoting Reddick v. Niagara Mohawk Power Co., No. 08-cv-995, 2010 WL 5185098, at *3 n.8 (N.D.N.Y. Dec. 16, 2010)).
[A] plaintiff makes out a prima facie case of discrimination by establishing that "(1) her employer is covered by the [NYSHRL]; (2) she suffers from a disability within the meaning of the [NYSHRL]; (3) she was qualified to perform the essential functions of her position, either with or without a reasonable accommodation; and (4) she suffered an adverse employment action under circumstances that at least suggest it was because of her disability." Pignone v. Village of Pelham Manor, No. 10 Civ. 2589, 2014 WL 929805, at *6 (S.D.N.Y. Mar. 6, 2014)(citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Once plaintiff demonstrates a prima facie case, the burden shifts to the defendant to articulate [*30]  a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for its decision. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802. A plaintiff must then demonstrate that the legitimate reasons proffered by the defendant were "'not its true reasons, but were a pretext for discrimination.'" Pignone, 2014 WL 929805, at *6 (quoting Texas Dep't of Cmty Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253 (1981)).
Polanco v. Active Retirement Cmty, Inc., No. 14-cv-4145, 2015 WL 12564206, at * 14 (E.D.N.Y. Dec. 21, 2015)(Report & Recommendation), adopted as modified, 2016 WL 792408 (E.D.N.Y. Feb. 29, 2016); see also Benson v. Family Dollar Operations, Inc., No. 17-2242, 2018 WL — (2d Cir. Nov. 13, 2018)(summary order)("Claims of disability discrimination under the NYSHRL are analyzed under the same standards as an ADA disparate treatment claim." (citation omitted)).
(b.) Retaliation
Like discrimination claims, retaliation claims under the NYSHRL are analyzed using the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework. See Spencer v. Int'l Shoppes, Inc., 902 F. Supp.2d 287, 293 (E.D.N.Y. 2012)(stating that retaliation claims under Title VII and NYHRL are treated similarly); see also, generally, Guzman v. News Corp., No. 09-cv-9323, 2013 WL 5807058, at *19 (S.D.N.Y. Oct. 28, 2013); supra at pp. 18-19 (discussing the components of the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting analysis for ADA retaliation claims). "Since courts presented with ADA claims employ the same analytical framework as used for Title VII claims, . . . where those claims cannot be maintained under the ADA, they likewise cannot be maintained under the NYSHRL." Fox. v. Costco Wholesale Corp., 239 F. Supp.3d 564, 585 (E.D.N.Y. 2017). The converse is, likewise, true: the "violation of one necessarily implies the violation of the other." See, e.g., Abrahamson v. Bd. of Educ. of Wappingers Falls Cent. Sch. Dist., 374 F.3d 66, 70 n.2 (2d Cir. 2004)(regarding age discrimination [*31]  claims under the ADEA and under the NYSHRL); see also, e.g., Wei v. Anthem, Inc., No. 16-cv-468, slip op. at 27 (E.D.N.Y. Sept. 4, 2018)(same); Gingold v. Bon Secours Charity Health Sys., 768 F. Supp.2d 537, 543 n.6 (S.D.N.Y. 2011)(where the Court determines that a plaintiff has a disability under the ADA, that plaintiff's NYSHRL claim "'survives or fails on the same basis' as his ADA claim" (citation omitted)).
(c.) Aiding and Abetting
The NYSHRL allows for individual liability where a defendant aided and abetted the unlawful discriminatory acts of others. See N.Y. Exec. Law § 296(6); see also Gorman, 146 F. Supp.3d at 521-22 (quoting EEOC v. Suffolk Laundry Servs., Inc., 48 F. Supp.3d 497, 523 (E.D.N.Y. 2014)). Thus, "a co-worker who 'actually participates in the conduct giving rise to a discrimination claim'" can be "held liable under the NYSHRL even though that co-worker lacked the authority to either hire or fire the plaintiff." Feingold v. New York, 366 F.3d 138, 158 (2d Cir. 2004)(quoting Tomka v. Seiler Corp., 66 F.3d 1295, 1317 (2d Cir. 1995)7); see also Rojas v. Roman Catholic Diocese of Rochester, 660 F.3d 98, 107 n.10 (2d Cir. 2011)("[W]hile an individual defendant with supervisory control may not be held personally liable under Title VII, an individual defendant may be held liable under the aiding and abetting provision of the NYSHRL if he actually participates in the conduct giving rise to a discrimination claim." (internal quotations and citations omitted)). "Aiding and abetting liability requires that the aider and abettor share the intent or purpose of the principal actor, and there can be no partnership in an act where there is no community of [*32]  purpose." Brice v. Sec. Operations Sys., Inc., No. 00-cv-2438, 2001 WL 185136, at *4 (S.D.N.Y. Feb. 26, 2001)(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). "Consequently, to find that a defendant actually participated in the discriminatory conduct requires a showing of direct, purposeful participation." Id. (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Stated differently, there must be sufficient evidence of the individual defendant's connection to the alleged discrimination to warrant the imposition of NYSHRL aider and abettor liability. See Guzman, 2013 WL 5807058, at *22. It is axiomatic, then, that the predicate to imposing individual aider and abettor liability under § 296(6) is the finding of impermissible discrimination.

B. The Instant Case
1. Plaintiff's ADA Failure to Accommodate Claim
Regarding her Failure to Accommodate Cause of Action (i.e., her First Cause of Action), by failing to address that claim in her Opposition to the Defendants' Summary Judgment Motion, Plaintiff is deemed to have waived it. See, e.g., Jackson v. Fed. Express, 766 F.3d 189, 198 (2d Cir. 2014)("[I]n the case of a counseled party, a court may, when appropriate, infer from a party's partial opposition that relevant claims or defenses that are not defended have been abandoned."); Neurological Surgery, P.C. v. Travelers Co., 243 F. Supp.3d 318, 329 (E.D.N.Y. 2017)(deeming an argument waived because it was not addressed in a party's opposition brief); see also Petrisch v. HSBC Bank USA, Inc., No. 07-cv-3303, 2013 WL 1316712, at *17 (E.D.N.Y. Mar. 28, 2013)(collecting [*33]  cases holding that where party fails to address arguments in opposition papers on summary judgment motion, the claim is deemed abandoned); Bryant v. S. Country Cent. Sch. Dist., No. 14-cv-5621, 2017 WL 1216553, at *19 (E.D.N.Y. Mar. 31, 2017)(failing to pursue theory in support of claim, claim is deemed waived); Robinson v. Am. Int'l Grp., Inc., No. 08-cv-1724, 2009 WL 3154312, at *4 & n.65 (S.D.N.Y. Sept. 30, 2009) (collecting cases where claims deemed abandoned for failing to oppose arguments raised in summary judgment motions), aff'd 396 F. App'x 781 (2d Cir. 2010); see also, e.g., Johannes Baumgartner Wirtschafts-Und Vermogensberatung GmbH v. Salzman, 969 F. Supp.2d 278, 290 (E.D.N.Y. 2013)("a Court need not entertain an argument that was not briefed")(citing Fidelity Bank, Nat'l Ass'n v. Avrutick, 740 F. Supp. 222, 228 n.6 (S.D.N.Y. 1990)).
Moreover, Plaintiff does not dispute that she "never made a specific request for accommodation that was denied or not implemented." (Defs.' 56.1 Statement ¶64; cf., Pl.'s 56.1 Statement ¶64.) That concession eviscerates Plaintiff's requisite prima facie showing that the Defendants refused to provide her with her requested accommodation. Hence, no rational fact finder could find in Plaintiff's favor on her ADA failure to accommodate cause of action.
2. Plaintiff's Retaliation Claims Under the ADA and NYSHRL
For purposes of their Summary Judgment Motion, "the [D]efendants do not dispute whether the [P]laintiff can establish her prima facie" retaliation case. (Memo at 9.) Nonetheless, they contend that "BOCES has satisfied its [shifted] burden to articulate legitimate, [*34]  non-discriminatory reasons for [Plaintiff's] termination," which is minimal (id.), to wit, that based on Weisel's observations of Plaintiff, Plaintiff did not demonstrate therapeutic techniques meeting the minimum standards of BOCES occupational therapists (see id. at 11). They further argue that Plaintiff's reliance on the temporal proximity between her requests for accommodations and her termination fail to satisfy her renewed burden of establishing "but for" causation. (See id.)
Plaintiff does not disagree with the general proposition that poor performance is a non-discriminatory reason to discharge employees. (See Opp'n at 10.) However, she argues that "[f]or six months after her employment began (March 5, 2015)[,] Plaintiff did not receive any negative feedback. It was only after the onset of her disability in August 2015 that Plaintiff received negative feedback." (Id.) Moreover, she contends that "the factors supporting dismissal were intertwined with Plaintiff's disability." (Id. at 11.)
The Defendants reply that "[i]n reviewing the evidence as a whole, it is abundantly clear that the only bases for the [P]laintiff's claims boil down to her own disagreement with her former supervisor's [*35]  assessment of her skills and techniques and the alleged temporal proximity," which is "woefully insufficient". (Reply at 8.) They maintain that there is "no evidence for a rational trier of fact to conclude that [P]laintiff was denied permanent status because of her disability and/or requests for accommodations." (Id. at 9.) According to the Defendants, "[i]n a case involving a decision of whether to give permanent status to an employee, and where there is no evidence of discriminatory animus or motive, the Court should not second guess and disturb . . . BOCES' discretion to evaluate and determine which therapists are deserving of the privilege of permanent status and all the protections it affords." (Id. (citing Loius v. Bd. of Educ. of City of N.Y., 705 F. Supp. 751, 760-61 (E.D.N.Y. 1989)(emphasis added).) At this juncture and on the record presented, however, the Court cannot say, as a matter of law, that there is no evidence of discriminatory animus or motive.
The Plaintiff has presented evidence that calls into question whether the Defendants were discriminatorily motived in deciding not to offer her permanent status. For example, while the Defendants contend that Weisel's concerns about Plaintiff's therapeutic skills "grew more significant as the [P]laintiff [*36]  did not demonstrate the expected growth and improvement with each of the successive observations" even though she "was provided feedback . . . after each observation" (Defs.' Memo at 10), the evidence also shows that Weisel's second, third, and fourth observations of Plaintiff (hereafter, the "Fall Observations") all occurred within an approximate one-month period from Plaintiff submitting her First Accommodation Letter and that those three observations occurred within a one-week period beginning two days after the Nekulak Memo was sent to Ellis. The condensed time period within which the Fall Observations were conducted demonstrates, at best, a weakness, if not an implausibility, in Defendants' contentions that Plaintiff was not improving in her therapeutic skills as it is as likely that the compacted time period within which the Fall Observations occurred failed to provide Plaintiff "sufficient time to demonstrate growth, improvement, and sufficient therapeutic techniques . . . ." that the Defendants assert was provided to her. (Reply at 7.) Moreover and of significance, the Defendants have not presented any evidence regarding the supposed minimum standards BOCES expected of its [*37]  OTs (e.g., a job description). (Cf., e.g., Ex. H (Nekulak Aff.) ¶4 ("[OT]s are required to demonstrate sufficient performance during the probationary period in order to receive permanent status . . . .").) The absence of such a base-line measurement impedes determining whether Weisel's assessments of Plaintiff were free of discriminatory animus or motive. Further, contrary to Defendants' contention that since "each observation involved a different student and a new set of circumstances and variables, so each observation presented a new, fresh start opportunity for the [P]laintiff to demonstrate her skills and techniques," (Reply at 7), the converse argument could as easily be advanced, i.e., that because each observation session involved a different pupil, Plaintiff had to start anew since she was being presented with "a new set of circumstances and variables," thereby thwarting her ability to demonstrate improvements in her skills and techniques.
Plaintiff has also presented evidence of other factors that affected her performance during the Fall Observations, e.g., Defendants failing to assign Plaintiff a permanent work-space to provide pupils therapy, and Defendants' failing to appoint [*38]  Plaintiff a mentor at RKS to assist her in learning that school's particular practices and procedures. It is unsurprising that Plaintiff and Weisel, who — other than the subject pupil — were the only two in attendance at each Observation, viewed the outcome of the Fall Observations differently. Yet, it is supposedly the very outcome of those Observations that form the bases for Plaintiff's not being recommended for permanent status as a BOCES OT and being terminated. In such an instance, granting summary judgment is not appropriate as "[a]ssessments of credibility and choices between conflicting versions of the events are matters for the jury, not for the court on summary judgment." Rule, 85 F.3d at 1011; see also Jeffreys, 426 F.3d at 551, 553-54.
Further, a careful reading of the Ellis Memo, recommending Plaintiff not be retained as a full-time OT, strongly suggests that the recommendation was based on the September Observation, not all the Fall Observations of Plaintiff. (See supra at pp. 9-10.) While it is true that Plaintiff admitted the September Observation did not proceed well, there is evidence that Ellis' summary of that Observation was skewed as it failed to report that the subject student: had been roused from a deep sleep [*39]  prior to the session; required toileting before the session began, thereby reducing the time available for the session; and, remained sleepy for much of the session, despite evidence supporting same. (See supra at p. 12.) Moreover, Ellis faults Plaintiff for not addressing the student's IEP goals (see Ellis Memo, supra at p. 10), but that contradicts the issue for which Plaintiff was admonished, i.e., for not following the student's BIP (see October Recap Letter, supra at p. 7), the existence as to which is in dispute. (Cf. Explanatory Letter at 2, supra at p. 12 ("in fact, he does not have a BIP except for one that refers to toileting procedures").) There is also evidence placing in dispute the Defendants' strident and literal reliance on Plaintiff's claim of having read forty BIPs and upon which they challenged her veracity (see, e.g., Ellis Memo), as it appears Plaintiff intended her reference to BIPs to encompass a broader array of materials (see Explanatory Letter (referencing BIPs, behavioral plans and psychological reports)) and to include the re-reading of reports (see id.). Again, however, that determination is within the preview of a jury and not for the Court on a motion for summary judgment. See [*40]  Jeffreys, 426 F.3d at 551.
In sum, in the instant action, whether the Defendants acted with discriminatory animus or motive in denying the Plaintiff a permanent OT position, and thereby retaliating against her for requesting accommodations, is a material, disputed fact which must be decided by a jury after weighing the evidence and assessing the credibility of the witnesses. Hence, the Court is precluded from granting Defendants summary judgment on Plaintiff's ADA and NYSHRL retaliation claims.
3. Plaintiff's Claim of Unlawful Discharge Under NYSHRL
Plaintiff complains that despite being "qualified for her job as an [OT]" and being "able to satisfactorily perform the 'essential functions' of the job with or without accommodation" (Complaint at ¶60), she was "unlawfully discharged in violation of the NYSHRL." (Id. at ¶61.) Defendants contend that they "have articulated legitimate and non-discriminatory reasons for terminating the [P]laintiff."8 (Memo at 13-14.) However, on the record presented and for the reasons previously articulated by the Court (see supra at pp. 25-27), it is a material disputed fact whether the Defendants' contention is as stated. Relatedly, because making that determination requires the assessment [*41]  of witness credibility and weighing of related evidence, summary judgment on this Cause of Action cannot enter.
4. Plaintiff's Aider and Abettor Liability Claim Under NYSHRL
Plaintiff claims that Heller and Weisel "aided and abetted BOCES's discrimination" of her "by refusing to accommodate [her] disability . . . and committing adverse actions against [her] by negatively evaluating her in order to terminate her." (Complaint ¶68.) The Court has already determined that Plaintiff cannot make out a prima facie case of failure to accommodate under the ADA both because she failed to pursue that Cause of Action in her Opposition and because she concedes that she was not denied any accommodations she sought. (See supra at pp. 23-24.) That determination, which warrants summary judgment in Defendants' favor, applies equally to the portion of Plaintiff's aider and abettor Cause of Action against Heller and Weisel, seeking to hold them individually liable for the alleged failure to accommodate Plaintiff's disability.
However, since whether Plaintiff's disability impermissibly played a role in Heller's and Weisel's "negatively evaluating [Plaintiff] in order to terminate her" (Complaint ¶69), is [*42]  a material, disputed fact which must be determined by a jury, that portion of her aider and abettor Cause of Action survives Defendants' Summary Judgment Motion. If the jury finds the Defendants engaged in unlawful discriminatory conduct, it may then consider whether Heller and Weisel directly and purposefully participated in such conduct thereby warranting finding them individually liable, pursuant to NYSHRL § 296(6), for it.
IV. Conclusion
Accordingly, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that Defendants' Summary Judgment Motion is granted in part and denied in part:
A. as to Plaintiff's First Cause of Action, the Defendants' Summary Judgment Motion is granted;
B. as to Plaintiff's Second Cause of Action, the Defendants' Summary Judgment Motion is denied;
C. as to Plaintiff's Third Cause of Action, the Defendants' Summary Judgment Motion is denied;
D. as to Plaintiff's Fourth Cause of Action, the Defendants' Summary Judgment Motion is denied; and
E. as to Plaintiff's Fifth Cause of Action, the Defendants' Summary Judgment Motion is;
1. granted in part, i.e., to the extent that Plaintiff seeks to hold Heller and Weisel personally liable on the basis of failing to accommodate Plaintiff; and
2. denied in part, i.e., to the [*43]  extent that Plaintiff seeks to hold Heller and Weisel personally liable on the basis of a pretextual negative evaluation, to impermissibly discriminate against her, which led to her termination.
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the December 19, 2018 Pretrial Conference, scheduled for 11:15 a.m. before the undersigned (Courtroom 1010 of the Central Islip Federal Courthouse), shall proceed as scheduled.
SO ORDERED this 15th day of November 2018 at Central Islip, New York.
/s/ Sandra J. Feuerstein
Sandra J. Feuerstein
United States District Judge


End of Document

