Peterson v. Shinseki
United States District Court for the District of Oregon, Medford Division
December 20, 2012, Decided; December 20, 2012, Filed
Civ. No. 11-cv-03036-CL

Reporter
2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 186402 *; 2012 WL 7224282
SUSAN PETERSON, Plaintiff, v. ERIC SHINSEKI, SECRETARY, VETERANS AFFAIRS, Defendant.
Subsequent History: Adopted by, Summary judgment granted, in part, summary judgment denied, in part by, Motion granted by, in part, Motion denied by, in part Peterson v. Shinseki, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 25085 (D. Or., Feb. 21, 2013)
Counsel:  [*1] For Susan Peterson, Plaintiff: Michael W. Franell, LEAD ATTORNEY, Michael Franell, Attorney, Medford, OR.
For Eric Shinseki, Secretary, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, Defendant: Timothy W. Simmons, LEAD ATTORNEY, United States Attorney's Office, Eugene, OR; Janice E. Hebert, U.S. Attorney's Office, Portland, OR.
Judges: MARK D. CLARKE, United States Magistrate Judge.
Opinion by: MARK D. CLARKE
Opinion


REPORT & RECOMMENDATION
CLARKE, Magistrate Judge.
Plaintiff Susan Peterson ("plaintiff") brings this action against defendant Eric Shinseki, Secretary of the United States Department of Veterans Affairs, in his official capacity ("the government"), alleging disability discrimination, retaliation, and failure to accommodate her disability. Before the court is the government's motion to dismiss, and in the alternative, motion for summary judgment (#20). For the reasons stated below, the court recommends that the government's motion be granted in part and denied in part.

PRELIMINARY PROCEDURAL MATTER
As an initial matter, the court must address the admissibility of the evidence offered by plaintiff in opposition to the government's motion. The government moved to strike two exhibits offered by plaintiff. Plaintiff did  [*2] not respond to the government's motion.
The first proposed exhibit the government objects to, Exhibit 2, is the American Federation of Government Employees' recommendation, dated January 29, 2009, on a work grievance filed by plaintiff (#32-2). The recommendation, prepared by plaintiff's union steward Marcia Tackett, describes an incident where plaintiff's supervisor gave plaintiff a Letter of Counseling, and states that the union's position is that the Letter was wrongly issued and should be withdrawn. The second document that the government objects to is a declaration by Tackett, which describes in detail interactions between plaintiffs supervisor and plaintiff, and states that Tackett believes plaintiff was targeted by her supervisor for discriminatory treatment (#30).
The government objects to the admission of both documents on the ground that they contain statements not based on personal knowledge. The government contends that both documents describe events Tackett was not present for. The Federal Rules of Civil Procedure provide that affidavits supporting or opposing a motion for summary judgment be made on personal knowledge. Fed.R.Civ.P. 56(e). In this case, the court agrees  [*3] with the government that Tackett lacked personal knowledge of the events described in both the union document and her declaration. Tackett was not present for the majority of the events she describes in both documents, and, as a union steward, was not in a position to acquire comprehensive knowledge. Accordingly, the government's motion to strike the union grievance recommendation and the Tackett declaration is granted.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND
The following facts are taken in the light most favorable to plaintiff:
Plaintiff was employed as a Patient Services Representative in the Release of Information ("ROI") Office of the United States Department of Veterans Affairs Southern Oregon Rehabilitation Center and Clinics ("SORCC VA") in White City, Oregon. The SORCC VA is a six-hundred bed residential rehabilitation center providing psychosocial rehabilitation and substance abuse treatment for veterans. Plaintiff worked as a Patient Services Representative at the ROI office from 2004 to 2011, when she retired to apply for disability retirement. Plaintiff has Attention Deficit-Hyperactivity Disorder ("ADHD"), for which she takes Ritalin. In January 2009, plaintiff was diagnosed with Post-Traumatic  [*4] Stress Disorder ("PTSD").
In the beginning of October 2008, plaintiff took time off of work to undergo arm surgery. Plaintiff returned to work on October 20, 2008. During the period plaintiff was off of work, Sandra Kindsvater began as the ROI office supervisor. As plaintiff's supervisor, Kindsvater assigned and managed plaintiff's workload, interacting with plaintiff on a daily basis.
On October 23, 2008, plaintiff forgot to take a dose of Ritalin and, by her own admission, "started to get a little wiggly." Pltf. Ex. 6, p. 4. A fellow employee reported that plaintiff looked as though she were under the influence. In response, Kindsvater had plaintiff undergo a field sobriety and urinalysis test, both of which were clean. The following day, Kindsvater told plaintiff that she disapproved of plaintiff taking Ritalin to manage her ADHD and told plaintiff that she should try herbal remedies or coffee instead.1
On December 31, 2008, Kindsvater issued a Letter of Counseling to plaintiff, reprimanding plaintiff for delegating a work task to another employee. Plaintiff contested the issuance of the Letter to her union, and the grievance was eventually  [*5] resolved in favor of plaintiff. On January 8, 2009, plaintiff received an email from Kindsvater telling her to obtain a union representative and attend a meeting with her Privacy Regulation and ROI manual, which plaintiff believed to be the sign of another disciplinary action.
From the afternoon of January 8, 2009, to March 23, 2009, plaintiff took time off work under the Family and Medical Leave Act ("FMLA"), citing stress from her interactions with Kindsvater. During plaintiff's leave, plaintiff's doctor diagnosed her with PTSD. On January 13, 2009, plaintiff contacted an Equal Employment Office ("EEO") Counselor and stated that she wanted to file an employment discrimination complaint regarding the drug test, Kindsvater's alleged statement about Ritalin, the Letter of Counseling, and January 8, 2009 request for a meeting. On February 12, 2009, plaintiff received a Notice of Right to File a Discrimination Complaint from the EEO. Pursuant to regulations, plaintiff was given a fifteen-day window in which to file her complaint. Plaintiff did not file by the deadline, however, and her right to file a discrimination complaint related to these charges lapsed.
On March 24, 2009, plaintiff  [*6] returned to work at the VA SORCC. Upon her return, Kindsvater told plaintiff that she should stay in her office, close the door, and perform work that had backlogged during plaintiff's absence until the work was completed. Plaintiff was also instructed to put a sign on her door informing walk-in patients seeking plaintiff's help to speak with plaintiff's ROI co-worker, Larry Sluss, rather than plaintiff. Also upon plaintiff's return to work, plaintiff found that a fax machine previously in her office had been moved to Sluss' office.
In February and early April 2009, plaintiff provided plaintiff's second-line supervisor, Monica Mortimer-Lamb, and Pam Hillers, the VA Human Resources manager with doctor's notes stating that she had PTSD. Kindsvater was also made aware of the doctor's note. On April 6, 2009, Kindsvater went into plaintiff's office, closed the door, and yelled at plaintiff about plaintiff's work performance.2
On April 7, 2009, plaintiff submitted a doctor's note stating that plaintiff should not be in a closed space alone with her supervisor, and that plaintiff would only be able to work four days a week. On April 23, 2009, Kindsvater  [*7] sent plaintiff an email stating:
"[I]f you are requesting a change to your work hours, you must request a change to your work hours. If you are requesting leave, the leave must be submitted and approved before the leave is taken. Attached is an SORCC reasonable accommodation with procedures for requesting accommodation. If you have any questions, please feel free to contact me."
Def. Ex. 7, p. 30.
The email contained a ten-page attachment with the SORCC VA's procedures for requesting reasonable accommodation. Plaintiff was also told in a meeting with Hillers, Kindsvater, and plaintiff's union president that plaintiff's request regarding contact with Kindsvater was not feasible, and was also informed that she could take a day off each week, but that she would need to retain her normal work hours of 8:00 AM to 4:30 PM on the other four days. Shortly thereafter, plaintiff submitted a note from her doctor advising that she could work the five day week again.
Various other events occurred between April and June 2009 that plaintiff found discriminatory: On May 4, 2009, Kindsvater issued plaintiff a written counseling for (1) staying at her work station after plaintiff's scheduled tour of duty,  [*8] despite being told not to; (2) making an indirect threat of violence against Kindsvater; and (3) excessive use of the internet for personal purposes. Plaintiff also asked to use annual leave, comp time, and "credit hours" to cover her weekly doctor's appointments, but was told she needed to use sick leave, despite the fact that plaintiff had exhausted her sick leave quota.
Plaintiff also states that in the spring she was told that she looked "stoned" when interacting with veterans seeking records, that Kindsvater instructed the Human Resource Management Service clerk not to assist or speak with plaintiff, that she was denied the opportunity to attend a training regarding Freedom of Information Act ("FOIA") issues, that she was the only employee in her section forced to create a daily work report, and that she was the only employee in her section told to leave on time at the end of every day. Plaintiff also alleges that she was continuously told to keep the door to her office closed, which caused her to develop heat stroke and claustrophobia on May 26, 2009.
Plaintiff took various actions in response. On June 10, 2009, plaintiff filed an Oregon Worker's Compensation Program ("OWCP") claim  [*9] for heat stroke and claustrophobia. Human Resources employee Greg Culver was assigned to help with plaintiff's claim, but was later replaced by Hillers. On June 16, 2009, OWCP sent plaintiff a letter requesting more information about her claim. Plaintiff did not respond, and on July 24, 2009, the claim was denied due to insufficient evidence.
On July 28, 2009, plaintiff made contact with an EEO counselor, claiming that she had been subjected to harassment due to her disability and prior EEO activity. Plaintiff participated in counseling regarding the EEO claim on October 22, 2009. Counseling did not resolve the dispute, however, and on October 28, 2009, the EEO issued plaintiff a Notice of Right to File a Discrimination Complaint. Plaintiff timely filed a formal EEO complaint on November 3, 2009. The EEO conducted an investigation related to the complaint, and gave plaintiff the option of selecting an EEO hearing or receiving a Final Agency Decision. Plaintiff requested a hearing on June 29, 2010. The EEO did not issue a decision within its 180 day deadline3 and plaintiff filed a complaint in this court on February 17, 2012.

PLAINTIFF'S CLAIMS
Plaintiff's first claim alleges discrimination in violation of the Rehabilitation Act, Title VII, and 42 U.S.C. § 1981. Plaintiff's second claim alleges retaliation in violation of 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-16, and remedies under 42 U.S.C. § 1981 and § 2000e-16(b). Plaintiff's third claim alleges failure to accommodate plaintiff's disability under the Rehabilitation Act, the Americans with Disabilities Act, and Oregon state law.

GOVERNMENT'S MOTION
The government moves to dismiss plaintiff's state law claim for failure to accommodate, and moves for summary judgment on plaintiff's remaining federal claims. In its response to the government's motion, plaintiff agreed to withdraw its state law claim for failure to accommodate. Accordingly, the court construes the government's motion to dismiss as moot, and analyzes only the government's motion for summary judgment.

LEGAL STANDARD
The court must grant summary judgment if there is no genuine issue of material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). An issue is "genuine"  [*11] if a reasonable jury could return a verdict in favor of the non-moving party. Rivera v. Philip Morris, Inc., 395 F.3d 1142, 1146 (9th Cir. 2005) (citing Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986)). A fact is "material" if it could affect the outcome of the case. Id. The court views the evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving party and draws "all justifiable inferences" in that party's favor. Miller v. Glenn Miller Prods., Inc., 454 F.3d 975, 988 (9th Cir. 2006) (quoting Hunt v. Cromartie, 526 U.S. 541, 552, 119 S. Ct. 1545, 143 L. Ed. 2d 731 (1999)). When the moving party has met its burden, the non-moving party must present "specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 587, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986) (quoting Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e)). Conclusory allegations, unsupported by factual material, are insufficient to defeat a motion for summary judgment. Taylor v. List, 880 F.2d 1040, 1045 (9th Cir. 1989).

DISCUSSION

I. Exhaustion of Administrative Remedies.
To preserve the right to maintain an employment discrimination lawsuit against a federal agency, a claimant must first exhaust her administrative remedies. Brown v. Gen. Servs. Admin., 425 U.S. 820, 832, 96 S. Ct. 1961, 48 L. Ed. 2d 402 (1976).  [*12] 29 C.F.R. § 1614.105 sets forth the procedures for submitting an employment discrimination claim to federal agencies. Pursuant to these procedures, a claimant must consult an EEO counselor prior to filing a complaint. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.105(a). If the matter cannot be resolved informally with the EEO counselor, then the claimant must file a complaint within fifteen days of the conclusion of the EEO counseling. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.106(b). Failure to comply with time limits will result in dismissal of an employee's discrimination claim. 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(2); see also Lyons v. England, 307 F.3d 1092,1105 (9th Cir. 2002).
In this case, plaintiff first contacted an EEO counselor on January 13, 2009. During EEO counseling, plaintiff brought up allegedly discriminatory events occurring between October 2008 and January 2009. The matter was not resolved in counseling, and plaintiff received a Notice of Right to File a Discrimination Complaint on February 25, 2009. Plaintiff did not file her complaint within the fifteen-day window, however, and her right to file the as to these charges lapsed. Accordingly, the claims occurring between October 2008 and January 2009 are time-barred by 29 C.F.R. § 1614.107(a)(2),  [*13] and the court only considers the timely-filed claims relating to events beginning in March 2009.

II. Disability Discrimination.
Plaintiff's first claim for relief alleges disability discrimination in violation of the Rehabilitation Act and Title VII. The Rehabilitation Act is the exclusive remedy for federal employees claiming disability discrimination. Oakes v. Sec'y, U.S. Dept. of Veterans' Affairs, No. 3:11-cv-00671-HZ, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 140284, 2012 WL 4508000 at *8 (D. Or. Sept. 28, 2012) (citation omitted). The Rehabilitation Act incorporates the procedures of Title VII in regard to claims by federal employees of disability discrimination. Boyd v. U.S. Postal Serv., 752 F.2d 410, 412 (9th Cir. 1985). The standards for determining employment discrimination under the Rehabilitation Act are the same as the standards used in the Americans with Disabilities Act. 29 U.S.C. § 794(d); Fleming v. Yuma Reg'l Med. Ctr., 587 F.3d 938, 940-41 (9th Cir. 2009).
To make out a prima facie claim under the Rehabilitation Act, a plaintiff must prove (1) she is disabled; (2) she is otherwise qualified for employment; and (3) she was discriminated against because of her disability. Walton v. U.S. Marshals Serv., 492 F.3d 998, 1005 (9th Cir. 2007).  [*14] The plaintiff's burden of establishing a prima facie case of disparate treatment is "not onerous." Texas Dep't of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253, 101 S. Ct. 1089, 67 L. Ed. 2d 207 (1981).
Once the plaintiff has established a prima facie case of disability discrimination, the burden shifts to the defendant to provide a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the alleged adverse employment action. See McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 802-803, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). If the defendant articulates a legitimate reason for its employment action, the presumption of unlawful discrimination "simply drops out of the picture," and the burden shifts back to the plaintiff to persuade the court that the articulated reason for the employment action was mere pretext for discrimination. St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 510-511, 113 S. Ct. 2742, 125 L. Ed. 2d 407 (1993). The plaintiff may prove pretext "(1) indirectly, by showing that the employer's proffered explanation is 'unworthy of credence' because it is internally inconsistent or otherwise not believable, or (2) directly, by showing that unlawful discrimination more likely motivated the employer." Chuang v. Univ. of Cal. Davis, 225 F.3d 1115, 1127 (9th Cir. 2000), (quoting Godwin v. Hunt Wesson, Inc.., 150 F.3d 1217, 1220 (9th Cir. 1998)).
If  [*15] the plaintiff relies on direct evidence as a pretext for discrimination, "very little evidence" is required to avoid summary judgment. EEOC v. Boeing Co., 577 F.3d 1044, 1049 (9th Cir. 2009) (citations omitted). Direct evidence is "evidence which, if believed, proves the fact [of discriminatory animus] without inference or presumption." Godwin, 150 F.3d at 1220 (citing Davis v. Chevron, U.S.A., Inc., 14 F.3d 1082, 1085 (5th Cir. 1994). If the plaintiff relies on indirect evidence, however, the evidence must be specific and substantial. Id. at 1221. That is, a party opposing a summary judgment motion must provide specific facts demonstrating that there remains a genuine factual issue for trial and evidence that is significantly probative as to any disputed claim of material fact. Steckl v. Motorola, Inc., 703 F.2d 392, 393 (9th Cir. 1983). "[M]ere assertions that [an employer] had discriminatory motivation and intent... [is] inadequate, without substantial factual evidence, to raise...a genuine issue of material fact as to pretext in order to avoid summary judgment." Id.
In this case, the court concludes that plaintiff has established a prima facie case of discrimination. The government  [*16] does not dispute that plaintiff is disabled and is otherwise qualified for employment. The bar for establishing a prima facie case of disability discrimination is low. Texas Dep't of Cmty. Affairs., 450 U.S. at 253; see also Bowden v. Potter, 308 F.Supp. 2d 1108, 1117 n. 5 (N.D. Cal. 2004) ("Given the gate-keeping function [of McDonnell Douglas, which addresses whether the plaintiff has established a prima facie case], there is reason to apply a more relaxed analysis to the prima facie stage than to the pretext [stage]"). Accordingly, taking plaintiff's claims cumulatively for the purposes of establishing a prima facie case of discrimination, the court also finds that plaintiff's disparate treatment is circumstantial evidence that plaintiff was discriminated against because of her disability.
Because plaintiff has set forth a prima facie case of disability discrimination, the burden shifts to the government to provide legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. For the reasons stated below, the court finds that the government has done so, and that plaintiff has failed to prove that the government's preferred nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions were pretextual.
Plaintiff  [*17] makes over a dozen claims of disability discrimination, which can be roughly grouped into five categories: (1) changes in job responsibilities, (2) discipline and counseling actions, (3) leave requests, (4) stray remarks, and (5) treatment of plaintiff's OWCP claim.

A. Category 1: Job Responsibility Changes.
Plaintiff claims that the government changed her job responsibilities in a discriminatory manner. Specifically, plaintiff alleges that after her return to work on March 24, 2009, she was told to stay in her office with the door closed and forward her calls, a fax machine was removed from her office and not returned, requests to attend training were denied, and plaintiff had to perform data entry duties that were not required of other employees. Plaintiff argues these changes in her work duties are circumstantial evidence of disability discrimination.
Plaintiff argues that on her return to work on March 24, 2009, Kindsvater told her to stay in her office, close the door, forward her calls, and have a sign on her office door directing walk-in patients to her co-worker, Sluss, for assistance in order for plaintiff to complete backlogged work. Plaintiff alleges that she initially agreed  [*18] with Kindsvater's plan, because working in isolation would help to quickly process backlogged work, but that plaintiff found after the meeting that there was not in fact any backlog of work. Plaintiff argues that despite the lack of backlog, she was still directed to stay in her office, close her door, forward her calls, and keep the sign on her door. Plaintiff essentially alleges that she was required to work in isolation for several months, while other coworkers were allowed to interact with patients and have their doors open. Plaintiff contends that working with her door closed led her to develop heat stroke and claustrophobia.
Plaintiff also argues that on June 15, 2009, plaintiff requested that she receive training regarding FOIA issues and was denied, while other employees junior to plaintiff were able to receive training. In addition, plaintiff states that in June 2009, Kindsvater told her to make daily logs of her activity. Plaintiff contends that the assignment was discriminatory, because her computer already generated a log of her activity, the reports were not collected, and because she was the only employee ordered to make a daily log.
The government alleges that it had legitimate  [*19] business reasons for the changes in plaintiff's job responsibilities. The government contends that there was a large backlog of work following plaintiff's absence, and that the instructions to plaintiff to work in private were given to help plaintiff avoid distraction. The government contends that plaintiff worked in isolation for several months only because the backlog took several months to finish. In reference to plaintiff's claims of heat stroke and claustrophobia, the government argues that plaintiff had not complained of either the temperature in her office or of feeling confined prior to her alleged diagnoses. The government further argues that plaintiff's office was spacious with large windows, and that Kindsvater had visited plaintiff's office on the day she later claimed heat stroke and claustrophobia and found that the temperature was comfortable. The government argues that if they had known plaintiff was uncomfortable, accommodations would have been made. In regard to the fax machine, the government states that the fax machine was removed to Sluss' office to make it easier for other employees to handle the requests during plaintiff's absence, and that the fax machine remained  [*20] in Sluss' office when plaintiff returned because plaintiff's backlogged work did not require faxing.
Kindsvater does not recall receiving a request from plaintiff to attend FOIA training, but argues that plaintiff would not have been able to attend the 2009 or 2010 training if she had received a request. The government argues that generally FOIA training happen on a yearly basis, and that the 2009 training took place in February, when plaintiff was gone on extended leave, and that the 2010 training was canceled for lack of funds. The government contends that any junior employees who attended the FOIA training would have attended it in 2009, when plaintiff was absent, and that there was not an alternative training to attend in 2010. In response to the workload logs, the government states that both plaintiff and Sluss were both asked to maintain a daily log of her workload to generate a monthly report of the amount of work plaintiff was producing. The government also argues that other sections of the VA were similarly required to produce monthly work reports.
Having considered plaintiff's claims and the government's justifications for its actions, the court finds that plaintiff has not  [*21] established that the changes in plaintiff's job duties following her absence were pretext for discrimination. For the purposes of this summary judgment motion, the court assumes that plaintiff is correct that there was not actually a backlog of work, and that plaintiff was told to do other assignments with a closed door, forwarded phone, and sign directing walk-in patients to speak with Sluss. However, this is not sufficient circumstantial evidence demonstrating that the government gave her this assignment because of her disability. As a general matter, federal agencies may choose how to assign work in order to accomplish their missions. 5 U.S.C. § 7106(a)(1). Directing plaintiff to concentrate on certain projects with her door closed and phone forwarded may be an assignment that plaintiff disagreed with, but it is not an action so adverse to presume disability discrimination. Plaintiff has the burden to produce specific and substantial evidence of discrimination. Godwin, 150 F.3d at 1221. Additionally, in regard to plaintiff's claims of heat stroke and claustrophobia, plaintiff has not provided evidence that the government knew or should have known that plaintiff was uncomfortable.  [*22] In reference to the fax machine, FOIA training, and monthly data log, plaintiff has not shown that she was treated differently than other employees, or otherwise provided evidence that the business justifications for these decisions were pretext for discrimination. Accordingly, the court grants summary judgment in favor of the government on plaintiff's claims of disability discrimination due to changes in her job responsibilities.

B. Category 2: Discipline and Counseling
Plaintiff also contends that the government disciplined her because of her disability. Specifically, plaintiff references a Letter of Counseling issued to plaintiff on May 4, 2009, stating that plaintiff (1) was staying at her work station after her scheduled tour of duty, despite being told not to; (2) made an indirect threat of violence against Kindsvater and failed to report it; and (3) excessively used the internet for personal purposes. The Letter of Counseling referenced a list of internet sites plaintiff visited on April 14, 2009, which the government argued showed that plaintiff frequently used the internet for non-work related purposes. Plaintiff argues that the Letter of Counseling in reference to issues (1)  [*23] and (3) was inappropriate because no one else was disciplined for leaving their work station, and plaintiff did not use the internet for personal purposes.
Plaintiff argues that the list of websites contained many "cookies" and duplicated sites, and thus was an inaccurate representation of her internet use. Plaintiff also argues that later in 2009, she was "escorted off" VA property at the end of her shift, in a disciplinary measure designed to ensure that plaintiff left work on time, and that on April 6, 2009, Kindsvater closed the door to plaintiff's office and yelled at plaintiff about her work performance, despite knowing of plaintiff's PTSD.
The government argues that its action were appropriate. In reference to internet use, the government contends that several employees had complained that plaintiff had been visiting non-work related websites rather than doing her work, in violation of the VA's policy allowing only limited personal use of the internet at work. The government states that because of the complaints, it conducted a review of the websites plaintiff visited on April 14, 2009, and found that plaintiff had visited a number of non-work related sites during work hours and  [*24] was staying late to use the internet for personal purposes. Further, the government had a security officer review the list of websites, and found that plaintiff's use of the internet for non-work purposes was excessive even when duplication of websites and "cookies" were considered.
In reference to staying on the premises after 4:30 PM, the government argues that it generally required employees to leave at the end of the day, as employees staying late exposed the VA to risks of injury and unsupervised work, as well as overtime cost. The government states that plaintiff often violated this policy by staying at her work station late. The government argues that plaintiff was never physically escorted off the property, but rather the Administrative Office of the Day or the VA police would check both plaintiff's office and Sluss' office around 4:30 PM, and remind both of them to leave for the day.
The government argues in response to the April 6, 2009, incident that Kindsvater did close the door to plaintiff's office and start to talk about plaintiff's work performance, but that Kindsvater only closed the door to plaintiff's office because she had forgotten that plaintiff had PTSD. Kindsvater  [*25] states that quickly recalled plaintiff's PTSD and opened the door, and that the substance of Kindsvater's conversation with plaintiff did not occur until after the door was opened. Kindsvater denies yelling at plaintiff.
Plaintiff has not demonstrated that the government's explanations are pretext. Employees alleging discrimination cannot defeat summary judgment with mere conclusory allegations. Swan v. Bank of America, 360 Fed.Appx. 903, 905 (9th Cir. 2009). In this case, there is no indication that the government issued the Letter of Counseling because of plaintiff's disability, or that plaintiff was treated differently than other employees in regard to leave times. In reference to the April 6, 2009, incident, the court finds that plaintiff has not shown that the government's explanation that closing the door to plaintiff's office was accidental is unworthy of credence. Plaintiff asserts that shutting the door was purposeful, but provides no evidence to support this point. Indeed, if Kindsvater had purposefully closed the door to plaintiff's office because of plaintiff's PTSD, there is no reason Kindsvater would not have kept the door closed for the remainder of the meeting. The court  [*26] finds that there is no indication that the government's disciplinary actions discriminated against plaintiff because of her disability. Accordingly, the government's motion for summary judgment on plaintiff's discrimination claims related to disciplinary and counseling actions is granted.

C. Category 3: Leave.
Plaintiff additionally claims that the government discriminated against her by denying her the opportunity to use certain kinds of leave time, causing her to have to take leave without pay. Plaintiff argues that on April 21, 2009, Kindsvater told plaintiff to use sick leave rather than annual leave to attend a doctor's appointment, though plaintiff had a negative sick leave balance. Plaintiff also alleges that Sluss was allowed to use one hour of comp time daily, while plaintiff was not allowed to use any comp time, and points to time records indicating that Sluss took more comp time than plaintiff over a two-year period. Finally, plaintiff contends that on May 26, 2009, Kindsvater wrongfully denied plaintiff the opportunity to use credit hours to cover weekly doctor's appointments. Plaintiff argues that the government's denial of the opportunity to use certain kinds of leave is  [*27] circumstantial evidence of discrimination based on her disability.
The government provides sufficient business-related explanations for its decisions regarding plaintiff's leave. In response to the sick leave request, the government argues that it was unaware that plaintiff had used all of her sick leave, because plaintiff had not submitted the require leave slips used to calculate leave balances.
In reference to comp time, the government disputes that plaintiff and Sluss were treated differently. The government states that while plaintiff was on extended leave, Sluss was given one hour of comp time daily to help cover plaintiff's work load, but argues that plaintiff was also given one hour of comp time daily when Sluss was gone. The government explains that the time records only indicate when comp time was taken, not when comp time was earned. The government argues that Sluss earned a considerable amount of comp time when plaintiff was on extended sick leave between early January and mid-March 2009, so Sluss had a larger amount of comp time available to use.
In reference to credit hours, the government does not dispute that it denied plaintiff's request for credit hours on May 26, 2009,  [*28] but states that its initial denial of the credit hours request was based on a misunderstanding of the union contract. Pursuant to the union contract, supervisors may grant employees credit hours, which are accumulated by working overtime and used as a banking system for doctor's appointments when leave balances are low. Kindsvater, as a new supervisor, had not received a request for credit hours before, and initially denied plaintiff's request based on her unfamiliarity with the system. The government maintains that Kindsvater subsequently spoke with union representatives, learned about the credit hours system, and then granted credit hours to employees, including plaintiff, based on valid requests.
When the government provides legitimate business reasons for its employment decisions, the plaintiff has the burden to produce substantial evidence that the employer's preferred reasons are unworthy of credence. Chuang, 225 F.3d at 1127. In this case, the court finds that plaintiff has failed to show that non-discriminatory reasons offered by the government for its statements regarding leave were pretexual. Accordingly, the court finds that there is no evidence that the government's decisions  [*29] regarding leave discriminated against plaintiff, and grants the government's motion as to these claims.

D. Category 4: Stray remark.
Plaintiff argues that the government made a discriminatory remark regarding plaintiff. Specifically, plaintiff alleges that Kindsvater told another employee that plaintiff "looked stoned" and so Kindsvater did not want plaintiff meeting with patients.
The government contends that Kindsvater did not say that plaintiff "looked stoned." The government points to an email from Union President Rob Duncan, where Duncan states, in response to an EEO complaint, that plaintiff asked him "why don't they want me waiting on patients," and Duncan said 'because you appear stoned."
Regardless of who made the statement, discrimination claims cannot be based on stray remarks without other indicia of discriminatory intent. Merrick v. Farmers Ins. Grp, 892 F.2d 1434, 1438 (9th Cir. 1990). Because plaintiff does not provide any other indicia of discriminatory intent, plaintiff cannot base a discrimination claim on the remark that plaintiff "looked stoned." The court grants the government's motion for summary judgment as to plaintiff's claim on this stray remark.

E. Category 5:  [*30] OWCP Claim.
On May 26, 2009, plaintiff alleged she developed heat exhaustion and claustrophobia from being in her office with her door closed, and on June 10, 2009, filed an OWCP claim for these alleged injuries. Human Resources employee Greg Culver was assigned to help with her claim. Plaintiff contends that Hillers took Culver off the claim, and that plaintiff was never told why, or that the claim was now being handled by Hillers. Plaintiff alleges this was discriminatory and thwarted her OWCP proceedings, because plaintiff's claim was never acted on.
The government argues that Culver was taken off the claim and replaced because Culver had improperly indicated on the claim form that he was plaintiff's supervisor, rather than Kindsvater, making Kindsvater unaware of the claim. The government argues that as plaintiff's supervisor, Kindsvater had a duty to be aware of all OWCP claims, and that Culver had intentionally or unintentionally left Kindsvater out of the process, and thus was replaced. The government also argues that regardless of who was assigned to the claim, the claim was not acted on due to plaintiff's own negligence. On June 16, 2009, OWCP sent a letter to plaintiff requesting  [*31] more information about her claim. Plaintiff did not respond with the requested information, and on July 24, 2009, the claim was denied due of insufficient evidence.
The court finds that plaintiff has not demonstrated that the government's business reasons were pretextual. If the plaintiff relies on indirect evidence to prove pretext, the evidence must be specific and substantial. Godwin, 150 F.3d at 1221. Here, plaintiff has failed to provide specific, substantial evidence that Culver was removed from handling her OWCP claim because of a discriminatory motive on the part of Hillers, or others. Indeed, there is no evidence that Hillers handled plaintiff's claim any differently than Culver would have; the OWCP claim failed due to plaintiff's lack of response. The court grants summary judgment to the government on plaintiff's claim that the treatment of her OWCP was discriminatory.

F. Conclusion.
The court finds that the government has offered legitimate business reasons for all of its actions, and that plaintiff has failed to demonstrate that the proferred reasons were pretext. Accordingly, the government's motion as to plaintiff's disability discrimination claim is GRANTED.

III. Retaliation.
Plaintiff's  [*32] second claim alleges retaliation in violation of 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-16. To make out a prima facie case of retaliation, a plaintiff must demonstrate "(1) involvement in a protected activity, (2) an adverse employment action and (3) a causal link between the two." Brooks v. City of San Mateo, 229 F.3d 917, 928 (9th Cir. 2000). An employee's formal or informal complaint regarding unlawful employment practices is protected activity as long as the plaintiff demonstrates that she reasonably believed that the employment practice was unlawful. See Passantino v. Johnson & Johnson Consumer Prods.., 212 F.3d 493, 506 (9th Cir. 2000). For the purposes of a retaliation claim, a challenged action must be "materially adverse." Burlington N. v. Sante Fe Ry. Co. v. White, 548 U.S. 53, 68, 126 S. Ct. 2405, 165 L. Ed. 2d 345 (2006). That is, a challenged action must be one that would dissuade a reasonable worker from exercising protected rights. Id. Examples of materially adverse changes include termination of employment, decreases in wages, a less distinguished title, a material loss of benefits, and significantly diminished material responsibilities. Marrazzo v. Leavitt, 719 F.Supp. 2d 1297, 1307 (D. Or. 2010) (citations omitted).  [*33] Denials of transfers and promotions are also considered to be adverse employment actions for retaliation claim purposes. Brooks, 229 F.3d at 928. Potentially adverse employment actions that are not lasting or final do not constitute adverse employment actions for the purposes of establishing a prima facie case of retaliation. Id. at 929.
Once a plaintiff establishes a prima facie case of retaliation, the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting analysis applies, and the employer must proffer a nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse action it imposed, after which the employee must demonstrate that the proferred reason was in fact pretextual. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802-803.
In this case, plaintiff argues that the government retaliated against her for taking FMLA, filing EEOC complaints, and requesting reasonable accommodation for her disabilities. Plaintiff re-alleges the facts in her first claim, and argues that the job duty changes, disciplinary actions, leave decisions, stray remark, and OWCP claim are evidence of adverse employment actions designed to dissuade her from exercising her protected rights.
While the court agrees that plaintiff engaged in protected activity, the court  [*34] finds that plaintiff cannot demonstrate that the government took an adverse employment action against her. For the purposes of retaliation claims, only employment actions that are materially adverse are actionable. Burlington N., 548 U.S. at 68. Plaintiff's retaliation claim is based on the same facts as her discrimination claim. None of these employment actions are so adverse that they would dissuade a reasonable person from exercising their protected rights. Plaintiff alleges that her job duties changed, but not in a way that was permanent, or decreased her wages. The disciplinary letter issued to plaintiff was not made public, and did not result in a demotion. In relation to leave, plaintiff argues that she was told she could not use certain kinds of leave, but does not argue that she was denied leave altogether or otherwise treated in a materially adverse manner. Neither the stray remark, nor the handling of plaintiff's OWCP claim would be activities that would deter a reasonable employee from exercising their rights.
Moreover, even if there were a question of fact as to whether the government took adverse employment actions against plaintiff, plaintiff offers no evidence that the  [*35] government acted with a discriminatory motive. As stated supra, the government offers legitimate nondiscriminatory reasons for each of its employment actions. Plaintiff has failed to offer evidence that the government's reasons are pretextual. Accordingly, even if plaintiff had offered a prima facie case of discrimination, her retaliation claim would still fail under the McDonnell-Douglas test.
Because the alleged adverse employment actions do not meet the "materially adverse" standard for retaliation claims, and plaintiff had failed to show that the government had a discriminatory motive, the government's motion as to plaintiff's retaliation claim is GRANTED.

IV. Failure to Accommodate.
Plaintiff's third claim alleges that the government failed to reasonably accommodate plaintiff's disability. The ADA prohibits an employer from discriminating against a qualified individual with a disability by "failing to make reasonable accommodations to known physical or mental limitations" of that individual." Willis v. Pac. Mar. Ass'n, 236 F.3d 1160, 1164 (9th Cir. 2001) (citing 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A)). "Once an employer becomes aware of the need for accommodation, that employer has a mandatory  [*36] obligation under the ADA to engage in an interactive process with the employee to identify and implement appropriate reasonable accommodations." Humphrey v. Mem'l Hosps. Ass'n, 239 F.3d 1128, 1137 (9th Cir. 2001) (citing Barnett v. U.S. Air. Inc., 228 F.3d 1105, 1114 (9th Cir. 2000) vacated on other grounds sub nom, U.S. Airways, Inc. v. Barnett, 535 U.S. 391, 122 S. Ct. 1516, 152 L. Ed. 2d 589 (2002)). That is, once an employee gives notice of their disability and desire for accommodation, the employer has a mandatory duty to engage in an interactive process to determine whether the employee's disability can be accommodated. Witt v. Nw. Aluminum Co., 177 F.Supp.2d 1127, 1132 (D.Or. 2001) (citing Barnett, 228 F.3d at 1114.
The interactive process the employer is obligated to engage in consists of "(1) direct communication between the employer and employee to explore in good faith the possible accommodations; (2) consideration of the employee's request; and (3) offering an accommodation that is reasonable and effective." Zivkovic v. S. Cal. Edison Co.., 302 F.3d 1080, 1089 (9th Cir. 2002) (citing Barnett, 228 F.3d at 114-115). Both the employer and the employee must communicate directly and exchange essential information,  [*37] and neither side can delay or obstruct the process. Barnett, 228 F.3d at 1114-1115. Liability for failure to accommodate only ensues when the employer is responsible for a breakdown in the interactive process. Zivkovic, 302 F.3d at 1089. Additionally, "an employer cannot prevail at the summary judgment stage if there is a genuine dispute as to whether the employer engaged in good faith in the interactive process." Witt, 177 F.Supp.2d at 1133, quoting Barnett, 228 F.3d at 1116.
Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim focuses on the government's response to a doctor's note submitted on April 7, 2009, which stated that plaintiff should not be in a closed space alone with her supervisor and that plaintiff should only work four days a week.4 In response to the doctor's note, a meeting was held with plaintiff, Duncan, Kindsvater, Hillers, and the interim chief of the department. At the meeting, plaintiff was told that her request that she not be in a closed space alone with her supervisor was not feasible and could not be granted. Also in response to plaintiff's doctor's note, Kindsvater sent plaintiff an email on April 23, 2009, stating that
Your work hours are 8:00 AM to 4:30 PM Monday —  [*38] Friday. If you are requesting a change to your work hours, you must request a change to your work hours. If you are requesting leave, the leave must be submitted and approved before the leave is taken. Attached is an SORCC reasonable accommodation with procedures for requesting accommodation. If you have any questions, please feel free to contact me.
Def. Ex. 7, p. 30.
The attachment contained the SORCC VA's guidelines on reasonable accommodations, a ten-page document describing the policy and procedures the VA follows for reasonable accommodation requests. Under "Procedures," the guidelines state that employee requesting accommodation "[m]ust submit a request for an accommodation (orally or in writing) to his/her Supervisor/Service Manager. An oral request starts the reasonable accommodation process; however, a reasonable  [*39] accommodation request form (Attachment A) must also be completed for record keeping purposes." The email attachment did not include the reasonable accommodation request form described as "Attachment A." Plaintiff alleges that the government never provided her with Attachment A or took any other further action regarding plaintiff's request.
Plaintiff alleges that the government did not engage in a good faith interactive process regarding her disability. Plaintiff argues that once she provided the doctor's note with the request to not be in a closed space alone with her supervisor, she had given notice of her disability and request for accommodation, and the government then had a duty to directly communicate with plaintiff to explore accommodations and consider possible solutions. Plaintiff argues that the government failed to engage in a good faith interactive process regarding her request. First, plaintiff points to the fact that she was told in a meeting that her request was not feasible. Second, Plaintiff argues that Kindsvater's email directing her to the reasonable accommodation guidelines was not "engaging in a good faith interactive process." Plaintiff argues that the email simply  [*40] told plaintiff to fill out a form, which was not attached to Kindsvater's email or otherwise provided to plaintiff. Plaintiff also argues that they guidelines attached to the email state that "[a]n oral request starts the reasonable accommodation process," so she assumed that the government would either provide her with the reasonable accommodation form, or speak with her directly about possible accommodations.
In response, the government argues it engaged in a good faith interactive process when it mailed plaintiff with the reasonable accommodation guidelines. The government contends that plaintiff also had a duty to engage in the interactive process, and failed to do so when she did not fill out the reasonable accommodation form or otherwise follow up on her request. The government further argues that plaintiff's requested accommodation was not reasonable, because plaintiff's job required daily direct communication with her supervisor.
The court finds a question of fact as to whether the government engaged in the interactive process in good faith. The doctor's note provided by plaintiff clearly put the government on notice of plaintiff's request and triggered the duty to engage in  [*41] the interactive process. The government's response was to state that the request was not possible, and send plaintiff an email regarding the internal procedures for processing reasonable accommodation requests. The first response — stating that plaintiff's request was not feasible — is clearly not engagement in the good faith interactive process. The government's argument that it denied the request because it was clearly unreasonable is not persuasive. While to ultimately prevail on a failure to accommodate claim a plaintiff must prove that a reasonable accommodation would have been possible, at the summary judgment stage, a plaintiff "does not have to provide evidence that the [requested] accommodation was feasible to overcome an employer's motion for summary judgment." Witt, 177 F.Supp.2d at 1133. This is because the interactive process is designed to identify and develop reasonable accommodation. Indeed, "[i]f the interactive process did not occur, it is difficult to tell whether [the initially requested] accommodation would have been possible." Id.
Additionally, it is not clear that the second response to plaintiff's request — sending an email with the attached internal procedures  [*42] for requesting reasonable accommodation — qualifies as engagement in the interactive process. The email only references plaintiff's work hours and leave requests, not her request to not be alone in a closed space with Kindsvater. Viewing the facts in the light most favorable to plaintiff, the government's statement that plaintiff never being alone in a closed space with Kindsvater was "not feasible" may have been the government's only response to this specific request, and the email telling plaintiff she could submit a reasonable accommodation form may have been intended solely as a response to the four-day work week request. In addition, even if the e-mail was intended as a response to both requests, there is a question of fact as to whether the email demonstrates good faith engagement in the interactive process. The e-mail did not directly inform plaintiff of what she needed to do regarding reasonable accommodation requests. While the email contained an attachment with the VA's procedures, it did not contain the reasonable accommodation form for plaintiff to submit, or indicate where plaintiff could find the form.
Summary judgment cannot be granted in favor of a plaintiff if there  [*43] is a question of fact as to whether the employer engaged in good faith in the interactive reasonable accommodation process. Witt, 177 F.Supp.2d at 1133. In this case, viewing the facts in the light most favorable to plaintiff, the court finds that there is a question of fact as to whether the government engaged in good faith in the interactive process. Accordingly, the court DENIES the government's motion as to plaintiff's reasonable accommodation claim.

RECOMMENDATION
For the reasons stated above, the court recommends that the government' motion (#20) be GRANTED as to plaintiff's disability discrimination and retaliation claims, and DENIED as to plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim.
This recommendation is not an order that is immediately appealable to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. Any notice of appeal pursuant to Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure Rule 4(a)(1) should not be filed until entry of the district court's judgment or appealable order.
The Report and Recommendation will be referred to a district judge. Objections to this Report and Recommendation, if any, are due fourteen (14) days from today's date. If objections are filed, any response to the objections is due fourteen  [*44] (14) days from the date of the objections. See FED. R. CIV. P. 72, 6.
DATED this 20 day of December, 2012.
/s/ Mark D. Clarke
MARK D. CLARKE
United States Magistrate Judge


End of Document

