Phillips v. Henry Schein, Inc
United States District Court for the Eastern District of Washington
January 31, 2020, Decided; January 31, 2020, Filed
NO: 2:19-CV-337-RMP

Reporter
2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 269708 *
DAVID N. PHILLIPS, Plaintiff, v. HENRY SCHEIN, INC, Defendant.
Prior History: Phillips v. Henry Schein, Inc, 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 269706 (E.D. Wash., Jan. 31, 2020)
Counsel:  [*1] For Henry Schein Inc, Defendant: David P R Symes, LEAD ATTORNEY, Littler Mendelson PC, Portland, OR.
David N Phillips, Plaintiff, Pro se, Spokane, WA.
Judges: ROSANNA MALOUF PETERSON, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: ROSANNA MALOUF PETERSON
Opinion


ORDER DENYING PLAINTIFF'S MOTION TO APPOINT COUNSEL
BEFORE THE COURT are Plaintiff's Motion to Appoint Counsel, ECF No. 54, and Plaintiff's identical motion filed at ECF No. 56. Defendant has not responded to either motion. The Court has considered the record, the relevant precedent, and is fully informed.

BACKGROUND
Mr. Phillips filed the operative Complaint in this matter, ECF No. 9, on March 5, 2018, in the District of Oregon. According to Mr. Phillips's complaint, he "was rated at 79% disabled by state of California for neck injury." ECF No. 9-3 at 2. Mr. Phillips alleges that his former employer, Defendant Henry Schein, Inc. ("Henry Schein") discriminated against him, retaliated against him on the basis of his disability, and failed to accommodate his disability, all in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"). ECF No. 9 at 4-5. Mr. Phillips previously worked for Henry Schein in Placentia, California. ECF No. 48 at 1. After filing this lawsuit, he moved to Spokane, Washington.
Mr. Phillips [*2]  attached a four-page statement of facts to his form Complaint, which explains Henry Schein's alleged conduct. See ECF 9-3. From what the Court understands, Henry Schein allegedly terminated Mr. Phillips's employment while he was on workers' compensation. Id. at 1. Mr. Phillips claims that he presently has four work-related injuries: a neck injury, a lower back injury/ hernia, "left hand trigger finger," and a right shoulder injury. Id. at 3. Mr. Phillips states that he asked his former employer to put him on workers' compensation several times, but they refused to do so. See id. at 4. He also states that, in May of 2016, his manager told him that he would be terminated if he opened a workers' compensation claim against the company. Id. at 2. Mr. Phillips's employment subsequently was terminated. Id.
Additionally, Mr. Phillips argues that Henry Schein failed to accommodate his injuries while he worked for them. Most of his allegations focus on the company's failure to accommodate his neck injury. For instance, Mr. Phillips states that he requested "24-inch clear/ clean walkways" to the stockroom, characterizing this request as a request for an accommodation. Id. at 2. Without the clear, [*3]  24-inch walkways requested, Mr. Phillips argues that he was at risk of tripping over something and breaking his neck. Id. He also states that he asked for clear walkways so that he could more easily push his cart back to the stockroom. Id. Mr. Phillips contacted OSHA and the Human Resource Manager at Henry Schein about the cluttered walkways, but the walkways never were permanently cleared. Id. He writes, "How many times did I physically show my manager the safety violations and how I need this to stop happening. I have a neck injury and can't injure my neck again. Again every time I show my manager the walkways, and blocked exit door I remind him that I have requested under the ADA to keep walkways 24 inches and clean and exit doors unblocked." Id.
Mr. Phillips alleges that his lower back injury and hernia were a result of his former employer's failure to accommodate his request regarding the walkways. Id. He claims that he incurred these injuries when he tried to push his cart back to the stockroom, but it would not fit through the walkway. Id. He had to push and pull the cart, which he implies caused his injuries. See id. Mr. Phillips claims that he was written up for this incident [*4]  and was denied workers' compensation benefits. Id.
Mr. Phillips's hernia required surgery. Id. After his surgery, he requested a new chair to accommodate his back. Id. This request was denied. Id. He also characterizes his numerous requests to be "put on worker's comp" as requests for accommodations that his former employer refused to grant in violation of the ADA. Id. Additionally, Mr. Phillips states that Henry Schein should have "evaluated [him] for employment." Id. It is not clear what he means by this statement.
Mr. Phillips explains that Henry Schein provided certain accommodations for him, which included: giving him a new microscope for repairing circuit boards; allowing him to use the back doors to exit the building and access the parking lot more easily; allowing him to work while on narcotics; allowing him to wear his braces at work; and allowing him to work flexible hours. Id. at 4.
Mr. Phillips filed this case in the District of Oregon, and it was heard initially by Magistrate Judge Mark D. Clarke. Mr. Phillips moved for appointment of counsel, and on February 27, 2018, that motion was denied. ECF No. 6. at 6. The Court explained in its Order that, while it may "request volunteer [*5]  counsel in exceptional cases, it has no power to make a mandatory appointment" in civil cases. Id. (citing Mallard v. United States Dist. Court of Iowa, 490 U.S. 296, 301-08, 109 S. Ct. 1814, 104 L. Ed. 2d 318 (1989)). Magistrate Judge Clarke concluded that Mr. Phillips's case did not present exceptional circumstances warranting the appointment of counsel, and instructed Mr. Phillips to proceed pro se, or to hire counsel. Id.
On April 9, 2019, the Court held a telephonic Rule 16 conference. During that proceeding, Magistrate Judge Clarke referred Mr. Phillips to the Court's online resources, specifically the public website for "Representing Yourself." ECF No. 26 (text order). Then, for reasons unclear on the present record, Magistrate Judge Clarke requested the appointment of pro bono counsel. Id.
Three attempts were made to appoint pro bono counsel, but none was successful. See ECF Nos. 27-39. It appears that these attempts were unsuccessful because of the Court's location, in Medford, Oregon. ECF Nos. 27, 30, and 34; see also ECF No. 44 at 2. After attempting to appoint counsel, Magistrate Judge Clarke again ordered Mr. Phillips to proceed pro se, or, alternatively, to obtain counsel on his own. ECF No. 40 (text order). Again, the Court instructed Mr. Phillips to use the online resources for pro [*6]  se parties. Id. Mr. Phillips was ordered to inform the Court, in writing, whether he would proceed pro se or with representation no later than August 12, 2019. Id.
In response to the Court's Order, Mr. Phillips filed a letter on July 24, 2019. ECF No. 44. The letter was construed as a motion to transfer the case. ECF No. 48. The letter states, in part:
Plaintiff has put in a motion to have my case transferred to Spokane, Washington. Three attorneys have declined because it is a burden to get to Medford, Oregon. Plaintiff is on disability it is a burden on me to get to Medford, Oregon. Plaintiff has severe spine injuries limiting his travel abilities. I have more resources in Spokane for help. If I have to represent myself, I need to be close to my Court, not 700 miles away.
Henry Schein Inc. as of today is ranked at #238 on the fortune 500 list. Henry Schein Inc. will have no problem with the transfer . . . .
Court site Representing Yourself, Pro Bono Representation there is no information about why the Judge can dismiss the appointment of Pro Bono once it is ordered?
Plaintiff can not represent himself against a fortune 500 company who has more attorneys to call on. I need a chance at [*7]  justice and to have my day in court. Pro bono might work in Spokane?
ECF No. 44 at 2. Mr. Phillips's construed motion to transfer was made, in part, because Mr. Phillips would be able to better represent himself, and would have more resources, if the case were transferred to Spokane. See id.
In deciding Plaintiff's motion to transfer, Magistrate Judge Clarke considered plaintiff's choice of forum and the convenience of the parties. ECF No. 48 at 4. The Court concluded that these factors weighed in favor of the requested transfer, explaining that Mr. Phillips "now resides in Spokane, and he believes he will be able to find representation more easily if the case is local to his current residence." Id. at 4-5. The Order continues, "If Plaintiff can find local counsel to assist him with this case, that would likely be beneficial for both parties." Id. at 5. The potential for Mr. Phillips to find his own representation in Spokane was an important factor in the Court's decision to transfer the case. See id. While Mr. Phillips's motion to transfer references the possibility of appointing pro bono counsel in Spokane, the Court did not order that another attempt to find pro bono counsel be made. [*8]  Rather, the Court focused its reasoning on Mr. Phillips's ability to find his own representation in Spokane.
Mr. Phillips again has asked the Court to appoint counsel, filing two identical Motions for Appointment of Counsel. ECF Nos. 54 and 56. The Court will refer to both motions, collectively, as the "Motion for Appointment of Counsel," as they are identical. Mr. Phillips's Motion for Appointment of Counsel is a form motion, providing no detail about Mr. Phillips's case, and containing no arguments.

DISCUSSION

Motion for Reconsideration
The Court construes Mr. Phillips's successive Motion for Appointment of Counsel as a Motion for Reconsideration of the court's prior Order, which ordered Mr. Phillips to either represent himself or to hire counsel, after numerous attempts to appoint counsel had been made. Reconsideration is an "extraordinary remedy, to be used sparingly in the interests of finality and conservation of judicial resources." Kona Enters., Inc. v. Estate of Bishop, 229 F.3d 877, 890 (9th Cir. 2000). A motion for reconsideration "should not be granted, absent highly unusual circumstances, unless the district court is presented with newly discovered evidence, committed clear error, or if there is an intervening change in the controlling law." McDowell v. Calderon, 197 F.3d 1253, 1255 (9th Cir. 1999) (internal [*9]  quotation omitted). District courts have broad discretion in deciding whether to grant a motion for reconsideration. Simon v. City of Phoenix, No. CV-09-701-PHX—MHM, 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 25914, 2010 WL 1038606, at *1, (D. Ariz. March 19, 2010).
As Mr. Phillips's Motion for Appointment of Counsel is a form motion designed to request appointment of pro bono counsel, it does not present an argument as to why this Court should reconsider the Oregon court's prior ruling in this matter. However, because Mr. Phillips is proceeding pro se, the Court has searched the record to determine whether it is appropriate to reconsider the prior Order, which instructed Mr. Phillips to proceed pro se or find representation on his own.
Several factors in this case lead the Court to find that unusual circumstances exist, such that the Court should reconsider the prior ruling. Most significantly, it is not clear from the record why Mr. Phillips's first Motion to Appoint Counsel, ECF No. 3, was granted after it had been denied initially. While the Magistrate Judge provided an explanation as to why the Court denied the motion initially, no reason was provided for the subsequent decision to change course and grant the motion to appoint counsel. The lack of reasons provided on the record for this change of course supports reconsideration. [*10] 
Additionally, the fact that the case was transferred supports reconsideration. After the Court unsuccessfully attempted to appoint pro bono counsel, it ordered Mr. Phillips to proceed on his own because the prospective pro bono attorneys were unwilling to travel to Medford, Oregon. See ECF No. 40; see ECF Nos. 27, 30, and 34. Now that the case has been transferred to Spokane, the facts underlying that decision have changed significantly. For the foregoing reasons, the Court finds that highly unusual circumstances exist warranting reconsideration.

Appointment of Counsel in a Civil Case
The Court now reconsiders Mr. Phillips's Motion for Appointment of Counsel. General Order 16-114-1 states that if, upon motion of a pro se litigant, accompanied by a declaration of indigency, the Court finds that appointed counsel is warranted, the Court will request that the Federal Bar Association select counsel from the panel of pro bono attorneys.
The Court "may request an attorney to represent any person unable to afford counsel" in a civil matter. 28 U.S.C. § 1915(e)(1). Section 1915(e)(1) does not authorize federal courts to require attorneys to represent indigent litigants in civil cases. Mallard, 490 U.S. at 309. The Court only has the ability to request an attorney [*11]  to represent Mr. Phillips. Id. at 310.
The Ninth Circuit has held that appointment of counsel "is within the sound discretion of the trial court" and should be "granted only in exceptional circumstances." Agyeman v. Corrections Corp. of Am., 390 F.3d 1101, 1103 (9th Cir. 20004) (quoting Franklin v. Murphy, 754 F.2d 1221, 1236 (9th Cir. 1984) (internal quotes omitted)). To determine whether those exceptional circumstances exist, a district court should consider: (1) the pro se plaintiff's likelihood of success on the merits; and (2) the plaintiff's ability to articulate his claims, "in light of the complexity of the legal issues involved." See id. (quoting Wilborn v. Escalderon, 789 F.2d 1328, 1331 (9th Cir. 1986) (citation omitted)). Neither factor is dispositive, and "both must be viewed together before reaching a decision on request of counsel under section 1915(d)." Wilborn, 789 F.2d at 1331. When it comes to the second factor, regarding "complexity of the legal issues involved," it is not enough to argue that one needs assistance developing facts through discovery. Id. "If all that was required to establish successfully the complexity of the relevant issues was a demonstration of the need for development of further facts, practically all cases would involve complex legal issues." Id.
The Court first considers whether Mr. Phillips has demonstrated a likelihood of success on the merits. At this time, Mr. Phillips [*12]  has not alleged enough facts in a clear manner to demonstrate a likelihood of success on his claims.
The Court next considers Mr. Phillips's ability to articulate his legal claims, in light of their complexity. Based on the pleadings and the facts presented on the record, it does not appear that Mr. Phillips's claims raise more complex legal issues than claims regularly brought under the ADA. While the Court acknowledges that Mr. Phillips has not presented his legal arguments in a particularly clear fashion at this juncture, the Court must consider whether his ability to articulate his claims is limited due to the complexity of the legal issues that they present. See Wilborn, 789 F.2d at 1331. Mr. Phillips consistently states in his pleadings that he should receive counsel because Defendant is a Fortune 500 Company, and therefore Defendant has more resources to litigate this case than he does. See e.g., ECF No. 3 at 1 (arguing that Henry Schein is too big and has too much money for Plaintiff to successfully challenge it without counsel). Mr. Phillips argues that his case will be difficult to win if he is not appointed counsel due to this disparity of resources. See id. While it is true that Defendant is represented [*13]  and Mr. Phillips is not, this fact does not establish successfully the complexity of the relevant legal issues. Therefore, Mr. Phillips has not shown that the legal issues he presents are complex.
Because Mr. Phillips has not demonstrated a likelihood of success on the merits or that his case presents complex legal issues, the Court finds that exceptional circumstances are not present. Therefore, appointment of counsel is not warranted.
Accordingly, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED:
1. Plaintiff's Motion for Appointment of Counsel, ECF No. 54, is DENIED.
2. Plaintiff's subsequent and identical Motion for Appointment of Counsel, ECF No. 56, is DENIED AS MOOT.
IT IS SO ORDERED. The District Court Clerk is directed to enter this Order and provide copies to counsel and Plaintiff.
DATED January 31, 2020.
/s/ Rosanna Malouf Peterson
ROSANNA MALOUF PETERSON
United States District Judge


End of Document

