Postell v. Metro. Atlanta RTA
United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division
November 13, 2018, Decided; November 13, 2018, Filed
CIVIL ACTION FILE NO. 1:17-CV-02296-WMR-WEJ

Reporter
2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 221528 *
TARLENE B. POSTELL, Plaintiff, v. METROPOLITAN ATLANTA RAPID TRANSIT AUTHORITY, Defendant.
Subsequent History: Adopted by, Summary judgment granted by Postell v. R Metro. Atlanta RTA, 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 26065 (N.D. Ga., Jan. 8, 2019)
Counsel:  [*1] For Tarlene B. Postell, Plaintiff: Howard Raymond Evans, Howard R. Evans Law Firm & Associates, Atlanta, GA.
For Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority, Defendant: Janine D. Willis, John Roger Lowery, Mozley, Finlayson & Loggins, LLP, Atlanta, GA.
Judges: WALTER E. JOHNSON, UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE.
Opinion by: WALTER E. JOHNSON
Opinion



FINAL REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION
Plaintiff, Tarlene B. Postell, alleges that her former employer, the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority ("MARTA"), discriminated against her in violation of the Americans With Disabilities Act, as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq. ("ADA"). Now pending before this Court is Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment [34]. For the reasons explained below, the undersigned RECOMMENDS that said Motion be GRANTED.

I. STATEMENT OF FACTS
The Court draws the material facts largely from the parties' submissions. In support of its Motion for Summary Judgment, Defendant as movant filed a Statement of Material Facts as to Which There is no Genuine Dispute ("DSMF") [34-2]. See N.D. Ga. Civ. R. 56.1(B)(1). As required by Local Rule 56.1(B).(2)a., Plaintiff submitted a response. (See Pl.'s Resp. to Def.'s Stat. of Mat. Facts as to Which There is No Gen. Dispute ("PR-DSMF") [41]). As allowed by Local Civil Rule 56.1(B)(2)(b), Plaintiff [*2]  filed a statement of additional facts which she contends are material and present a genuine issue for trial (see Pl.'s Stat. of Mat. Facts Which Create a Gen. Issue for Trial ("PSAMF") [42], to which Defendant submitted a response. (See Def.'s Resp. to Pl.'s Stat. of Mat. Facts Which Create a Gen. Issue for Trial ("DR-PSAMF") [51-1].)
When a party admits a fact proposed by the other, the Court includes that fact as undisputed for the purposes of this Report and Recommendation and cites only that proposed fact. When a party denies a proposed fact, the Court reviews the record and determines whether that denial is supported by the record evidence cited, and if it is, whether any fact dispute is material. The Court sometimes modifies a proposed fact to better reflect the record cited. Where necessary, the Court rules on a party's objection to a proposed fact, but if the Court includes the proposed fact without discussion of the objection, then the objection has been overruled. Finally, the Court may draw additional facts necessary for disposition of the Motion from its review of the record. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(3).

A. Plaintiff's Employment at MARTA and the CBA
MARTA hired Plaintiff as a Mobility Operator [*3]  in June 2008. (DSMF ¶ 1; see also PR-DSMF ¶ 1.) As a Mobility Operator, and as with all represented employees, Plaintiff's employment was governed, at least in part, by a Collective Bargaining Agreement ("CBA"). (DSMF ¶ 2.) Paragraph 34(C) 4 of the CBA sets forth the Maximum Absence Rule applicable to all represented employees as twelve continuous months. (Id. ¶ 3; see also Def.'s Ex. 3 [39-2], at 9 (excerpt from CBA).)1 Paragraph 70 of the CBA sets forth the Workers Compensation Program and the Modified Duty Program ("MDP"). (DSMF ¶ 4.)2

B. Plaintiff's Work-Related Injury and Modified Duty
On August 7, 2014, Plaintiff suffered an on-the-job injury to her left shoulder. (DSMF ¶ 8.) Because Plaintiff suffered a compensable on-the-job injury, she was eligible for and received worker's compensation benefits as well as treatment and ongoing assessment under MARTA's Workers Compensation Program. (Id. ¶ 9.) Plaintiff was unable to work her regular duty position (i.e., Mobility Operator) from August 7, 2014, through to the time of her termination. (Id. ¶ 11; see also id. ¶ 19 (Plaintiff's medical provider opined that she could not perform the essential duties of the Mobility Operator position) [*4] 3.)
Ms. Postell was absent from work from August 8, 2014 through April 5, 2015. (See Def.'s Ex. 11 [39-2], at 30; see also Benson Aff. [36] ¶ 5.) When Plaintiff was cleared to return to work on light duty, Terrie Benson, the Worker's Compensation Claims Adjuster who worked with Plaintiff on her claim, referred Plaintiff to the MDP, where she was provided a modified duty assignment as a Station Agent for a maximum period of six months. (DSMF ¶¶ 10, 12.)4 Plaintiff's six-months in the MDP ran from April 6, 2015 through October 6, 2015. (Id. ¶ 23.)5
The essential duties and functions of a Station Agent are set forth in its position description. (DSMF ¶ 13, citing Position Description-Station Agent, filed as Def.'s Ex. 2 [39-2], at 4-6.) The Station Agent Position Description lists the following as "ESSENTIAL DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES":
1. Provides face-to-face customer contact by interacting with patrons to ensure immediate resolutions to service issues. Directly responds to patrons' needs regarding service issues including service disruptions and emergencies. Maintains safe flow of patrons during special events, incidents, and/or accidents.
2. Inspects station equipment [*5]  and responds to and assists customers with station equipment, (e.g., automated fare equipment), escalators, and station communication equipment. Reports equipment problems to appropriate personnel, follows up with appropriate written forms to appropriate internal staff.
3. Monitors MARTA information sources, staying abreast of MARTA service and maintenance issues, special events, and operating procedures and rules. Must attend bi-weekly safety training informational meetings.
4. Documents customer complaints and directs complaint and issues to the appropriate MARTA staff.
5. Provides information regarding transportation services such as current routes and schedules for assigned station. Maintains an appropriate supply of schedules and other information or publications, providing customer information and assistance.
6. Must apply safety policies, principles and practices in daily work.
7. Performs other related duties as needed.
(Position Description-Station Agent, filed as Def.'s Ex. 2 [39-2], at 4; see also PSAMF ¶ 1.)
The Station Agent Position Description also lists the following "SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS":
(1) Must pass physical examination, including drug and alcohol screen.
(2) Must successfully [*6]  pass background investigation by Georgia Crime Information Center.
(3) Must be willing to work weekends and holidays at various locations and times.
(4) Must be able to do the necessary standing (constant), walking (constant), bending (occasional), using hands-fingering/feeling (frequent), climbing (occasional), crouching (occasional), and reaching (occasional).
(5) Must be able to occasionally lift up to 50 pounds. \2
(6) Minimum 18 years of age.
(Position Description-Station Agent, filed as Def.'s Ex. 2 [39-2], at 6; see also PSAMF ¶ 2 & DSMF ¶ 31.)
MARTA's Phyllis Walker6 declares that, while in the modified duty assignment as a Station Agent, Plaintiff did not perform the full spectrum of duties expected from a Station Agent as set out above in its Position Description; instead, her role was limited to performing the "customer service" aspects of the job with limited physical demands. (DSMF ¶ 14.)
Plaintiff denies the preceding proposed fact, supporting her denial with the Declarations of two retired Station Agents, Ms. Linda Lockett [46] and Ms. Nancy Blanton [48-1]. (See PR-DSMF ¶ 14.)7 Further, in PSAMF, Plaintiff asserts that she performed "all the required station agent duties" and [*7]  supports that assertion by citing generally to the Declarations of Mses. Lockett and Blanton. (PSAMF ¶ 3.)8 As discussed infra, both Declarants opine that Plaintiff performed what they believe were the essential duties of the Station Agent position as they performed it.
For example, Ms. Lockett states that, when she worked with Plaintiff, it was her observation that Ms. Postell was "physically able to perform the regular physical requirements of the position." (Lockett Decl. [46] ¶ 7; see also id. ¶ 15 & PSAMF ¶ 20.) According to Ms. Lockett, the most physical aspect of the job was "walking and standing" (Lockett Decl. [46] ¶ 9), and that MARTA provided stools so that Station Agents would not have to stand for an extended time (id. ¶ 10). Ms. Lockett claims that she was never required to lift 50 pounds. (Id. ¶ 9; see also PSAMF ¶ 17, citing Lockett and Blanton Declarations.) Ms. Lockett asserts that the most physical work she performed was barricading out-of-service escalators or elevators, and in this task she was always assisted by other employees in dragging (not lifting) barricades which weighed 20-30 pounds. (Lockett Decl. [46] ¶ 9.) She adds that Station Agents underwent "wayside" [*8]  training,9 where they pressed up against a wall to avoid contact with a train or electric rails. (Id. ¶ 12; see also PSAMF ¶ 22.) Plus, in the event of a train malfunction, "supervisors, police, and others were involved in" removing passengers from the railcars and directing them safely to exit to buses. (Lockett Decl. [46] ¶ 13; see also PSAMF ¶ 21.)
Ms. Blanton echoed some of Ms. Lockett's statements. For example, Ms. Blanton declares that "Ms. Postell was physically able to perform the regular physical requirements of the position." (Blanton Decl. [48-1] ¶ 6; see also id. ¶ 15.) Ms. Blanton states that anything heavy was moved by other employees. (Id. ¶ 8.) Ms. Blanton reports that she was never required to lift 50 pounds. (Id. ¶ 9; see also PSAMF ¶ 17.) According to Ms. Blanton, the most physical work she performed was adjusting the position of signs weighing no more than 5 to 7 pounds by sliding them. (Blanton Decl. [48-1] ¶ 9.)
While she was in the MDP, MARTA gave Plaintiff the opportunity and encouraged her to seek and apply for job vacancies in the event she was unable to return to her position as a Mobility Operator. (DSMF ¶ 15.) On or about August 5, 2015, Ms. Walker [*9]  sent Plaintiff a letter reminding her that her time in the MDP would expire on October 6, 2015, and that if she were unable to return to regular duty position by that date, then she could be subject to termination. (Id. ¶ 21.) This letter advised Plaintiff that she "may continue reviewing internal openings on a weekly basis" and made clear that she was "responsible for monitoring the positions posted at the garages, the MARTAnet Intranet Portal, or Employee Portal on www.itsmarta.com." (Def.'s Ex. 9 [39-2], at 27.) Finally, this letter informed Plaintiff that months spent working in the MDP would be counted towards the Maximum Absence Time of twelve months as identified under paragraph 34C (4) of the CBA. (DSMF ¶ 22.)
Despite other positions being available at MARTA during this time period, Plaintiff was only interested in continuing to work in the Station Agent position in a light duty capacity. She did not inquire about any alternatives. (DSMF ¶ 20, citing Walker Aff. [35] ¶ 13.)10 Ms. Walker testified that she recalled having a conversation with Plaintiff while she was in the MDP in which she asked to be considered for the Station Agent position. (PSAMF ¶ 4, modified per record cited.) [*10]  According to Ms. Postell, she told Ms. Walker that she could perform the Station Agent job because nothing hindered her ability to walk, that she could perform the customer service functions and paperwork, and that if something happened on a train, she knew how to deal with that situation. (Id. ¶ 5, modified per record cited.) According to Plaintiff, Ms. Walker replied that she would make a good Station Agent. (Id. ¶ 6.) However, Ms. Walker could not hire Plaintiff into that job. (Postell Dep. [33-1] 322.)
At some point during this time frame, Plaintiff claims that Ms. Walker suggested she go to Human Resources and talk to Recruiting Technician Amber Drayton about her interest in the Station Agent position. (PSAMF ¶ 7, modified per record cited.)11 Plaintiff testified that she went to see Ms. Drayton and told her that she was interested in the Station Agent position. (Postell Dep. [33-1] 202.) According to Plaintiff, Ms. Drayton replied that she still had Plaintiff's May 2014 application for the Station Agent position on file. (PSAMF ¶ 9; see supra note 5.)12 Ms. Drayton reportedly told Plaintiff to call back because she was going to check on it. (PSAMF ¶ 8, modified per record cited.) [*11]  Plaintiff went to see Ms. Drayton again, and on this occasion, Ms. Walker and Ms. Drayton talked on the telephone (but Plaintiff did not know what they talked about), and Ms. Drayton reportedly told Plaintiff that she was going to get back with her. (Postell Dep. [33-1] 201, 205.) However, Plaintiff never heard back from Ms. Drayton, and when Plaintiff called Ms. Drayton, she did not answer her telephone. (Id.)13
Plaintiff testified that there is a difference between expressing interest in a position and actually submitting an application for it. (Postell Dep. [33-1] 203.) Ms. Postell could not say that the conversation she had with Ms. Drayton qualified as an application for the Station Agent position. (Id. at 206.) Given this concession, Ms. Drayton's averment that Plaintiff did not apply for any open position during the course of this second MDP is undisputed. (DSMF ¶ 16, citing Drayton Aff. [37] ¶¶ 8-9.)14
The last medical assessment of Plaintiff's condition before her six-month MDP expired on October 6, 2015 is dated September 18, 2015. That document reflects that Ms. Postell could not lift, push, or pull more than five pounds; that she had limited use of her injured arm; that she could [*12]  not perform overhead work; and that she needed additional physical therapy. (DSMF ¶ 24, citing Def.'s Ex. 10 [52]; see also Benson Aff. [36] ¶ 7.) The form completed by Plaintiff's physician indicated that she still had right and left shoulder pain. (Def.'s Ex. 10 [52].)
Based upon Ms. Walker's experience and review of information pertaining to the Station Agent position, she believed that Plaintiff was unable to perform the essential functions of the Station Agent position. (DSMF ¶ 25.)15 Plaintiff proposes two additional facts based upon Ms. Walker's deposition testimony. (See PSAMF ¶¶ 14-15.) However, after review of the cited testimony and consideration of its context, the Court excludes those two proposed facts as unsupported by the record cited. (See DR-PSAMF ¶¶ 14-15.)16
Vickie Dewberry conducted an investigation and made the recommendation for Plaintiff's termination based upon her violation of the Maximum Absence Rule. (DSMF ¶ 32.) Ms. Dewberry prepared a memorandum documenting that investigation and recommendation that was signed by the General Superintendent- Mobility Operations, Angela A. Brown. (Dewberry Aff. [53-1] ¶ 13.) In that memorandum, Ms. Dewberry calculated the number [*13]  of weeks since Plaintiff's October 2013 injury that she had worked as a Mobility Operator (5.86), the number of weeks that she been in the MDP (52), and the number of weeks that she had been absent due to injury (45). Plaintiff's total time out of the Mobility Operator position was 97 weeks, which Ms. Dewberry calculated was 19 weeks more than the 78 weeks (or 18 months) allowed under the CBA's Maximum Absence Rule.17 (Def.'s Ex. 11 [39-2], at 29-31.)
By letter dated November 23, 2016, General Superintendent-Mobility Operations Brown notified Plaintiff of her termination as follows:
In a recent Labor-Management meeting on September 15, 2015, the parties agreed to an interpretation of Paragraph 34 C (4) in the labor agreement which impacts your employment status. Based upon this recent interpretation:
2022; Individuals absent due to inability to perform assigned job, whose last day worked was December 31, 2014 or earlier will be subject to the terms and conditions of the Labor Agreement between Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority and Amalgamated Transit Union Local 732, effective November 23, 2010-June 30, 2013.
MARTA records reflect you last worked October 6, 2013. You have been [*14]  unable to perform your assigned job for a time period which exceeds 18-months, and your 18-month period is continuous, since it was not broken by 45 days of work. Therefore, effective November 23, 2015, your employment with MARTA has been terminated.
(Def.'s Ex. 12 [39-2], at 32.)18 MARTA recognized the error in the last day worked listed above and sent a corrected letter to Plaintiff on January 27, 2016, which provides that her last day worked was October 6, 2015, and amends her effective termination date to January 27, 2016. (Def.'s Ex. 13 [39-2], at 34.)
"Because Ms. Postell remained out of her [Mobility Operator] position for a period longer tha[n] twelve (12) months, and because her absence was not interrupted by a period of work longer than 45 days, Ms. Postell was due to be terminated pursuant to the terms of the Labor Agreement, specifically the Maximum Absence Rule." (Dewberry Aff. [53-1] ¶ 12.) Ms. Dewberry also avers that the decision to terminate Ms. Postell's employment "was based solely on the terms of the Labor Agreement which governed her employment." (Id. ¶ 15.)
When asked how reasonable accommodation worked at MARTA, Ms. Walker described it as an "interactive [*15]  discussion with the employee." (Walker Dep. [47-1] 28; see also PSAMF ¶ 16, modified per record cited.) MARTA starts by making a determination of what help the employee feels he needs to perform the essential functions of a job. (Walker Dep. [47-1] 28.) MARTA also examines whether any accommodation requested would impose an undue hardship upon it. (Id.) When asked if a discussion of that type occurred with Plaintiff, Ms. Walker replied, "She was not under--identified under the ADA, so that process was not engaged in." (Id. at 32; see also PSAMF ¶ 19.)
One of MARTA's Rule 30(b)(6) representatives, Dr. Shelton Goode, the Executive Director of Diversity and Inclusion, testified that he was familiar with the MDP. (Goode Dep. [44-1] 19.) He explained that, if an employee placed in the MDP could no longer perform the essential functions of his original position, then MARTA would make some attempt to find that individual another job for which he was qualified. (Id. at 20; see also PSAMF ¶ 18.) MARTA's policies, however, place the burden on the employee to "inform MARTA that an accommodation is needed." (Def.'s Ex. 4 [39-2], at 17.)

II. SUMMARY JUDGMENT STANDARD
A "court shall grant summary judgment if the movant shows that [*16]  there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." See Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). The party moving for summary judgment bears the initial burden of "informing the court of the basis for its motion and of identifying those materials that demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact." Rice-Lamar v. City of Fort Lauderdale, 232 F.3d 836, 840 (11th Cir. 2000) (citing Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986)). Those materials may include "depositions, documents, electronically stored information, affidavits or declarations, stipulations (including those made for purposes of the motion only), admissions, interrogatory answers, or other materials." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(1)(A). "Only when that burden has been met does the burden shift to the non-moving party to demonstrate that there is indeed a material issue of fact that precludes summary judgment." Clark v. Coats & Clark, Inc., 929 F.2d 604, 608 (11th Cir. 1991).
The non-moving party is then required "to go beyond the pleadings" and present competent evidence "showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." Celotex, 477 U.S. at 324. Generally, "[t]he mere existence of a scintilla of evidence" supporting the non-movant's case is insufficient to defeat a motion for summary judgment. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 252, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). If in response the non-moving party does not sufficiently support an essential element of his case as to which he bears the burden [*17]  of proof, summary judgment is appropriate. Rice-Lamar, 232 F.3d at 840. "In determining whether genuine issues of material fact exist, [the Court] resolve[s] all ambiguities and draw[s] all justifiable inferences in favor of the non-moving party." Id. (citing Anderson, 477 U.S. at 255).
In deciding a summary judgment motion, the court's function is not to resolve issues of material fact but rather to determine whether there are any such issues to be tried. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 251. The applicable substantive law will identify those facts that are material. Id. at 248. Facts that are disputed, but which do not affect the outcome of the case, are not material and thus will not preclude the entry of summary judgment. Id. Genuine disputes are those in which "the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party." Id. For factual issues to be "genuine," they must have a real basis in the record. Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986). When the record as a whole could not lead a rational trier of fact to find for the non-movant, there is no "genuine issue for trial." Id. at 587.

III. DISCUSSION
Plaintiff claims that MARTA discriminated against her in violation of the ADA by terminating her employment as a Mobility Operator without providing her the reasonable accommodation of transfer [*18]  into the Station Agent position. Defendant responds that the undisputed material facts show that Plaintiff was not disabled, that she was not a qualified individual, and that she was not discriminated against because the accommodation she sought was unreasonable.
The ADA prohibits covered employers from discriminating "against a qualified individual on the basis of disability in regard to job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a); see also Wascura v. City of S. Miami, 257 F.3d 1238, 1242 (11th Cir. 2001). The definition of "discriminate" includes a failure to make reasonable accommodation. See 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A) ("the term 'discriminate against a qualified individual on the basis of disability' includes . . . not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who is an applicant or employee, unless such covered entity can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business of such covered entity"). "Thus, an employer's failure to reasonably accommodate a disabled individual itself constitutes discrimination [*19]  under the ADA, so long as that individual is 'otherwise qualified,' and unless the employer can show undue hardship." Holly v. Clairson Indus., L.L.C., 492 F.3d 1247, 1262 (11th Cir. 2007).19
To establish a failure to accommodate claim, the plaintiff must show that (1) she is disabled; (2) she was a "qualified individual" at the relevant time, meaning she could perform the essential functions of the job in question with or without reasonable accommodation; and (3) she was discriminated against by way of the defendant's failure to provide a reasonable accommodation. Solloway v. Clayton, 738 F. App'x 985, 987 (11th Cir. 2018) (per curiam) (citing Lucas v. W.W. Grainger, Inc., 257 F.3d 1249, 1255 (11th Cir. 2001)). The plaintiff bears the burden of identifying an accommodation and of demonstrating that the accommodation allows her to perform the job's essential functions. Bagwell v. Morgan Cty. Comm'n, 676 F. App'x 863, 865 (11th Cir. 2017) (per curiam). If a plaintiff establishes all three elements, then the burden shifts to the employer to prove that the plaintiff's requested accommodation imposes an undue hardship. Terrell v. USAir, 132 F.3d 621, 624 (11th Cir. 1998); see also Willis v. Conopco, Inc., 108 F.3d 282, 286 (11th Cir. 1997) (per curiam) ("[E]stablishing that a reasonable accommodation exists is a part of an ADA plaintiff's case, whereas undue hardship is an affirmative defense to be pled and proven by an ADA [*20]  defendant."). The Court examines the three elements of Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim separately below.

A. Ms. Postell is Disabled
The ADA defines a "disability" as "(A) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities of [an] individual; (B) a record of such an impairment; or (C) being regarded as having such an impairment." 42 U.S.C. § 12102(1). The Complaint alleges that Plaintiff has an actual physical impairment (subpart (A)) and that MARTA regarded her as having a physical impairment (subpart (C)). (Compl. [1] ¶¶ 29, 39.) Plaintiff's Response Brief abandons the "regarded as" claim, but adds the new assertion that Plaintiff is disabled because she has a record of an impairment (subpart (B)). (Pl.'s Br. [40] 7-8.) However, a response brief cannot amend a complaint. See Gilmour v. Gates, McDonald & Co., 382 F.3d 1312, 1315 (11th Cir. 2004) (per curiam) ("A plaintiff may not amend her complaint through argument in a brief opposing summary judgment."). Given the fact that Plaintiff cannot assert a "record of" claim for the first time in a response brief and given that she has abandoned her "regarded as" claim, the only remaining claim is that Plaintiff is disabled because of an actual physical impairment. Thus, Ms. Postell [*21]  can only proceed under subpart (A) of the above-quoted statute.20
The terms "impairment," "substantially limits," and "major life activities" found in subpart (A) of the above-quoted statute have specific meanings. Under the EEOC's ADA regulations, an "impairment" means:
Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss affecting one or more body systems, such as neurological, musculoskeletal, special sense organs, respiratory (including speech organs), cardiovascular, reproductive, digestive, genitourinary, immune, circulatory, hemic, lymphatic, skin, and endocrine[.]
29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(h)(1). Nevertheless, an impairment does not rise to the level of a disability unless it "substantially limits" an individual in a major life activity. The regulations provide as follows:
An impairment is a disability within the meaning of this section if it substantially limits the ability of an individual to perform a major life activity as compared to most people in the general population. An impairment need not prevent, or significantly or severely restrict, the individual from performing a major life activity in order to be considered substantially limiting.
Id. § 1630.2(j)(1)(ii).
The regulations [*22]  further provide that the term "substantially limits" shall "be construed broadly in favor of expansive coverage, to the maximum extent permitted by the terms of the ADA. 'Substantially limits' is not meant to be a demanding standard." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(1)(i). Another rule of construction urged upon courts states as follows:
The primary object of attention in cases brought under the ADA should be whether covered entities have complied with their obligations and whether discrimination has occurred, not whether an individual's impairment substantially limits a major life activity. Accordingly, the threshold issue of whether an impairment "substantially limits" a major life activity should not demand extensive analysis.
Id. § 1630.2(j)(1)(iii).
Finally, the EEOC's regulations provide that "major life activities" include, but are not limited to: "Caring for oneself, performing manual tasks, seeing, hearing, eating, sleeping, walking, standing, sitting, reaching, lifting, bending, speaking, breathing, learning, reading, concentrating, thinking, communicating, interacting with others, and working[.]" 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(i)(1)(i). Additionally, the regulations direct that, in "determining other examples of major life activities, the term 'major' shall not be interpreted [*23]  strictly to create a demanding standard for disability. ADAAA section 2(b)(4) (Findings and Purposes). Whether an activity is a 'major life activity' is not determined by reference to whether it is of 'central importance to daily life.'" Id. § 1630.2(i)(2).
In applying the above standards to this case, neither party proposed most of the following facts, but they discuss them in their briefs. (Compare Def.'s Br. [34-1] 8-9, with Pl.'s Resp. [40] 8-9.) Although the Local Civil Rules provide that the Court may refuse to consider facts found only in a brief (see N.D. Ga. Civ. R. 56.1(B)(1)(d) ), the Court will exercise its discretion to examine this evidence.
In response to written interrogatories asking Plaintiff to describe each disability from which she allegedly suffers and/or each major life activity she alleges she is limited or impaired in performing, Plaintiff wrote that "she has been restricted from lifting, has had fusions and is prevented from working as a mobility operator, a position that many non-disabled individuals can perform as well as many occupation categories requiring more than light lifting." (Def.'s Ex. 19 [39-3], at 10-11.) When asked in her deposition to describe the extent of her limitations, Plaintiff testified that [*24]  she could drive a vehicle (but she tries not to); she has not lifted anything over 30 pounds since her injury; she could not turn her head all the way to the left; that if she bends over to lift, she feels a strain or pull in her neck; she can lift small objects; she can lift her two-week old grand baby; and she has limited range of motion lifting her left arm. (Postell Dep. [33] 176-85.)
Finally, in a fact that was proposed, the last medical assessment of Plaintiff's condition before her six-month MDP expired on October 6, 2015 is dated September 18, 2015. That document reflects that Ms. Postell could not lift, push, or pull more than five pounds; that she had limited use of her injured arm; that she could not perform overhead work; and that she needed additional physical therapy. The form completed by Plaintiff's physician indicated that she still had right and left shoulder pain. (DSMF ¶ 24.)
Based on this evidence, Plaintiff argues that the EEOC's Interpretative Guidance on Title I of the ADA supports her contention that she is substantially limited in the major life activities of performing manual tasks (i.e., driving) and lifting. (Pl.'s Br. [40] 6-7.)21 Construing the evidence in [*25]  a light most favorable to Plaintiff, the undersigned reports that Ms. Postell has raised a triable issue over whether she is substantially limited as she contends and thus disabled. Having found that Plaintiff is disabled, the Court turns to the second element of her failure to accommodate claim—whether she is a qualified individual.

B. Ms. Postell is Not a Qualified Individual
The second element of Plaintiff's claim is whether she is a qualified individual. Plaintiff must show that she "satisfies the requisite skill, experience, education and other job-related requirements of the employment position such individual holds or desires and, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of such position." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m); see also 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8) ("The term 'qualified individual' means an individual who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds or desires.").22
"Accordingly, an ADA plaintiff must show either that he can perform the essential functions of his job without accommodation, or, failing that, show that he can perform the essential functions of his job with a reasonable accommodation." D'Angelo v. ConAgra Foods, Inc., 422 F.3d 1220, 1229 (11th Cir. 2005) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). If the plaintiff cannot perform an essential function of her job, even with a reasonable accommodation, then she is not a qualified individual. Davis v. Fla. Power & Light Co., 205 F.3d 1301, 1305 (11th Cir. 2000).
Given the [*27]  above standards, a court must first "determine the 'essential functions' of a job." Bagwell, 676 F. App'x at 865. Whether a particular job function is essential is "evaluated on a case-by-case basis by examining a number of factors." D'Angelo, 422 F.3d at 1230 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). For example, the EEOC's ADA regulations define the "essential functions" of a position to mean "the fundamental job duties of the employment position the individual with a disability holds or desires. The term 'essential functions' does not include the marginal functions of the position." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(1); see also Mason v. United Parcel Serv. Co.., 674 F App'x 943, 951 (11th Cir. 2017) (per curiam) ("An essential function is a fundamental job duty of a position, and does not include marginal functions of the position."); Holly, 492 F.3d at 1257 ("[E]ssential functions are the fundamental job duties of a position that an individual with a disability is actually required to perform.") (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
In determining if a task is an essential function, relevant evidence may include: (1) the employer's judgment as to what functions are essential, (2) a written job description, (3) the amount of time spent on the job performing the function, (4) the consequences of not requiring the employee to perform the function, [*28]  (5) the terms of a collective bargaining agreement, (6) the work experience of past employees in the position, and (7) the current work experience of employees in similar jobs. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(3).23
"There are also three non-exclusive bases on which a particular job function may be deemed essential." Samson v. Fed. Exp. Corp., 746 F.3d 1196, 1201 (11th Cir. 2014). They are as follows: (1) the position exists to perform that function; (2) a limited number of employees are available among whom that job function can be distributed; and (3) the job function is "highly specialized" so that the incumbent is hired for their expertise or ability to perform that function. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(2).
As discussed supra, MARTA's Station Agent Position Description lists the job's "essential duties and responsibilities" as including, inter alia, directly responding to patrons' needs regarding service issues (including service disruptions and emergencies) and maintaining [*29]  the safe flow of patrons during special events, incidents, or accidents. (See Def.'s Ex. 2 [39-2], at 4 ¶ 1.)24 The Position Description also provides that a Station Agent must apply safety policies, principles and practices in daily work and perform other related duties as needed. (Id. ¶¶ 6-7.) The Position Description also lists several "special requirements," which provide that a Station Agent must be able to pass a physical; perform the necessary standing (constant), walking (constant), bending (occasional), using hands-fingering/feeling (frequent), climbing (occasional), crouching (occasional), and reaching (occasional); and occasionally lift up to 50 pounds. (Def.'s Ex. 2 [39-2], at 6 ¶¶ (1), (4)-(5).)
The only one of the aforementioned "essential duties" or "special requirements" that Plaintiff challenges is the one mandating that she be able to lift up to 50 pounds occasionally. (Pl.'s Br. [40] 16-17.) She argues that because this 50-pound lifting requirement is not found among those listed as "essential" in the Position Description, but rather is found in the section entitled "Special Requirements," it is subject to modification. (Id.) She also asserts that it is questionable [*30]  whether MARTA even requires Station Agents to lift up to 50 pounds, citing the Declarations of retired Station Agents Lockett and Blanton, who aver that they never had to lift that much weight.25
The Court is directed by statute and regulation to give substantial deference to the employer's judgment as to what job functions are essential. Here, MARTA's judgment is that occasionally lifting up to 50 pounds is an essential function of the Station Agent position. It memorialized that judgment in a written job description prepared long before Plaintiff sought this accommodation. That this lifting requirement is found in the "special requirements" section of the Position Description and not in its "essential duties" section is of no moment. The Court must read the Position Description in its entirety.
Moreover, the Circuit directs that "when considering the employer's judgment regarding what is an essential function, we have previously considered not only the company's 'official position,' but also testimony from the plaintiff's supervisor." Holly, 492 F.3d at 1257. Mr. Hicks supervised all Station Agents during the relevant time period. (Hicks Aff. [38] ¶ 2.) He avers that Station Agents occasionally have to lift [*31]  up to 50 pounds to carry and position large signs or barriers to direct or limit patron traffic flow, or to assist wheelchair bound patrons who get stuck, need assistance entering or exiting an elevator, or need to be pushed to safety. (Id. ¶ 6.) That Ms. Blanton or Ms. Lockett never had to lift up to fifty pounds in the time that they performed the job does not create a material fact dispute regarding MARTA's judgment that occasionally lifting up to 50 ponds is an essential function of the Station Agent position.26 Thus, the Court finds that occasionally lifting up to 50 pounds is an essential function of the Station Agent position.
But, even if occasionally lifting up to 50 pounds were not an essential function of the job, the serious physical restrictions which led this Court to report that Plaintiff is disabled (see supra Part III. A.) show that she cannot perform other essential functions of the Station Agent position that Plaintiff does not dispute. For example, a Station Agent must apply safety policies, principles, and practices in daily work. This would necessarily include performing wayside duties.27 Plus, a Station Agent must be able to climb and reach occasionally. [*32]  The record shows that, based on the last medical assessment submitted to MARTA, Plaintiff's interrogatory response, and her deposition testimony, Plaintiff's physical ability is so limited that she could not climb (i.e., pull her weight up a ladder for wayside duties) and could not reach over her head. Given these limitations, the undisputed material fact show that Plaintiff could not perform the essential functions of the Station Agent position.
If a plaintiff cannot perform the essential functions of the position, a court must next "determine whether a reasonable accommodation exists that 'enables the employee to perform the essential functions of the job.'" Bagwell, 676 F. App'x at 866 (quoting Lucas, 257 F.3d at 1255). "The burden of identifying an accommodation that would allow a qualified employee to perform the essential functions of her job rests with that employee, as does the ultimate burden of persuasion with respect to showing that such accommodation is reasonable." Earl, 207 F.3d at 1367. Thus, "[t]he plaintiff bears the burden of identifying a reasonable accommodation that would allow a qualified individual to perform the job, and an employer is not required to accommodate an employee in any manner in which the employee desires." Gilliard v. Ga. Dep't of Corr., 500 F. App'x 860, 868 (11th Cir. 2012) (per [*33]  curiam).28 The ADA does not require the employer to "transform the position into another one by eliminating functions that are essential to the nature of the job as it exists." Lucas, 257 F.3d at 1260.29 The employer's duty to provide a reasonable accommodation is not triggered unless the plaintiff makes a specific demand for an accommodation. Gaston v. Bellingrath Gardens & Home, Inc., 167 F.3d 1361, 1363 (11th Cir. 1999) (per curiam).
"An employer is not required to re-allocate job duties in order to change the essential function of the job or remove another employee from a position in order to accommodate a disabled employee." Bagwell, 676 F. App'x at 866. An employer may be required to restructure a particular job by altering or eliminating marginal functions, but an employer is not required to transform a position into another one by eliminating essential functions. Lucas, 257 F.3d at 1260. "Accommodations that eliminate essential functions of the position or violate internal policies are categorically unreasonable." Mattingly v. Univ. of S. Fla. Bd. of Trs., 931 F. Supp. 2d 1176, 1185 (M.D. Fla. 2013); see also Anderson v. Embarq/Sprint, 379 F. App'x 924, 928 (11th Cir. 2010) (per curiam) ("[L]ifting was an essential function of [Plaintiff]'s job. [Plaintiff]'s request for forklift work only, however, eliminates this essential function. Thus, because [Plaintiff's] requested accommodation would eliminate an essential function of his job, it was not reasonable and was therefore [*34]  not required under the statute.").
The record shows that MARTA placed Plaintiff in the MPD for a maximum of six months while she recovered from a work-related injury. She was assigned to the Station Agent position for modified duty and performed only its customer service functions. The accommodation that Plaintiff sought from MARTA was to continue performing the Station Agent job in that manner on a permanent basis. However, granting that accommodation would have required MARTA to create a permanent light-duty position for Ms. Postell. An employer is "not required by the ADA to create a permanent light-duty position especially for Plaintiff." Frazier-White v. Gee, 818 F.3d 1249, 1256 (11th Cir. 2016). "This proposed accommodation is unreasonable as a matter of law because it would force Defendant to eliminate essential functions of Plaintiff's position under the guise of reasonably accommodating Plaintiff's disability." Allen v. Ga. Power Co., 980 F. Supp. 470, 478 (N.D. Ga. 1997). Moreover, "numerous courts have held that where an employer does not have a permanent 'light duty' position, it is not required to create one or convert a temporary 'light duty' position into a permanent one for purposes of accommodating an employee's disability." Id. (citing cases).30 Thus, Plaintiff has not satisfied her [*35]  burden of identifying an accommodation that would have allowed her to perform the essential functions of the Station Agent position.
Third, and finally, the EEOC's ADA regulations provide that, to determine the appropriate reasonable accommodation, an employer may need "to initiate an informal, interactive process with the individual with a disability in need of an accommodation" to identify the person's limitations and potential reasonable accommodations. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3). However, where the employee fails to identify a reasonable accommodation, the employer has no affirmative duty to engage in an interactive process. Earl, 207 F.3d at 1367; see also Knowles v. Sheriff, 460 F. App'x 833, 835 (11th Cir. 2012) (per curiam) ("[W]here the employee failed to identify a reasonable accommodation, the employer had no affirmative duty to engage in an interactive process.") (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
Plaintiff contends that MARTA did not engage her in the interactive process contemplated in the EEOC's ADA regulations and in its own policies. (Pl.'s Br. [40] 14.) Even assuming that contention to be true,31 it makes no difference. This is because Plaintiff's proposed accommodation would not have enabled her to perform the essential functions of the Station Agent position. [*36]  "Consequently, there is no basis for imposing liability on Defendant for failing to engage in an "interactive process" to identify accommodations." Frazier-White, 818 F.3d at 1257-58; see also Willis, 108 F.3d at 285 ("[W]here a plaintiff cannot demonstrate 'reasonable accommodation,' the employer's lack of investigation into reasonable accommodation is unimportant."); McKane v. UBS Fin. Servs., Inc., 363 F. App'x 679, 681 (11th Cir. 2010) (per curiam) (The "ADA provides no cause of action for failure to investigate possible accommodations.") (internal quotations marks and citation omitted).

C. Plaintiff Was Not Discriminated Against
Because Plaintiff cannot show that she was a qualified individual, she was not discriminated against by way of Defendant's failure to provide a reasonable accommodation. Thus, the Court need not discuss the third element of Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim. See Mason v. United Parcel Serv. Co., No. 2:13-CV-02335-AKK, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 3970, 2016 WL 146234, at *10 (N.D. Ala. Jan. 13, 2016) (given the court's finding that the plaintiff was not a qualified individual under the ADA, she cannot show that her employer discriminated against her; therefore, the court need not address the final element of the failure to accommodate claim), aff'd sub nom. Mason v. UPS Co., 674 Fed. Appx. 943 (11th Cir. 2017) (per curiam). The Court also does not have to address the employer's undue hardship burden. See  [*37]  Everett v. Grady Mem'l Hosp. Corp., No. 1:15-CV-173-SCJ, 2016 WL 9651268, at *32 (N.D. Ga. May 12, 2016) ("[I]f an employee never identifies a reasonable accommodation, the employer would not be required to prove an "undue burden."), aff'd, 703 F. App'x 938 (11th Cir. 2017).

IV. CONCLUSION
For the reasons explained above, the undersigned RECOMMENDS that Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment [34] be GRANTED.
The Clerk is DIRECTED to terminate the reference to the undersigned Magistrate Judge.
SO RECOMMENDED, this 13th day of November, 2018.
/s/ Walter E. Johnson
WALTER E. JOHNSON
UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE


End of Document

