Powell v. Anheuser-Busch Inc.
United States District Court for the Central District of California
September 24, 2012, Decided; September 24, 2012, Filed
CV 09-729-JFW (VBKx)

Reporter
2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 200311 *; 2012 WL 12953439
Fred Powell -v- Anheuser-Busch Incorporated, et al.
Prior History: Powell v. Anheuser-Busch, Inc., 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 134701 (C.D. Cal., June 29, 2009)
Counsel:  [*1] For Fred Powell, Plaintiff: Rita M Morales, LEAD ATTORNEY, Miranda Morales Law Firm, Los Angeles, CA; Barbara DuVan-Clarke, Law Offices of Barbara DuVan, Redondo Beach, CA; Carney R Shegerian, Shegerian and Associates Inc, Santa Monica, CA.
For Anheuser-Busch Incorporated, a Missouri Corporation, Defendant: Nicky Jatana, LEAD ATTORNEY, Jackson Lewis, Los Angeles, CA; John J Manier, Nassiri & Jung LLP, Los Angeles, CA; Kevin Steven Saman, Jackson Lewis LLP, Los Angeles, CA.
Judges: HONORABLE JOHN F. WALTER, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: JOHN F. WALTER
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES -- GENERAL

PROCEEDINGS (IN CHAMBERS): ORDER GRANTING DEFENDANT ANHEUSER-BUSCH, INC.'S MOTION FOR TOTAL SUMMARY JUDGMENT OR, IN THE ALTERNATIVE, FOR PARTIAL SUMMARY ADJUDICATION OF ISSUES [filed 7/30/12; Docket No. 142]
On July 30, 2012, Defendant Anheuser-Busch, Inc. ("Defendant") filed a Motion for Total Summary Judgment or, in the Alternative, for Partial Summary Adjudication of Issues ("Motion"). On August 20 and 21, 2012, Plaintiff Fred Powell ("Plaintiff") filed his Opposition.1 On August 27, 2012, Defendant filed a Reply. Pursuant to Rule 78 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and Local Rule 7-15, the Court found the matter appropriate for submission on the papers without oral argument. The [*2]  matter was, therefore, removed from the Court's September 10, 2012 hearing calendar and the parties were given advance notice. After considering the moving, opposing, and reply papers, and the arguments therein, the Court rules as follows:

I. Factual and Procedural Background
In about October 1995, Plaintiff was hired by Defendant as a Delivery Driver at the Sylmar, California branch of its Wholesale Operations Division ("WOD"). Plaintiff's duties and responsibilities as a Delivery Driver included delivering product to retail customers, picking up expired product, and unloading his truck. The products that Plaintiff was required to unload and deliver included beer in pony kegs (weighing 65 pounds), half kegs (weighing 165 pounds), bottled beer (weighing 25 pounds), and beer in cans (weighing 15 to 20 pounds). In 1996, Plaintiff was promoted to the position of Delivery Driver/Route Sales, which is the position Plaintiff held until his employment was terminated on April 20, 2007. In his new position, Plaintiff's additional duties involved sales (which included sales of packaged product, creating invoices, and displaying advertisement) but he was still required [*3]  to unload his truck, and deliver beer in bottles, cans, pony kegs, and half kegs to retail customers. During his employment with Defendant, Plaintiff was considered a good employee, and was a member of Teamster Local Union No. 896.
On December 16, 2003, Plaintiff sustained an injury to his neck while unloading a keg of beer from his delivery truck at the first stop on his route. Despite his injury, Plaintiff was able to finish his route, and before leaving for the day, Plaintiff alerted dispatch of his injury. Because he continued to experience pain over the weekend, Plaintiff decided to see a doctor. Plaintiff spoke to the Safety and Risk Manager for Sylmar WOD, Joseph Baerga ("Baerga"), and Baerga referred Plaintiff to a Defendant-associated occupational injury doctor, who examined him and prescribed medication for his injury.
Shortly after his visit to the doctor, Plaintiff returned to work and was assigned "light duty" by Baerga based on a note from Plaintiff's doctor, which instructed Plaintiff to avoid lifting, pushing, or pulling anything in excess of ten pounds. Plaintiff was also instructed by his doctor to avoid repetitive bending, stooping, or lifting. Plaintiff's light duty [*4]  assignment was commensurate with those restrictions and lasted for 90 days. Because his condition had not improved and he was diagnosed with a degenerative disc disease in his neck, Plaintiff was granted a medical leave of absence beginning on March 16, 2004. Plaintiff remained on medical leave for approximately three years. While on medical leave, Plaintiff underwent surgery on his neck. Plaintiff also filed a workers' compensation claim related to his workplace neck injury.
On January 16, 2007, Plaintiff was examined by an agreed upon orthopedic medical examiner, and the medical examiner determined that Plaintiff had attained "permanent and stationary status/maximum medical improvement." Plaintiff's permanent restrictions required him to avoid heavy work, repetitive activities at or above shoulder level with the left arm, and all pushing or pulling with the left arm.2
In April 2007, Plaintiff was released to return to work with restrictions that included a limit on how much he could lift, and instructions to avoid excessive bending, pushing, and pulling. Plaintiff advised Baerga as to the nature and extent of his restrictions. Thereafter, Plaintiff had several conversations with Baerga [*5]  during which they discussed his permanent restrictions. On April 10, 2007, Plaintiff met with Baerga and the Human Resources Manager for Sylmar WOD, Allison Shirley ("Shirley"). At the time of this meeting, Plaintiff recognized that he was unable to perform his previous position as a Delivery Driver, and Baerga and Shirley advised him that, other than his previous Delivery Driver position, there were only two other open positions in the sales department.3 However, they concluded that Plaintiff was unable to perform the essential functions of either the sales representative or the merchandiser position because each of those jobs, like his previous position, required him to lift, load, unload, and move products weighing up to 165 pounds and hang merchandising materials.4 At the conclusion of the meeting, Plaintiff was advised that Shirley would search for any other available positions and determine if he could perform the essential functions of any open positions, provided he met the minimum qualifications such as prior experience or education.
After the meeting, Shirley searched Defendant's online and internet job databases to determine if any additional position in the locations acceptable [*6]  to Plaintiff were available and that could accommodate Plaintiff's permanent restrictions and for which he was qualified. Shirley also contacted Beach Cities WOD Human Resources Manager to determine if there were any open positions suitable for Plaintiff at Beach Cities WOD. Although Plaintiff was encouraged to search Defendant's website to determine if there were available jobs that were of interest to him and that he could perform given his restrictions, he failed to do so.
On April 19, 2007, Plaintiff had another meeting with Baerga and Shirley, and Shirley explained the results of her efforts to find another position for Plaintiff. Shirley advised Plaintiff that other than the sales positions they had discussed at their earlier meeting, she was unable to find any other positions currently available at either Sylmar WOD or Beach Cities WOD for which Plaintiff was qualified and that would be able to accommodate his restrictions. After discussing her findings, Shirley asked Plaintiff if there were any other positions in which he had any interest and Plaintiff advised Shirley that he was not aware of any positions that were available that he would be able to perform given his restrictions. [*7]  At the conclusion of the meeting it was determined that Plaintiff could not perform the essential functions of either a Delivery Driver position or any vacant available position with or without a reasonable accommodation. As a result, Plaintiff's employment was terminated effective April 20, 2007.
After his termination, Plaintiff applied for three open positions at local facilities that he found on Defendant's website: (1) weekend production at Defendant's Van Nuys facility in approximately May 2007; (2) business development representative at Defendant's Pomona facility in approximately June 2007; and (3) relief sales representative at Sylmar WOD in approximately November 2008. Plaintiff was not offered any of these positions, and admits that he was neither qualified for nor able to perform the essential functions required by these positions. Plaintiff also admits that he has no idea why he was not offered these positions and has no evidence that the decisions were in any way connected to his disability.
Approximately one week after his termination, Plaintiff filed a grievance with his union, alleging disability discrimination. On June 27, 2007, the union notified Plaintiff that it had [*8]  determined his grievance lacked merit. On August 21, 2007, Plaintiff filed a Charge of Discrimination with the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing ("DFEH"), alleging Defendant unlawfully terminated him due to his disability, failed to accommodate his alleged disability, and failed to engage in the interactive process. On February 8, 2008, DFEH issued Plaintiff a Right to Sue letter.
On December 30, 2008, Plaintiff filed his Complaint against Defendant in Los Angeles Superior Court, alleging causes of action for: (1) disability discrimination; (2) failure to provide reasonable accommodation; (3) failure to engage in interactive process: (4) failure to prevent disability harassment and/or discrimination; (5) wrongful termination in violation of public policy/constructive discharge; (6) discriminatory refusal to reinstate; (7) retaliation; (8) intentional infliction of emotional distress; (9) violation of California Business & Professions Code §§ 17200, et seq. ("UCL").5 On January 29, 2009, Defendant removed this action to this Court. In its Motion, Defendant moves for summary judgment on all the causes of action in Plaintiff's Complaint.

II. Legal Standard
Summary judgment is proper where "the movant shows that there is no genuine [*9]  dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). The moving party has the burden of demonstrating the absence of a genuine issue of fact for trial. See Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 256, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). Once the moving party meets its burden, a party opposing a properly made and supported motion for summary judgment may not rest upon mere denials but must set out specific facts showing a genuine issue for trial. Id. at 250; Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c), (e); see also Taylor v. List, 880 F.2d 1040, 1045 (9th Cir. 1989) ("A summary judgment motion cannot be defeated by relying solely on conclusory allegations unsupported by factual data."). In particular, when the non-moving party bears the burden of proving an element essential to its case, that party must make a showing sufficient to establish a genuine issue of material fact with respect to the existence of that element or be subject to summary judgment. See Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). "An issue of fact is not enough to defeat summary judgment; there must be a genuine issue of material fact, a dispute capable of affecting the outcome of the case." American International Group, Inc. v. American International Bank, 926 F.2d 829, 833 (9th Cir. 1991) (Kozinski, dissenting).
An issue is genuine if evidence is produced that would allow a rational trier of fact to reach a verdict in favor of the non-moving party. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248. "This requires evidence, not speculation." [*10]  Meade v. Cedarapids, Inc., 164 F.3d 1218, 1225 (9th Cir. 1999). The Court must assume the truth of direct evidence set forth by the opposing party. See Hanon v. Dataproducts Corp., 976 F.2d 497, 507 (9th Cir. 1992). However, where circumstantial evidence is presented, the Court may consider the plausibility and reasonableness of inferences arising therefrom. See Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249-50; TW Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Pacific Elec. Contractors Ass'n, 809 F.2d 626, 631-32 (9th Cir. 1987). Although the party opposing summary judgment is entitled to the benefit of all reasonable inferences, "inferences cannot be drawn from thin air; they must be based on evidence which, if believed, would be sufficient to support a judgment for the nonmoving party." American International Group, 926 F.2d at 836-37. In that regard, "a mere 'scintilla' of evidence will not be sufficient to defeat a properly supported motion for summary judgment; rather, the nonmoving party must introduce some 'significant probative evidence tending to support the complaint.'" Summers v. Teichert & Son, Inc., 127 F.3d 1150, 1152 (9th Cir. 1997).

III. Discussion

A. Evidentiary Objections

1. The Parties' Objections Generally
"A trial court can only consider admissible evidence in ruling on a motion for summary judgment." Orr v. Bank of America, NT & SA, 285 F.3d 764, 773 (9th Cir. 2002). Defendant has filed in excess of 100 evidentiary objections to the evidence submitted by Plaintiff in opposition to Defendant's Motion. See Docket Nos. 176, 176-1, 176-2, 176-3, 178, 178-1, 178-2 and 183. The majority of those objections are absolutely frivolous and [*11]  have substantially increased the Court's burden in reviewing this matter.6 In making these objections, Defendant's counsel is apparently unaware or chosen to ignore the well established principle that "[t]o survive summary judgment, a party does not necessarily have to produce evidence in a form that would be admissible at trial, as long as the party satisfies the requirements of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 56." Frasier v. Goodale, 342 F.3d 1032, 1036-1037 (9th Cir. 2003) (citing Block v. City of Los Angeles, 253 F.3d 410, 418-419 (9th Cir. 2001).
Similarly, Plaintiff's counsel has greatly increased the Court's burden in reviewing this Motion by improperly citing to entire sets of deposition transcripts and documents with no specific page and line references whatsoever in violation of paragraph 4(b) of the Amended Case Management Order. See, e.g., Plaintiff's Separate Statement in Opposition to Defendant's Uncontroverted Facts and Conclusions of Law (Docket No. 166), UF Nos. 8-10, 20, 22, 31
In addition to violating the Court's Amended Scheduling and Case Management Order, it is well established that if the non-movant does not "specifically . . . challenge the [duly supported] facts identified in the [movant's] statement of undisputed facts, the non-movant "is deemed to have admitted the validity of the facts contained in the [movant's] [*12]  statement." Beard v. Banks, 548 U.S. 521, 527, 126 S. Ct. 2572, 165 L. Ed. 2d 697 (2006). "Because a district court has no independent duty to scour the record in search of a genuine issue of triable fact, and may rely on the nonmoving party to identify with reasonable particularity the evidence that precludes summary judgment . . .the district court . . .[is] under no obligation to undertake a cumbersome review of the record on the [non-moving party's] behalf." Simmons v. Navajo Cnty, Ariz, 609 F.3d 1011, 1017 (9th Cir. 2010) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
Finally, Plaintiff's objections are primarily directed to Defendant's Statement of Uncontroverted Facts, attacking the phrasing of the statements rather than the underlying evidence upon which they are based. However, statements of undisputed facts are not evidence, the admissibility of which can be challenged under the Federal Rules of Evidence. Instead, they are summaries of the material facts contained in the cited evidence which the Court reviews independently. As a result, all of Plaintiff's objections attacking the statements of undisputed fact are improper, not well taken, and are overruled.
In the interest of brevity, as the parties are well aware of the substance of their objections and the grounds asserted in support of each objection, the Court [*13]  will not review the substance or grounds of all the objections here with the exception of discussing the objections related to Plaintiff's expert, Alessandro Anfuso ("Anfuso"). However, for the purposes of this motion and as explained below, Defendant's objections to the declarations of Arthur T. Hernandez ("Hernandez") (Exh. 7 to the August 20, 2012 Declaration of Rita Morales), Angel Salas ("Salas") (Exh. 6), and Martin Jacobs ("Jacobs") (Exh. 8) are sustained. Moreover, to the extent that the Court has relied on other evidence to which the parties have objected, the Court has considered and overruled those objections. As to the remaining objections, the Court finds that it is unnecessary to rule on those objections because the disputed evidence was not relied on by the Court.

2. Defendant's Objections to Plaintiff's Expert
Rule 702 of the Federal Rules of Evidence governs the admissibility of expert testimony:
If scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge will assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue, a witness qualified as an expert by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education, may testify thereto in the form of an opinion or otherwise, if (1) the testimony [*14]  is based upon sufficient facts or data, (2) the testimony is the product of reliable principles and methods, and (3) the witness has applied the principles and methods reliably to the facts of the case.
In other words, for an expert's testimony to be admissible, (1) the expert must be qualified; (2) the expert's testimony must be relevant, i.e., must assist the trier of fact to understand the evidence or determine a fact in issue; and (3) the expert's testimony must be reliable. The Court has a basic gatekeeping function to ensure that testimony meets these requirements, and is entitled to broad discretion in discharging this function.
The Supreme Court, in Daubert v. Merrel Dow Pharm., Inc., 509 U.S. 579, 593-94, 113 S. Ct. 2786, 125 L. Ed. 2d 469 (1993), provided the Court with a non-exclusive, nondispositive list of factors to use in assessing the reliability of an expert's testimony: (1) whether the theory or technique can be, or has been, tested; (2) whether it has been subjected to peer review and publication; (3) whether it has a known or potential rate of error; and (4) whether it has been generally accepted by the scientific community. However, as the Supreme Court further explained in Kumho Tire, these factors "may or may not be pertinent in assessing reliability, depending [*15]  on the nature of the issue, the expert's particular expertise, and the subject of his testimony." Indeed, the Court has "considerable leeway in deciding in a particular case how to go about determining whether particular expert testimony is reliable." The key question is whether the expert employs in the courtroom the same level of intellectual rigor that characterizes the practice of an expert in the relevant field. The test for reliability, however, is not the correctness of the expert's conclusions but the soundness of his methodology." A court may admit somewhat questionable testimony if it falls within 'the range where experts might reasonably differ, and where the jury must decide among the conflicting views. "Vigorous cross-examination, presentation of contrary evidence, and careful instruction on the burden of proof are the traditional and appropriate means of attacking shaky but admissible evidence." Daubert, 509 U.S. at 596.
The proponent of the expert testimony has the burden of establishing Rule 702's admissibility requirements by a preponderance of the evidence. See Fed. R. Evid. 702 Advisory Committee's Note. As the Ninth Circuit held in United States v. Alatorre, 222 F.3d 1098, 1100 (9th Cir. 2000), the Court need not conduct a separate, pretrial evidentiary hearing to determine [*16]  the admissibility of the proffered expert testimony.
Although Defendant objects to the qualifications of Anfuso, those objections are overruled, and the Court concludes that Anfuso is qualified to testify.7 However, the balance of Defendant's objections to Anfuso's testimony are sustained. Specifically, Plaintiff has failed to demonstrate that Anfuso's opinions are the product of reliable principles and methods, reliably applied to the facts of this case. Experts such as Anfuso who rely solely on experience must explain how that experience leads to the conclusions reached, why that experience is a sufficient basis for the opinions offered by the expert, and how that experience is reliably applied to the facts. Fed. R. Civ. P. 702, Advisory Committee Notes, 2000 Amendments ("The trial court's gatekeeping function requires more than simply 'taking the expert's word for it'").
After reviewing Anfuso's report and deposition testimony, the Court concludes that his opinions are unreliable in large part because he relies on the mere fact of his experience as a Vocational Rehabilitation Consultant to support his conclusions and he, in essence, requests the Court to take his word for it rather than applying his specialized knowledge to the facts of this [*17]  case. This subjective, conclusory approach cannot reasonably be assessed for reliability and is plainly insufficient under Daubert.
In addition, the Court concludes that Anfuso lacks sufficient facts or data to make a reliable analysis of Defendant's actions and decisions regarding Plaintiff's employment. Although Anfuso's report lists the "Records Relied Upon," the only deposition transcripts Anfuso reviewed before preparing his report were those of Baerga and Plaintiff. Although it was certainly important to review Baerga's deposition testimony, Baerga's testimony fails to provide a complete picture of the relevant events and therefore Anfuso attempts to offer opinions without a full understanding or knowledge of the facts of this case. Baerga testified, and Anfuso acknowledged during his deposition, that although Baerga may have had several initial conversations with Plaintiff when he returned to work in April 2007 and advised Baerga of his restrictions, Baerga had limited involvement and he made no decisions regarding Plaintiff's employment because he referred all issues regarding Plaintiff's employment to Shirley who served as Defendant's Human Resources Manager. Thereafter, all [*18]  actions taken and decisions regarding Plaintiff's employment were undertaken and made by Shirley.
Accordingly, in order to properly assess and analyze the events leading up to Plaintiff's termination after he returned to work, it was imperative that Anfuso review Shirley's deposition testimony. However, Anfuso admitted in his deposition that he failed to do so. See Deposition Transcript of Alessandro Anfuso, 71:6-20. The importance of reviewing Allison's testimony before forming his opinions in this case is exemplified by Anfuso's admission that his opinions might change if he had the opportunity to review her testimony.
Although the Court recognizes that Plaintiff has an argument that the completeness of the materials Anfuso reviewed is an issue going to the weight of his testimony and not its admissibility, the Court rejects that argument. Reliance on incomplete facts and data will make an expert's opinion unreliable because an expert must know "of facts which enable him to express a reasonably accurate conclusion." Smith v. Pac. Bell Tel. Co., Inc., 649 F.Supp 2d 1073, 1096-1097 (E.D. Cal. 2009) (refusing to admit testimony of an expert in part because the expert's report was based on incomplete facts and selective documents). In this case, the Court concludes [*19]  that Anfuso has failed to sufficiently consider the relevant underlying facts necessary to support his opinions and conclusions, especially in light of his admitted failure to develop the factual record relating to Shirley's actions and decisions relating to Plaintiff's disability and employment. Accordingly, the Court concludes that Anfuso's testimony is unreliable and not admissible. See Gen. Elec. Co. v. Joiner, 522 U.S. 136, 146, 118 S. Ct. 512, 139 L. Ed. 2d 508 (1997) ("nothing in either Daubert or the Federal Rules of Evidence requires a district court to admit opinion evidence that is connected to existing data only by the ipse dixit of the expert); Fanning v. Sitton Motor Lines, Inc., 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 116809, 2010 WL 4261476, *7 (D. Kan. Mar. 10, 2010) ("to satisfy the strictness of Daubert, an expert may not base his or her testimony upon assumptions that are not supported by the evidence").
Finally, for many of the same reasons that Anfuso's opinions are unreliable, they are also irrelevant. The Court concludes that Anfuso's testimony is not helpful to the trier of fact. Expert testimony is not helpful to the trier of fact and therefore irrelevant when it addresses an issue that is within "the common knowledge of the average lay man." U.S. v. Hanna, 293 F.3d 1080 (9th Cir. 2002). Anfuso has obviously developed his opinions for the sole purpose of testifying in this case and the majority of Anfuso's purported [*20]  opinions simply consist of a regurgitation of facts that he has carefully selected from the record and that the trier of fact may assess without the aid of an expert witness. The Court finds that this is the type of opinion where the normal experiences and qualifications of layman jurors are sufficient for them to draw a proper conclusion from given facts and circumstances, and that expert witness testimony is not necessary and is improper. Wilson v. Muckala, 303 F.3d 1207, 1219 (10th Cir. 2002).

B. Plaintiff's First Cause of Action for Disability Discrimination Fails.
Defendant seeks summary judgment on Plaintiff 's disability discrimination claim under Cal. Govt. Code 12940(a) as alleged in the first cause of action, arguing that Plaintiff cannot establish a prima facie case of disability discrimination because Plaintiff admits, and therefore cannot show, that he is a qualified individual with a disability as defined by FEHA.8 Specifically, Defendant argues that Plaintiff has failed to provide evidence that he was a qualified individual who was able to perform the essential functions of the job or any other vacant position with or without a reasonable accommodation. Plaintiff argues that he has produced sufficient evidence to support his claim for disability discrimination [*21]  such that the summary judgment must be denied.
"California has adopted the three-stage burden shifting test established by the United States Supreme Court for trying claims of discrimination."9 Guz v. Bechtel Nat'l, Inc., 24 Cal. 4th 317, 354, 100 Cal. Rptr. 2d 352, 8 P.3d 1089 (2000). "This so-called McDonnell Douglas test reflects the principle that direct evidence of intentional discrimination is rare, and that such claims must usually be proved circumstantially." Id.; see also McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973).
Under the McDonnell Douglas analysis, Plaintiff must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination. Id. at 354. "Generally, the plaintiff must provide evidence that: (1) he was a member of a protected class, (2) he was qualified for the position he sought or was performing competently in the position he held; (3) he suffered an adverse employment action, such as termination, demotion or denial of an available job, and (4) some other circumstance suggests discriminatory motive." Id. at 355. If the plaintiff succeeds in establishing a prima facie case, a presumption of discrimination arises, and the employer must then identify a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse action. Id; Reeves v. MV Transportation, Inc., 186 Cal. App. 4th 666, 673, 111 Cal. Rptr. 3d 896 (2010). "If the employer sustains this burden, the presumption of discrimination disappears." Guz, 24 Cal.4th at 356. "To avoid summary judgment, [*22]  the employee must then offer substantial evidence that the employer's stated nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse action was untrue or pretextual, or evidence the employer acted with a discriminatory animus, or a combination of the two, such that a reasonable trier of fact could conclude the employer engaged in intentional discrimination." Reeves, 186 Cal. App. 4th at 673 (quotations and citations omitted). "[T]here must be evidence supporting a rational inference that intentional discrimination, on grounds prohibited by the statute, was the true cause of the employer's actions." Guz, 24 Cal. 4th at 361 (emphasis in original). "Whether judgment as a matter of law is appropriate in any particular case will depend on a number of factors. These include the strength of the plaintiff's prima facie case, the probative value of the proof that the employer's explanation is false, and any other evidence that supports the employer's case . . . ." Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products, Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 148-149, 120 S. Ct. 2097, 147 L. Ed. 2d 105 (2000).10
To establish a prima facie case of disability discrimination under FEHA, Plaintiff must establish that: (1) he suffers from a disability or perceived disability; (2) he was a qualified individual or otherwise qualified to do his job; and (3) he was subjected to an adverse employment action [*23]  because of his disability. Jensen v. Wells Fargo Bank, 85 Cal. App. 4th 245, 254-55, 102 Cal. Rptr. 2d 55 (2000); Faust v. California Portland Cement Co., 150 Cal. App. 4th 864, 866, 58 Cal. Rptr. 3d 729 (2007).

1. Plaintiff is Not a "Qualified Individual" Under the Fair Housing and Employment Act.
In this case, Defendant does not challenge that Plaintiff is disabled because of his neck injury. Instead, Defendant seeks summary judgment on the grounds that plaintiff has failed to establish that he is a qualified individual within the meaning of Green v. State of California, 42 Cal. 4th 254, 64 Cal. Rptr. 3d 390, 165 P.3d 118 (2007), and that he was improperly terminated because of his disability.
In Green, the California Supreme Court held that "[b]y its terms, section 12940 makes it clear that drawing distinctions on the basis of physical or mental disability is not forbidden discrimination in itself. Rather, drawing these distinctions is prohibited only if the adverse employment action occurs because of a disability and the disability would not prevent the employee from performing the essential duties of the job, at least not with reasonable accommodation. Therefore, in order to establish that a defendant employer has discriminated on the basis of disability in violation of the FEHA, the plaintiff employee bears the burden of proving he or she was able to do the job, with or without reasonable accommodation." See Green, 42 Cal. 4th at 262.
The essential functions of a job are "the fundamental [*24]  . . . duties of the employment position the individual with a disability holds or desires," not including "the marginal functions of the position." Cal. Gov. Code § 12926(f); see also 2 Cal. Code Regs. § 7293.8(g) (an "essential job function" is a job duty that is fundamental to the position, as opposed to marginal or peripheral). An employer's job description is considered to be the most reliable evidence of what a particular job's essential functions are. See Dark v. Curry County, 451 F.3d 1078, 1087 (9th Cir. 2006) (interpreting analogous provision of the ADA). However, other relevant evidence that may be considered in determining the essential functions of a job includes the actual work experience of current or past employees in the job, the amount of time spent performing a function, and the consequences of not requiring that an employee perform a function. See Cal. Gov. Code § 12926(f)(2); 2 Cal. Code Regs § 7293.8(g)(2).
In this case, Plaintiff is unable to establish a prima facie case of disability discrimination because he cannot demonstrate that he is able to perform the essential duties of his position without endangering himself or others. Although Plaintiff argues that he was a qualified individual, Plaintiff has failed to offer any evidence that he was a qualified individual within the meaning of FEHA. Plaintiff admitted that at the time [*25]  of his termination and continuing thereafter his ability to lift was severely limited, and, thus, he could not fulfill even the minimum lifting requirements of a Delivery Driver.11 In fact, based on Plaintiff's deposition testimony as to his limitations, he was unable to lift a single case of canned beverages, which he estimated to weigh between fifteen and twenty-five pounds.12 Because the only open positions for which Plaintiff was qualified had the identical lifting requirements of his Delivery Driver position, it was impossible for Defendant to accommodate Plaintiff's disability by simply transferring him to those positions.13
In addition, Plaintiff argues that Defendant could have made accommodations that could have allowed him to perform either his position as a Delivery Driver or another open position. However, employers need not provide accommodations that would cause undue hardship. Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(m). Furthermore, FEHA does not require that the employer create a new position for an employee, or a temporary light-duty assignment where no such position existed previously. Watkins v. Ameripride Servs., 375 F.3d 821, 828-29 (9th Cir.2004); see also Raine v. City of Burbank, 135 Cal. App. 4th 1215, 1227, 37 Cal. Rptr. 3d 899 (2006). Finally, an employer is not required to eliminate "essential functions" of a job, or reallocate them to other employees. [*26]  Wilmarth v. City of Santa Rosa, 945 F.Supp. 1271, 1278 (N.D. Cal.1996). Plaintiff fails to provide any evidence in support of his argument. For example, Plaintiff relies on Anfuso's, his expert, unsupported assertion that not all Delivery Drivers deliver kegs weighing up to 165 pounds, but, instead, only deliver products weighing a maximum of forty pounds. However, even if this claim was true (which it is not), it does not help Plaintiff because he was admittedly not capable of lifting forty pounds.
Plaintiff also relies on his expert's unsupported assertion that there were other open positions for which Plaintiff was qualified and which he could perform. In support of his assertion, Plaintiff's expert relies on a May 2007 organizational chart that purportedly references other open positions. However, not only is the May 2007 organizational chart unauthenticated, it references a time period — May 2007 - that is after Plaintiff's April 20, 2007 termination, and, thus does not support the conclusion that there were other positions available for which Plaintiff was qualified and which he could perform during the April 10-20, 2007 time frame when Defendant attempted to accommodate Plaintiff's work restrictions.
As a result, Plaintiff has failed to establish [*27]  a triable issue of fact as to his prima facie claim for disability discrimination and Defendant's Motion is granted with respect to that claim.

2. Defendant Had a Legitimate, Nondiscriminatory Reason for Terminating Plaintiff.
Even if Plaintiff had come forward with sufficient evidence to establish a triable issue as to a prima facie claim of disability discrimination (which he did not), the undisputed evidence would nonetheless support a finding that Defendant had a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for terminating Plaintiff's employment. Under FEHA, an employer is not prohibited from discharging a disabled employee who is "unable to perform his or her essential duties with reasonable accommodation, or cannot perform those duties in a manner that would not endanger his health or safety or the health or safety of others even with reasonable accommodations." Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(a)(1); see also Green, 42 Cal. App. 4th at 263 (holding that "in disability discrimination actions, the plaintiff has not shown the defendant has done anything wrong until the plaintiff can show he or she was able to do the job with or without reasonable accommodation").
In this case, Plaintiff was legitimately terminated because he could not perform the essential [*28]  functions of his Delivery Driver position or any other available position at the time he returned from his medical leave of absence. As discussed above, Plaintiff has candidly admitted that he was not able to perform the essential functions of his position because his disability prevented him from lifting products within the required range of a minimum of 25 pounds to 165 pounds, and Plaintiff has presented no evidence that there was any reasonable accommodation available that Defendant failed to provide Plaintiff.
Therefore, the Court concludes that Defendant had a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for terminating Plaintiff.

3. Plaintiff Cannot Establish Defendant's Reason for Terminating Him Was

a Pretext for Discrimination.
If Plaintiff had come forward with sufficient evidence to establish a triable issue as to a prima facie claim of disability discrimination, and Defendant articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for Plaintiff's termination, the burden would shift back to Plaintiff to establish that the articulated reason is false and a pretext for unlawful discrimination. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802-04. In this case, Plaintiff challenges Defendant's legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for his termination [*29]  as pretext by arguing that Defendant has a "pattern and practice" of discriminating against and failing to accommodate its disabled or injured employees. However, "[d]etermining whether a proposed accommodation . . . is reasonable, including whether it imposes an undue hardship on the employer, requires a fact-specific, individualized inquiry." Nunes v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 164 F.3d 1243, 1247 (9th Cir. 1999); see also Echazabal v. Chevron USA, Inc., 336 F.3d 1023, 1027 (9th Cir. 2003) (holding that when providing a reasonable accommodation, "an employer must demonstrate that it has made an 'individualized assessment' of the employee's ability to perform the essential functions of the job"). Thus, whether Defendant failed to provide reasonable accommodations to three former employees is irrelevant to the individualized, fact-specific assessment of Defendant's ability to provide Plaintiff with a reasonable accommodation. For such comparative evidence to be relevant, Plaintiff would have to demonstrate that these three other employees were "similarly situated in all material respect" to him. Beck v. United Food and Commercial Workers Union, Local 99, 506 F.3d 874, 885 (9th Cir. 2007). In this case, Plaintiff has failed to demonstrate that these three former employees were similarly situated in all material respects to him. For example, one of these former employees, Arthur Hernandez, was a forklift operator, [*30]  not a Delivery Driver. In addition, although all three former employees mention work restrictions placed on them by their doctors, it is not clear if these restrictions were similar to Plaintiff's restrictions. In addition, all three former employees testified that they had never seen the job descriptions for any of the positions they claim they were fit to perform after their injuries. Moreover, all three former employees testified in their depositions that they had no knowledge of what positions were available at the times of their terminations. Therefore, Plaintiff has failed to demonstrate that there was a pattern or practice of terminating disabled or injured employees instead of accommodating those employees or that Defendant's termination resulted from such a pattern and practice.14
Therefore, Plaintiff has failed to demonstrate that Defendant's legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for terminating Plaintiff was merely a pretext. Accordingly, the Court concludes that Defendant is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's first cause of action for disability discrimination.

C. Plaintiff's Second Cause of Action for Failure to Provide Reasonable Accommodation Fails.
Defendant also [*31]  seeks summary judgment on Plaintiff's second cause of action for failure to provide a reasonable accommodation, arguing that it fails because Plaintiff is not a qualified individual and, in any event, Defendant did not fail to accommodate his disability. Under FEHA, it is unlawful for an employer to fail to reasonably accommodate the known physical disability of an employee. Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(m). The elements of a failure to accommodate claim are: (1) Plaintiff has a disability; (2) Plaintiff is qualified under FEHA to perform the essential functions of the position; and (3) the employer failed to reasonably accommodate Plaintiff's disability. Scotch v. Art Institute of California-Orange County, Inc., 173 Cal. App. 4th 986, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d 338 (2009). The selection of an appropriate accommodation is an individualized process that is highly dependent on the limitations of the employee's disability. Nadaf-Rahrov v. Neiman Marcus Group, Inc., 166 Cal. App. 4th 952, 974 n. 9, 83 Cal. Rptr. 3d 190 (quoting the EEOC's "Interpretive Guidance on Title I of the American with Disabilities Act").
In this case, as discussed above, Plaintiff has failed to demonstrate that he is a qualified individual under FEHA. Because Plaintiff has been unable to raise a genuine issue of material fact in this case regarding the essential functions of the job that he held at the time of his termination or the otherwise open positions, [*32]  or his inability to perform those essential functions, Defendant's Motion is granted.
In addition, Plaintiff has failed to demonstrate that there was a specific reasonable accommodation that Defendant failed to provide him to allow him to perform either his Delivery Driver position or any otherwise open position. As discussed above, although Plaintiff makes several arguments regarding purportedly reasonable accommodations that could or should have been made, Plaintiff fails to provide any admissible evidence to support those arguments.
Accordingly, Plaintiff's claim for failure to provide reasonable accommodation under FEHA fails as a matter of law, and Defendant is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's second cause of action.

D. Plaintiff's Third Cause of Action for Failure to Engage In the Interactive Process Fails.
Defendant also seeks summary judgment on Plaintiff's third cause of action for Defendant's alleged failure to engage in the interactive process. Under FEHA, an employer is required to engage in a "timely, good faith interactive process . . . in response to a request for reasonable accommodation by an employee with a known physical or mental disability." Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(n). Specifically, [*33]  "the interactive process requires communication and good-faith exploration of possible accommodations . . . with the goal of identifying an accommodation that allows the employee to perform the job effectively." Nadaf-Rahrov, 166 Cal. App. 4th at 984. The elements of a cause of action for failure to engage in the interactive process are: 1) the plaintiff has a disability covered by FEHA and known to the defendant; 2) the plaintiff requested a reasonable accommodation for his or her disability so that he or she could perform the essential functions of the job; 3) the plaintiff was willing to participate in an interactive process to determine whether a reasonable accommodation could be made so that he or she could perform the essential job requirements; 4) the defendant failed to participate in a timely, good faith interactive process to determine whether reasonable accommodation could be made; 5) resulting in harm to the plaintiff. Gelfo v. Lockheed Martin Corp., 140 Cal. App. 4th 34, 54, 43 Cal. Rptr. 3d 874 (2006).
In this case, Plaintiff cannot demonstrate that he is a qualified individual under FEHA, and, therefore, his claim fails as a matter of law. In addition, there is no evidence that Defendant failed to fulfill its obligation to engage in the interactive process. It is undisputed that Plaintiff [*34]  had multiple conversations with Baerga and two in person meeting with Baerga and Shirley, all of which focused on his permanent restrictions and explored the open positions which Plaintiff might be capable of performing. It is also undisputed that Shirley searched Defendant's website and called the Human Resources Manager at Beach Cities WOD in attempt to find open positions for Plaintiff, but that Plaintiff himself failed to search Defendant's website or otherwise make any effort to locate a suitable position until after he had been terminated. Thus, it was Plaintiff, and not Defendant, who failed to engage in the interactive process. See Nadaf-Rahrov, 166 Cal. App. 4th at 984.
Accordingly, Plaintiff's claim for failure to engage in the interactive process fails as a matter of law, and Defendant is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's third cause of action.

E. Plaintiff's Fourth Cause of Action for Failure to Prevent Disability Discrimination Fails.
In his fourth cause of action, Plaintiff alleges a claim for failure to prevent disability discrimination. Under FEHA, it is unlawful "[f]or an employer . . . to fail to take all reasonable steps necessary to prevent discrimination and harassment from occurring." Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(k). The [*35]  California courts have held that this subsection is a separate unlawful employment practice. Carter v. Cal. Dept. of Veterans Affairs, 38 Cal. 4th 914, 925 n. 4, 44 Cal. Rptr. 3d 223, 135 P.3d 637 (2006). Nevertheless, employers are not liable for failing to take necessary steps to prevent discrimination, "except where the [discriminatory] actions took place and were not prevented." Trujillo v. N. Cnty. Transit Dist., 63 Cal. App. 4th 280, 289, 73 Cal. Rptr. 2d 596 (1998).
In this case, because there is no viable claim for discrimination, Plaintiff cannot prevail on his claim for failure to prevent disability discrimination. Accordingly, Plaintiff's claim for failure to prevent disability discrimination fails as a matter of law, and Defendant is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's fourth cause of action.

F. Plaintiff's Fifth Cause of Action for Wrongful Termination in Violation of Public Policy Fails.
In his fifth cause of action, Plaintiff alleges a claim for wrongful termination in violation of public policy. To maintain a claim for wrongful termination in violation of public policy, a plaintiff must demonstrate: (1) an employer-employee relationship existed; (2) the employer terminated the employee; (3) the termination violated public policy; and (4) the termination caused the employee damages. Holmes v. General Dynamics Corp., 17 Cal. App. 4th 1418, 1426, 22 Cal. Rptr. 2d 172 (1993). With respect to the public policy, it must affect "society at large rather [*36]  than a purely personal or proprietary interest of the plaintiff or employer." Gantt v. Sentry Insurance, 1 Cal. 4th 1083, 1090, 4 Cal. Rptr. 2d 874, 824 P.2d 680 (1992); Foley v. Interactive Data Corp., 47 Cal. 3d 654, 669-671, 254 Cal. Rptr. 211, 765 P.2d 373 (1988). In addition, the policy at issue must be substantial, fundamental, and grounded in a statutory or constitutional provision. Gantt, 1 Cal. 4th at 1089-1095; Sequoia Ins. Co. v. Sup. Ct., 13 Cal. App. 4th 1472, 1479-1480, 16 Cal. Rptr. 2d 888 (1993).
In this case, Plaintiff's claim for wrongful termination in violation of public policy claim is derivative of his statutory claims. See Sanders v. Arneson Products, Inc., 91 F.3d 1351 (9th Cir. 1996). Because the Court has granted summary judgment on Plaintiff's statutory claims, summary judgment is appropriate on Plaintiff's public policy claim. See Cavanaugh v. Unisource Worldwide, Inc., 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 25907, 2007 WL 915223 (E.D. Cal. Mar. 26, 2007). Accordingly, Plaintiff's claim for wrongful termination in violation of public policy fails as a matter of law, and Defendant is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's fifth cause of action.

G. Plaintiff's Sixth Cause of Action for Discriminatory Refusal to Reinstate Fails.
In his sixth cause of action, Plaintiff alleges a claim for discriminatory refusal to reinstate. However, refusal to reinstate only constitutes a separate cause of action when it is based on "new elements of unfairness, not existing at the time of the original" termination, that are related to the refusal to reinstate. Josephs v. Pacific Bell, 443 F.3d 1050, 1060 (9th Cir. 2006). In this case, Plaintiff has failed to demonstrate any new elements of unfairness related to his claim [*37]  for discriminatory refusal to reinstate other than those already alleged in his disability discrimination, failure to provide reasonable accommodation, and failure to engage in the interactive process claims. Therefore, Plaintiff cannot maintain a separate claim for discriminatory refusal to reinstate. Accordingly, Plaintiff's claim for discriminatory refusal to reinstate fails as a matter of law, and Defendant is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's sixth cause of action.

H. Plaintiff's Seventh Cause of Action for Retaliation Fails.
In his seventh cause of action, Plaintiff claims that Defendant retaliated against him in violation of FEHA. Under California law "an employee must exhaust the ... administrative remedy" provided by FEHA by filing an administrative complaint with the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing ("DFEH") (Cal. Gov. Code, § 12960) and obtaining the DFEH's notice of right to sue (Cal. Gov. Code § 12965(b)), "before bringing suit on a cause of action under the act or seeking the relief provided therein." Rojo v. Kliger, 52 Cal. 3d 65, 88, 276 Cal. Rptr. 130, 801 P.2d 373 (1990). To exhaust his or her administrative remedies as to a particular act made unlawful by FEHA, the claimant must specify the act in the administrative complaint. Yurick v. Sup. Ct., 209 Cal. App. 3d 1116, 1121-1123, 257 Cal. Rptr. 665 (1989). Under FEHA, "[t]he failure [*38]  to exhaust an administrative remedy is a jurisdictional, not a procedural, defect," and thus that failure to exhaust administrative remedies is a ground for a defense summary judgment. Miller v. United Airlines, Inc., 174 Cal. App. 3d 878, 890, 220 Cal. Rptr. 684 (1985).
In this case, Plaintiff failed to exhaust his administrative remedies with respect to his retaliation claim. Although his administrative complaint with DFEH alleges disability discrimination, failure to accommodate, and failure to engage in the interactive process, his complaint failed to include a claim for retaliation. See Martin v. Lockheed Missles & Space Co., 29 Cal. App. 4th 1718, 1724, 35 Cal. Rptr. 2d 181 (1994) (holding that the defendant was entitled to summary judgment on all claims other than age discrimination because the plaintiff had failed to exhaust her administrative remedies as to those claims).
In addition, even if Plaintiff had exhausted his administrative remedies with respect to his retaliation claim, his claim for retaliation would still fail. To demonstrate a claim for retaliation, Plaintiff must establish a prima facie case that demonstrates: (1) he engaged in a "protected activity," (2) that an adverse employment action was taken thereafter, and (3) a causal link existed between the protected activity and the employer's action. Yanowitz v. L'Oreal USA, Inc., 36 Cal. 4th 1028, 1042, 32 Cal. Rptr. 3d 436, 116 P.3d 1123 (2005). Once an employee establishes a prima facie [*39]  case, the employer is required to offer a legitimate, nonretaliatory reason for the adverse employment action. Id. If the employer produces a legitimate reason for the adverse employment action, the presumption of retaliation "drops out of the picture," and the burden shifts back to the employee to prove intentional retaliation. Id. (quoting Morgan v. Regents of University of California, 88 Cal. App. 4th 52, 68, 105 Cal. Rptr. 2d 652 (2000)). Although the precise contours of Plaintiff's retaliation claim are not entirely clear to the Court, Plaintiff appears to contend that they are based on his request for a reasonable accommodation and/or filing of workers' compensation claims. However, this claim fails as a matter of law because Plaintiff was unable to perform the essential functions of the Delivery Driver position or other available positions at the time he returned from medical leave with or without reasonable accommodation. In addition, to the extent Plaintiff is alleging that Defendant retaliated against him because he filed a workers' compensation claim after his December 2003 injury, his retaliation claim fails. Not only has Defendant demonstrated a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for his termination, but, most significantly, there is simply no evidence provided by [*40]  Plaintiff that suggests his workers' compensation claims filed after his December 2003 injury had anything at all to do with his termination.15
Accordingly, Plaintiff's claim for retaliation fails as a matter of law, and Defendant is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's seventh cause of action.

I. Plaintiff's Eighth Cause of Action for Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress Fails.
A claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress requires a showing of: "(1) extreme or outrageous conduct by defendant with the intention of causing, or reckless disregard of the probability of causing, emotional distress; (2) plaintiff's suffering severe or extreme emotional distress; and (3) actual and proximate causation of the emotional distress by defendant's outrageous conduct." Hughes v. Pair, 46 Cal. 4th 1035, 1050, 95 Cal. Rptr. 3d 636, 209 P.3d 963 (2009). Plaintiff must demonstrate that Defendant's conduct was so extreme that it "exceeds all bounds" tolerated in civilized society. Id. at 1050. Furthermore, Plaintiff must establish that Defendant's outrageous conduct caused him such severe emotional distress that no reasonable person "in civilized society should be expected to endure it." Id. at 1051.
In this case, Plaintiff is unable to demonstrate that anyone at Defendant engaged [*41]  in extreme or outrageous conduct sufficient to satisfy a claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress. Plaintiff admits that he cannot identify a single employee of Defendant whom he believes discriminated against him or whom he believes was treated differently or more favorable than he was. In addition, Baerga and Shirley were very professional in all of their contacts with Plaintiff, and there is absolutely no evidence that they treated Plaintiff with anything other than concern and respect for his condition. Therefore, Plaintiff is unable to satisfy the first element of a claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress.
In addition, Plaintiff has not established that he suffered the required severe emotional distress. Although Plaintiff states that he was stressed out and nervous, he fails to include any specific facts to support this assertion. In fact, Plaintiff admitted in his deposition that he has been able to "move on" from any stress and depression that he underwent as a result of his termination, he has not been treated by any doctor for stress or depression since his termination, and that he has not been diagnosed with any mental disease or illness since [*42]  his termination. Moreover, Plaintiff has been employed at three different jobs since his termination and he has not lost his ability to socialize. Therefore, Plaintiff is unable to satisfy the second element of a claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress.
Finally, even if Plaintiff had evidence to satisfy the elements of a claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress, Plaintiff's claim is preempted by workers' compensation system. Section 3600 of the California Labor Code establishes an employee's right to workers' compensation, providing that "[l]iability for the compensation provided by this division, in lieu of any other liability whatsoever to any person ... shall ... exist against an employer for any injury sustained by his or her employees arising out of and in the course of the employment." Cal. Labor Code § 3600(a). In addition, California Labor Code § 3602 provides that, where Section 3600(a) applies, "the right to recover such compensation is ... the sole and exclusive remedy of the employee." Cal. Labor Code § 3602(a). The California Supreme Court has held that these provisions apply to all injuries that result from an employment relationship, including injuries for intentional infliction of emotional distress. See Livitsanos v. Superior Court, 2 Cal. 4th 744, 747, 7 Cal. Rptr. 2d 808, 828 P.2d 1195 (1992) (holding that workers' compensation system preempted action for intentional [*43]  infliction of emotional distress, regardless of whether or not that distress caused a disability); Spratley v. Winchell Donut House, Inc., 188 Cal. App. 3d 1408, 1412, 234 Cal. Rptr. 121 (1987) (holding that allegations of fraudulent inducement of employment fell within workers' compensation scheme, and, thus, the claim was preempted, even though allegedly fraudulent acts occurred before employment relationship); Gates v. Trans Video Corp., 93 Cal. App. 3d 196, 155 Cal. Rptr. 486 (1979) (holding that claim was preempted by workers' compensation scheme even though the incident at issue "undoubtedly" took place after the plaintiff had been fired because the incident was directly connected with the employment relationship). In Cole v. Fair Oaks Fire Protection District, 43 Cal. 3d 148, 159-60, 233 Cal. Rptr. 308, 729 P.2d 743 (1987), the California Supreme Court acknowledged that an employer's intentional efforts to cause emotional distress to an employee could give rise to an action outside of the workers' compensation system. However, the California Supreme Court carefully limited the basis for any such action to only the most compelling of circumstances:
[W]hen the misconduct attributed to the employer is actions which are a normal part of the employment relationship, such as demotions, promotions, criticism of work practices, and frictions in negotiations as to grievances, an employee suffering emotional distress causing disability may not avoid the exclusive [*44]  remedy provisions of the Labor Code by characterizing the employer's decisions as manifestly unfair, outrageous, harassment, or intended to cause emotional disturbance resulting in disability.
Cole, 43 Cal.3d at 160; see also King v. AC & R Advertising, 65 F.3d 764, 770 (9th Cir. 1995) (holding that for conduct to be considered "outrageous" it must be "so extreme as to exceed all possible bounds of that usually tolerated in a civil society"). Moreover, Plaintiff must establish that Defendant's outrageous conduct caused him such severe emotional distress that no reasonable person "in a civilized society should be expected to endure it." Hughes, 46 Cal. 4th at 1051.
As discussed above, Plaintiff is unable to demonstrate that any of Defendant's employees engaged in extreme or outrageous conduct. The only evidence presented by Plaintiff in support of this claim are the actions of Defendant's employees in making routine personnel decisions, including those pertaining to his requested accommodations and eventual termination. Thus, because Plaintiff's claim is based on conduct which is part of the ordinary course and scope of his employment, his claim is preempted by the workers' compensation system.
Accordingly, Plaintiff's claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress fails as a matter of [*45]  law, and Defendant is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's eighth cause of action.

J. Plaintiff's Ninth Cause of Action for Violation of the UCL Fails.
A claim based on a violation of the UCL "borrows violations of other laws and treats these violations, when committed pursuant to a business activity, as unlawful practices independently actionable under Section 17200 et seq. and subject to the distinct remedies provided thereunder." Farmers Insurance Exchange v. Sup. Ct., 2 Cal. 4th 377, 383, 6 Cal. Rptr. 2d 487, 826 P.2d 730 (1992). In this case, Plaintiff's UCL claim is based entirely on his claims alleging violations of FEHA. However, as demonstrated above, Plaintiff's FEHA claims fail. Because Plaintiff's FEHA claims fail, Plaintiff's claim for violation of the UCL also fails as a matter of law. Accordingly, the Court concludes that Defendant is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's ninth cause of action for violation of the UCL.

IV. Conclusion
For all the foregoing reasons, Defendant's Motion is GRANTED.
IT IS SO ORDERED.


End of Document

