Quinn v. St. Louis County
United States District Court for the District of Minnesota
November 9, 2009, Decided; November 9, 2009, Filed
Civil No. 09-1372 ADM/RLE

Reporter
2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 146007 *
Ellen Quinn, Plaintiff, v. St. Louis County, a municipal Corporation, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] Joni M. Thome, Esq., and Frances E. Baillon, Esq., Halunen & Associates, Minneapolis, MN, on behalf of Plaintiff.
Thomas E. Marshall, Esq., and V. John Ella, Esq., Jackson Lewis LLP, Minneapolis, MN, on behalf of Defendant.
Judges: ANN D. MONTGOMERY, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: ANN D. MONTGOMERY
Opinion



MEMORANDUM OPINION AND ORDER

I. INTRODUCTION
On August 25, 2009, the undersigned United States District Judge heard oral argument on Defendant St. Louis County, a municipal Corporation's ("the County") Corrected Motion to Dismiss, Motion to Strike, and in the Alternative Motion for a More Definite Statement [Docket No. 4] ("Motion to Dismiss"). Plaintiff Ellen Quinn ("Quinn") asserts claims against the County for violations of the Family Medical Leave Act ("FMLA"), 29 U.S.C. §§ 2601-54, and the Minnesota Human Rights Act ("MHRA"), Minn. Stat. §§ 363A.01-.41, as well as claims of breach of contract, intentional and negligent infliction of emotional distress, and defamation. Notice of Removal [Docket No. 1], Ex. A (Compl.) ¶¶ 73-103. For the reasons stated herein, the County's Motion to Dismiss is granted.

II. BACKGROUND1
The County is a local municipality organized under the laws of the State of Minnesota. Compl. ¶ 2. Quinn lives in Duluth, Minnesota and [*2]  began working for the County in 1994. Id. ¶¶ 1, 3. She served as a public information officer and a member of the county administration and has worked closely with the county board on a regular basis during her tenure. Id. ¶ 3.
The Complaint alleges Quinn and several of her female co-workers were routinely subjected throughout the 1990s to sexually inappropriate conduct and comments by various county commissioners, administrators, directors, and elected officials. Id. ¶¶ 4-5. In the early 2000s, the County conducted sexual harassment training, but the training, according to Quinn, failed to address the most important issue—harassment by elected officials. Id. ¶ 6. She alleges that the discriminatory and harassing conduct continued throughout the 2000s, including "sexist remarks during open meetings" after a woman candidate for county attorney defeated the longtime, male incumbent, Alan Mitchell ("Mitchell"), in his re-election bid. Id. ¶¶ 6-8.
In February 2007, Quinn reported to the county administrator that Commissioner Raukar sexually harassed her while they were on a business trip. Id. ¶ 11. At the same time, she also disclosed that she had been subjected to "long term and consistent [*3]  harassment" by Martin Buncombe, a department head. Id. ¶¶ 7, 12. When another female employee reported that she had been harassed by a different county commissioner, the two cases were jointly investigated and presented to the county board. Id. ¶ 17. Raukar hired Mitchell to represent him. Id. ¶ 16. Local news outlets covered the investigation, and the county board ultimately voted three-to-three on the truth of Quinn's allegations. Id. ¶¶ 17-23. As a result, Rauker and the other commissioner against whom allegations had been made were not disciplined. Id. ¶ 23.
In August 2007, shortly after the county board rendered its decision, Quinn entered into an agreement releasing her claims against the County and its employees in exchange for "guaranteed employment for six years" and the promise that the County would not retaliate against Quinn. Id. ¶ 25. Quinn alleges that in the months after she entered into the agreement, county commissioners "made several defaming statements about [her]" and the County "stripped [her] of many of her work duties [that] she had been performing for years." Id. ¶¶ 26-32.
Sometime in early 2008, Quinn learned that Mitchell, the former county attorney and the [*4]  individual who represented Raukar regarding the February 2007 incident, was to be her new supervisor. See id. ¶¶ 32-33. Quinn told her doctor that she was feeling increasingly depressed and anxious about working with Mitchell, and her doctor recommended that she take a leave of absence from work. Id. ¶ 32. Quinn met with Mitchell on February 13, 2008 and told him that she was "willing to put the past behind them and move forward." Id. Quinn alleges that Mitchell responded that he understood Quinn to be a problem employee and that the two "d[id]n't need to be friends to work together" and did not "need to go out for dinner or for drinks or on a date to get along." Id. ¶¶ 33-34. By the end of the meeting, Quinn "was struggling not to cry," and she felt attacked, belittled, and humiliated. Id. ¶¶ 35-36.
Two days later, Quinn met with the human resources director and asked that she be assigned to a different supervisor. Id. ¶ 38. She told the human resources director that "she was depressed and suicidal, and [she] then cried hysterically"; the human resources director told Quinn she would get back to her about being assigned to a new supervisor. Id. In March 2008, Quinn learned from the [*5]  human resources director that Mitchell refused to allow Quinn to be reassigned to a new supervisor. Id. ¶ 41.
Quinn alleges that during the few months that she worked under Mitchell's supervision, Mitchell (1) wrongfully accused her of "being delinquent on a project"; (2) "yelled at [her] in front of her co-workers"; (3) "question[ed] her use of leave"; and (4) warned her in a written letter "to be at work at the exact same time each day and to have any absence approved in advance, no matter how brief." Id. ¶¶ 40-45.
On approximately April 3, 2008, Quinn followed her doctor's recommendation that she take a full-time leave from work. Id. ¶ 46. Quinn met with Mitchell several days later to notify him of her need to take full-time leave. Id. ¶ 47. Quinn claims that Mitchell told her that her request for FMLA leave had already been denied and, as a result, she would not be allowed to use her banked sick leave and would instead have to take leave without pay. Id. ¶ 50. At the conclusion of her meeting with Mitchell, Quinn met with the human resources director, who told Quinn that although her FMLA leave was denied, she could still take paid leave, but she would not be protected from termination [*6]  during the leave and her medical benefits would likely be cancelled. Id. ¶ 51. Several days later, Quinn received a letter indicating that Mitchell approved her leave, but only until May 5. Id. ¶ 58. "By August 2008, [Quinn] had submitted several applications for FMLA leave. All requests were denied." Id. ¶ 62.
Quinn was diagnosed by her psychologist as having post traumatic stress disorder stemming from the harassment she suffered. Id. ¶ 63. The County requested that Quinn see another psychologist, who agreed that Quinn suffered symptoms of post traumatic stress disorder, depression, and anxiety. Id. ¶ 64. The psychologist stated that Quinn "was not capable of performing her job duties" and that "'returning to any County affiliated work situation . . . will . . . exacerbate her symptoms and have a detrimental effect on her mental health." Id.
Quinn filed her Complaint in state court in May 2009. The County removed the matter to this Court on June 10, 2009, and, shortly thereafter, filed its Motion to Dismiss Counts II, IV, V, VI, and VII of the Complaint; the County's Motion does not challenge Quinn's reprisal claim under the MHRA (Count I) or her FMLA claim (Count III).

III. DISCUSSION [*7] 

A. Motion to Dismiss Standard
Rule 12 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure provides that a party may move to dismiss a complaint for failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted. Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6). In considering a motion to dismiss, the pleadings are construed in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party, and the facts alleged in the complaint must be taken as true. Hamm, 15 F.3d at 112; Ossman v. Diana Corp., 825 F. Supp. 870, 879-80 (D. Minn. 1993). Any ambiguities concerning the sufficiency of the claims must be resolved in favor of the nonmoving party. Ossman, 825 F. Supp. at 880. Under Rule 8(a) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, pleadings "shall contain a short and plain statement of the claim showing that the pleader is entitled to relief." A pleading must contain "enough facts to state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face." Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 570 (2007). "A claim has facial plausibility when the plaintiff pleads factual content that allows the court to draw a reasonable inference that the defendant is liable for the misconduct alleged." Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 129 S. Ct. 1937, 1949 (2009). Determining whether a complaint states a plausible claim for relief is "a context-specific task that requires the reviewing court to draw on its judicial experience and common sense." Id. "But where the well-pleaded facts do not permit the court to infer more than the mere possibility of misconduct, the complaint has alleged—but not 'shown'—'that the [*8]  pleader is entitled to relief.'" Id. (quoting Fed. R. Civ. P. 8(a)(2)).

B. Count II
Count II of Quinn's Complaint alleges a claim of disability discrimination under the MHRA.2 Specifically, Quinn claims the County failed to provide her reasonable accommodations and denied her employment opportunities because of her disability, perceived disability, and record of having a disability. Compl. ¶ 75; Baillon Aff. [Docket No. 11], Ex. A (Am. Compl.) ¶ 76. A prima facie case of disability discrimination under the MHRA requires that a plaintiff show she (1) is disabled within the meaning of the MHRA, (2) is qualified to perform the essential functions of her job with or without reasonable accommodation, and (3) suffered an adverse employment action because of her disability. McCain v. Andersen Corp., 567 F.3d 956, 967 (8th Cir. 2009). With regard to the failure to accommodate aspect of the claim, Quinn also must show that the County knew of, and failed to reasonably accommodate, her disability. Kammueller v. Loomis, Fargo & Co., 383 F.3d 779, 784 (8th Cir. 2004).

1. Failure to Accommodate
The County argues that Count II fails to state a failure-to-accommodate claim because the Complaint, as pleaded, alleges that Quinn "'does not have the self-esteem or confidence to leave her home' and 'returning to any County affiliated work situation, [*9]  either as a part-time or full-time employee' would 'exacerbate her symptoms and have a detrimental effect on her mental health." Def.'s Mem. in Supp. of Mot. to Dismiss [Docket No. 7] at 5 (quoting Compl. ¶ 64). The County argues that Quinn's inability to return to "any County affiliated work situation" makes it impossible to provide an accommodation that would allow Quinn to be able to perform the essential functions of the job since any position would, by definition, be "affiliated" with the County. Id. Quinn contends her discussion with the human resources director on February 15, 2008, during which she asked to be assigned to a different supervisor constitutes a request for a reasonable accommodation. At the time of this discussion, she was able to perform the essential functions of her job; it was not until after that request was denied in March 2008 that she became unable to work for the County in any capacity. The County responds that even if Quinn's February 15, 2008 request of the human resources director is the operative event, such a request is not, as a matter of law, a request for a reasonable accommodation.
Numerous courts have held that a request for a different supervisor [*10]  does not, as a matter of law, constitute a request for a "reasonable accommodation." See Gaul v. Lucent Technologies, Inc., 134 F.3d 576, 581 (3d Cir. 1998) (holding that a request to be transferred away from a supervisor who was causing a plaintiff stress was unreasonable as a matter of law under the ADA); Weiler v. Household Fin. Corp., 101 F.3d 519, 526 (7th Cir. 1996) (affirming a district court's grant of summary judgment for the defendant and holding that the defendant's denial of the plaintiff's request to be assigned to a different supervisor because her current supervisor caused her anxiety and depression by yelling at her did not constitute a failure to grant a "reasonable accommodation"); Lewis v. Zilog, Inc., 908 F. Supp. 931, 940-42, 48 (N.D. Ga. 1995) (holding that a request by a plaintiff who suffered from bipolar and mood disorder to be transferred to a different supervisor in a different location because working for her current supervisor was causing her stress was not a reasonable accommodation under the ADA as a matter of law); Ghoston v. Nissan N. Am., Inc., No. 3:05CV766HTW-LRA, 2008 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 25530, 2008 WL 879737, at *5 (S.D. Miss. Mar. 30, 2008) (quoting EEOC Enforcement Guidance: Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under the Americans with Disabilities Act, Question 33 (EEOC Notice No. 915.002, Oct. 17, 2002), "which specifically states that '[a]n employer does not have to provide an employee with a new supervisor as [*11]  a reasonable accommodation" and citing caselaw that "tracks the EEOC's guidance in this respect"); Prichard v. Dominguez, No. 3:05cv40, 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 46607, 2006 WL 1836017, at *13-14 (N.D. Fla. Jun. 29, 2006) (citing numerous cases and concluding that the case law cited, "and literally dozens of other cases not cited, make clear that Plaintiff's suggested accommodation [of being allowed to work in another department with a new supervisor] was unreasonable as a matter of law"). It appears that only the Second Circuit adheres to a different rule. See Kennedy v. Dresser Rand Co., 193 F.3d 120, 122 (2d Cir. 1999) (rejecting a per se rule similar to the rule articulated by the Seventh Circuit in Weiler, and holding that "[t]here is a presumption . . . that a request to change supervisors is unreasonable, and the burden of overcoming that presumption (i.e., of demonstrating that, within the particular context of the plaintiff's workplace, the request was reasonable) therefore lies with the plaintiff").3 The rationale for the rule is that a request to work for a different supervisor "essentially ask[s] [the courts] to establish the conditions of employment," and "'[n]othing in the ADA allows this shift in responsiblity.'" Gaul, 134 F.3d at 581 (quoting Weiler, 101 F.3d at 526). "[N]othing in the law [supports the conclusion] that in enacting the disability acts, [*12]  Congress intended to interfere with personnel decisions within an organization hierarchy." Id.
The Court concludes that Quinn's February 15, 2008 request to the human resources director to be assigned to a different supervisor was not, as a matter of law, a request for a reasonable accommodation.

2. Adverse Employment Action
The County next argues that the Complaint "fails to allege facts showing any adverse employment action to support a discrimination claim." Def.'s Mem. in Supp. of Mot. to Dismiss at 7. Specifically, the County contends that the Complaint fails to allege that Quinn was actually or constructively discharged because of discrimination. Quinn responds that the Complaint, as plead, clearly alleged the aspects of a constructive discharge, and to clarify, she has offered an Amended Complaint that specifically states that she was constructively discharged on October 22, 2008, when, after having been on leave for more than six months, the County asked her to clear her office so it could be used for a new employee.4 Am. Compl. ¶ 72.
"A constructive discharge occurs when an employer deliberately renders [an] employee's working conditions intolerable, forcing [*13]  him to quit his job." Buboltz, 523 F.3d at 869 (alteration in original) (quotation omitted).5 "An objective standard applies to constructive discharge claims, i.e., a constructive discharge takes place only when a reasonable person would find working conditions intolerable," and, accordingly, "[p]art of any employee's obligation to be reasonable is an obligation not to assume the worst and not to jump to conclusions too fast." Id. (quotation omitted). The employer's actions must have been intended to force the employee to quit, which is satisfied if an employee shows that the resignation was a reasonably foreseeable consequence of the employer's discriminatory actions. Cf. Allen v. Bridgestone/Firestone, Inc., 81 F.3d 793, 796 (8th Cir. 1996) (discussing the required showing for a constructive discharge in an age discrimination case).
Here, regardless of whether a reasonable person would have found intolerable the working conditions Quinn allegedly experienced, the Complaint fails to set forth allegations to permit the inference that the County intended to force Quinn to end her employment. While the Complaint and the offered Amended Complaint allege that the "unlawful employment practices" by the County were "intentional and were performed [*14]  . . . with malice or reckless indifference to anti-discrimination laws," the Complaint does not allege that the County intended the discriminatory conduct to force Quinn to leave or an allegation that it was a reasonably foreseeable consequence that Quinn would leave. Am. Compl. ¶ 81. Quinn's recitations of the term "constructive discharge" in her offered Amended Complaint are not sufficient. As the Supreme Court has instructed, "[a] pleading that offers 'labels and conclusions' or 'a formulaic recitation of the elements of a cause of action will not do.'" Iqbal, 129 S.Ct. at 1949 (quoting Twombly, 550 U.S. at 555). Here, the Complaint, although pleading facts that are "consistent with . . . liability" based on a constructive discharge, fails to permit the Court to infer more than the "mere possibility" of the intent required to state a discrimination claim based on a constructive discharge. Id. (citing Fed. R. Civ. P. 8(a)(2)). In addition, the Complaint fails to link the alleged intolerable conditions that lead to the constructive discharge to a discriminatory animus concerning Quinn's disability. Rather, to the extent that the alleged intolerable conditions stem from any type of discriminatory animus, the allegations of the Complaint suggest that they [*15]  stem from an animus in response to Quinn's February 2007 harassment allegation.
Quinn also argues that she suffered other adverse actions, including that she was "defamed during the course of her employment, she was degraded and demeaned, yelled at in front of co-workers, her honesty was questioned, she was accused of committing criminal acts (publically), she was stripped of work duties and made to work for a hostile supervisor who questioned her ability and berated her work." Pl.'s Mem. in Opp'n to Mot. to Dismiss [Docket No. 10] at 20. Again, as previously discussed, the Complaint and the offered Amended Complaint do not allege that those claimed adverse actions occurred because of Quinn's disability. Rather, the allegations of the Complaint relate those adverse actions to Quinn's claims of reprisal discrimination (Count I) and violations of the FMLA (Count III), neither of which are being challenged in this Motion to Dismiss.
Because Quinn has failed to state a claim of disability discrimination under the MHRA, Count II is dismissed.

C. Count IV
Quinn alleges her August 2007 settlement agreement with the County prohibited the County from terminating her for anything other than just [*16]  cause and that the County breached the agreement by retaliating against her to the extent that her work environment was "so intolerable that no [reasonable] person would be expected to continue to work in the environment"; in other words, the County breached the agreement by causing her constructive discharge. Pl.'s Mem. in Opp'n to Mot. to Dismiss at 21-22. However, as previously discussed, the Complaint and the offered Amended Complaint fail to state a plausible claim of a constructive discharge. Therefore, even if a constructive discharge could constitute a breach of a just-cause provision of an employment agreement, there was no constructive discharge in this case and, consequently, no breach.

D. Count V
In Count V, Quinn asserts a claim of intentional infliction of emotional distress ("IIED"). Compl. ¶ 90; Am. Compl. ¶ 91. To adequately state such a claim requires allegations of extreme and outrageous conduct that is intentional or reckless and causes severe emotional distress. Hubbard v. United Press Int'l, Inc., 330 N.W.2d 428, 438-39 (Minn. 1983). Only "egregious facts" rise to the level of constituting extreme conduct and severe mental distress. Id. at 439. For an act to be extreme and outrageous, "the conduct must be . . . so atrocious that it passes the [*17]  boundaries of decency and is utterly intolerable to the civilized community." Hill v. Scott, 349 F.3d 1068, 1075 (8th Cir. 2003) (citation omitted). "[I]nsults, indignities, threats, annoyances, petty oppressions, or other trivialities" do not rise to the level of extreme and outrageous conduct. Langelsag v. KYMN Inc., 664 N.W.2d 860, 865 (Minn. 2003) (quotation omitted).
The County argues that the conduct alleged by Quinn in support of her IIED does not constitute extreme and outrageous conduct as a matter of law. Quinn argues that the conduct to which she was subjected between August 2007 and October 2008 was extreme and outrageous, and, in support, she cites numerous allegations from the Complaint:
• Commissioner Raukar publically characterized her charges regarding the February 2007 incident as "untruthful";
• Commissioner Forsman referred to the February 2007 charges as "untruthful," publically implied that Quinn "isn't 'smart enough to know when a glance turns into a leer'" and publically stated that she "wore short skirts, told dirty jokes[,] and yelled at secretaries,";
• she was stripped of her work duties;
• two commissioners referred to her supporters as "idiots" and "a circus";
• the County retaliated against people who spoke up for her;
• Commissioner Forsman publically stated, "I [*18]  still don't know how you can be out drinking with two guys at 10:00, and then a couple hours later be back on the job when they call her at 2:00.";
• the County hired Mitchell to be her new supervisor;
• Mitchell refused to permit her to report to someone other than him, accused her of being late on a project, yelled at her in front of several co-workers, questioned her use of leave in a "threatening and intimidating manner," and applied a more stringent and exacting leave policy to her;
• the County continually misinformed her of the leave policy;
• Mitchell changed values on her time sheets, called her doctor to find out if Quinn was "faking" her condition, and publically questioned Quinn's honesty about her need to take a leave due to her condition;
• the County denied her application for FMLA leave several times;
• the County directed her to remove her belongings from her office in October 2008; and
• the County stopped paying her, denied her sick leave, and discontinued her health insurance.
Pl.'s Mem. in Opp'n to Mot. to Dismiss at 28-30. Quinn stresses that the "duration, intensity, nature, boldness[,] and frequency [of such conduct] raise the conduct to the level of extreme and outrageous." [*19]  Id. at 30.
The Minnesota Supreme Court has held that conduct consisting of withdrawing an employee from important assignments and professionally embarrassing the employee by making negative comments about his performance did not, as a matter of law, amount to extreme and outrageous conduct. See Hubbard, 330 N.W.2d at 431-37. The supreme court has also held that a jury's finding of a pattern of conduct by a defendant toward a plaintiff in the workplace that included the filing of two false police reports, repeated threats to take legal action, and frequently engaging in loud workplace arguments were insufficient to support a verdict on an IIED claim. Langelsag, 664 N.W.2d at 865. Allegations of bizarre, inappropriate, and even reprehensible conduct in the workplace have likewise been held insufficient. See Lund v. Chicago & Nw. Transp. Co., 467 N.W.2d 366, 369-70 (Minn. Ct. App. 1991) (concluding that conduct that included oral harassment of an employee and the distribution of a vulgar memorandum that was derogatory of the employee "[did] not reach the requisite level of severity"); Boykin v. Perkins Family Rest., No. C9-01-1100, 2002 Minn. App. LEXIS 19, 2002 WL 4548, at *1-2 (Minn. Ct. App. Jan. 2, 2002) (affirming a district court's grant of summary judgment on an IIED claim and holding that a plaintiff's allegations that a male co-worker's sexual comments and inappropriate sexual conduct, which continued after [*20]  a manager spoke to the co-worker, although "reprehensible, . . . [were] not so atrocious as to meet the standard for [IIED]"). Other courts in this District have similarly held that a work environment in which co-workers or supervisors criticize, taunt, or harass another employee, did not rise to the level of egregious conduct required of an IIED claim under Minnesota law. See, e.g., Onyiah v. St. Cloud State Univ.,655 F. Supp. 2d 948, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 85327, 2009 WL 2974738, at *2, *17-18 (D. Minn. Sept. 17, 2009) (holding that a plaintiff's allegations of an "unfriendly and contentious work place" in which he was "subjected 'to an atmosphere of harassment and hostility'" consisting of the defendants encouraging others to harass him, filing false accusations against him, and conspiring to get him fired did not "satisfy the high threshold showing for an IIED claim"); Schibursky v. Int'l Bus. Machines Corp., 820 F. Supp. 2d 1169, 1183 (D. Minn. 1993) (holding that oral harassment by the plaintiff's supervisor did not amount to the egregious conduct required of an IIED claim).
In contrast, Wenigar v. Johnson, 712 N.W.2d 190, 208 (Minn. Ct. App. 2006), involved conduct that was found to be sufficiently atrocious to rise to be characterized as extreme and outrageous. There, the defendant employed the 57 year-old plaintiff who had a limited ability to read and write and an I.Q. of 54 and withheld the plaintiff's overtime pay, did not allow him to take breaks, [*21]  housed him in "uninhabitable" quarters, shouted at him, accused him of not completing his work, ridiculed him, and called him "stupid" and "retarded." Id. at 197-99. Extreme and outrageous conduct occurred in Strauss v. Thorne, when a physician admitted that he wrote on a patient's chart that he was concerned about possible child abuse by the patient's spouse in an effort to "get back" at the spouse for "talking to [the physician] in a manner that he found offensive." 490 N.W.2d 908, 910-13 (Minn. Ct. App. 1992).
The conduct alleged by Quinn in support of her intentional infliction of emotional distress claim is akin to the conduct found insufficient in Hubbard, Langelsag, and other cases, and in stark contrast to the extreme, shocking conduct present in Wenigar and Strauss. Although the Court must accept the conduct alleged in Quinn's Complaint as true, it is not required to accept Quinn's characterization of that alleged conduct as being extreme, outrageous, and atrocious. If her allegations are true, the complained of conduct shows that she works in a contentious, hostile, harassing (perhaps even reprehensible) work environment. The alleged conduct falls short, however, of rising to the level of being so atrocious that it passes the boundaries [*22]  of decency and is utterly intolerable to the civilized community. See Hill, 349 F.3d at 1075.
Quinn has failed to state a claim for IIED. For that reason, Count V is dismissed, and the Court declines to consider the County's other argument that Quinn's IIED claim is preempted by the MHRA's exclusive remedy provision in Minn. Stat. § 363A.04.

E. Count VI
Quinn also asserts a claim of negligent infliction of emotional distress ("NIED"). Compl. ¶¶ 97-100; Am. Compl. ¶¶ 96-99. To establish a claim for NIED, Quinn must show that she (1) was within a zone of danger of physical impact, (2) reasonably feared for her own safety, and (3) suffered severe emotional distress with accompanying physical manifestations. Wall v. Fairview Hosp. & Healthcare Servs., 584 N.W.2d 395, 408 (Minn. 1998). The County argues that Quinn's Complaint merely recites the elements of an NIED claim but fails to allege facts that show her claim to be plausible on its face. Specifically, the County contends that the Complaint fails on the first element of an NIED claim.
In response, Quinn essentially concedes that she is unable to allege facts to satisfy the "zone of danger" requirement of an NIED claim but urges the Court to recognize the so-called "direct invasion" exception to that requirement. Pl.'s Mem. in Opp'n to Mot. to Dismiss at [*23]  22-26. Under the direct invasion exception, a plaintiff who has suffered a "direct invasion of [her] rights, such as defamation, malicious prosecution, or other willful, wanton[,] or malicious conduct" may recover damages on an NIED claim. See Bohdan v. Alltool Mfg. Co., 411 N.W.2d 902, 907 (Minn. Ct. App. 1987).
This Court has previously rejected the invitation to recognize the direct invasion exception. See Shqeirat v. U.S. Airways Group, Inc., 515 F. Supp. 2d 984, 1003-04 (D. Minn. 2007) (adopting Judge Magnuson's analysis in Meyer v. Tenvoorde Motor Co., 714 F. Supp. 991, 995-96 (D. Minn. 1989), and holding that the reasoning in Bohdan for recognizing the direct invasion exception is "unsound and contradicts well-settled Minnesota Supreme Court precedent"); see also Doku v. Hennepin Health Care Systems, Inc., No. 09-353, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 47894, 2009 WL 1586709, at *4 (D. Minn. June 4, 2009) (same). Quinn maintains, however, that "important factors were missing" in the court's analysis in Meyer and that "the jurisprudential landscape has changed" since Meyer was decided. Pl.'s Mem. in Opp'n to Mot. to Dismiss at 23.
Quinn relies on a recent decision by the Minnesota Court of Appeals, Yath v. Fairview Clinics, N.P., 767 N.W.2d 34 (Minn. Ct. App. 2009), in support of her argument that the "jurisprudential landscape has changed." There, the court stated that "[o]ne exception to the zone-of-danger rule is that a plaintiff may recover damages for mental anguish or suffering for a direct invasion of rights, such as defamation, malicious prosecution, or other willful, wanton or malicious conduct." [*24]  Id. at 46 (quotation omitted). The court went on to hold, however, that because the underlying invasion of privacy claim failed, there was no basis on which to apply the direct invasion exception to preserve the NIED claim. Id. Notably, the court was not squarely presented with the issue of whether Minnesota law recognizes the direct invasion exception.
Notwithstanding the mention of the direct invasion exception by the Minnesota Court of Appeals in Yath, the rationale for recognizing a direct invasion exception to the zone of danger requirement is "unsound and contradicts well-settled Minnesota Supreme Court precedent." Shqeirat, 515 F. Supp. 2d at 1003-04. Quinn's NIED claim, Count VI, is dismissed. As with Quinn's IIED claim, the County's preemption argument as it relates to Quinn's NIED claim need not be addressed.

F. Count VII
Lastly, the County moves to dismiss Count VII of Quinn's Complaint, which asserts a claim of defamation. See Compl. ¶¶ 100-03; Am. Compl. ¶¶ 101-04. Quinn alleges that the County, "through its managers, administrators[,] and officials acting on behalf of the [County] and within the scope of their employment, caused to be published to third persons . . . defamatory statements." Compl. ¶ 100; Am. Compl. [*25]  ¶ 101. Specifically, Quinn complains of the following alleged statements by County commissioners, which were made during public meetings, board workshops, and in response to inquiries by the press: (1) several characterizations of her February 2007 harassment report as "lies, half lies, and untruths," "trumped up," "a complete and utter fabrication," "untruthful," "untrue and baseless," and an attempt to "sucker in a couple of nice guys, nail them with harassment charges and come out of the deal with better jobs"; (2) the statement that "Ellen Quinn is not smart enough to know when a glance turns to a leer"; (3) the reference to Quinn's "supporters" as "idiots" and "a circus"; (4) the statement that Quinn "wore short skirts, told dirty jokes, and yelled at secretaries"; and (5) the statement that "I still don't know how someone can be out drinking with two guys at 10:00 and then a couple of hours later be back on the job when they call her at 2:00." See id. ¶¶ 24, 26-29; Am. Compl. ¶¶ 26-31. The County argues that such statements cannot, as a matter of law, support a defamation claim.
"Only statements that present or imply the existence of fact that can be proven true or false are actionable [*26]  under state defamation law." Marchant Inv. & Mgmt. Co. v. St. Anthony W. Neighborhood Org., Inc., 694 N.W.2d 92, 95 (Minn. Ct. App. 2005) (quotation omitted). Accordingly, "if it is plain that the speaker is expressing a subjective view, an interpretation, a theory, conjecture, or surmise, rather than claiming to be in possession of objectively verifiable facts, the statement is not actionable." Id. at 95-96 (quotation omitted); see also Lee v. Metro. Airport Comm'n, 428 N.W.2d 815, 820 (Minn. Ct. App. 1988) (holding that statements consisting of opinions are absolutely protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and are not actionable in a defamation action) (citing Janklow v. Newsweek, Inc., 788 F.2d 1300, 1302 (8th Cir. 1986)). To determine whether a statement is a fact or an opinion requires consideration of four factors: (1) the precision and specificity of the disputed statement; (2) the statement's verifiability; (3) the literary and social context in which the statement was made; and (4) the statement's public context, meaning the public or political arena in which the statement was made. Id. "The opinion-fact determination is a question of law." Lund, 467 N.W.2d at 369.
The Court concludes that the statements complained of by Quinn fail to support a claim for defamation as a matter of law. The statements by commissioners concerning the truthfulness or merit to Quinn's February 2007 harassment complaint plainly constitute, in view of the circumstances in which they were [*27]  uttered, "subjective views," "interpretations," or "theories" held by those commissioners, and thus are not actionable.6See Marchant Inv., 694 N.W.2d at 95. The statement that Quinn is not smart enough to know the difference between a glance and a leer, the statement that Quinn wore short skirts, told dirty jokes, and yelled at secretaries, and the statement consisting of the rhetorical question about being out drinking and then being back on the job a couple of hours later are "too imprecise in nature to be actionable defamatory statements." See Lee, 428 N.W.2d at 821 (holding that statements that the plaintiff is "a 'fluffy,' a 'bitch,' or flirtatious" are too imprecise); Lund, 467 N.W.2d at 368 (holding that statements about the plaintiff in a company-wide memorandum consisting of the words "favoritism, . . . sick, . . . brown nose, shit head[]" were too imprecise, lacked specificity, amounted to constitutionally protected expressions of opinion, and, thus, were not actionable); see also Jones v. Minneapolis Public Schools, No. C1-02-4523, 2003 Minn. App. LEXIS 496, 2003 WL 1962062, at *6 (Minn. Ct. App. Apr. 29, 2003) (holding that statements that the plaintiff "had been 'screaming,' 'yelling,' and 'ranting and raving' . . . were too imprecise to be actionable"). To the extent that the statement referring to Quinn's supporters as "idiots" and [*28]  "a circus" could be viewed as defamatory, they seem to defame Quinn's supporters, not Quinn herself. In addition, the words "idiots" and "a circus" are highly imprecise and lacking in verifiability.
Because Quinn's defamation claim is predicated on statements that, as a matter of law, do not support a claim for defamation, Count VII is dismissed. Therefore, the Court need not address the argument that absolute immunity bars Quinn's defamation claim based on the statements by the County officials.

IV. CONCLUSION
Based upon the foregoing, and all the files, records, and proceedings herein, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the County's Motion to Dismiss [Docket No. 4] is GRANTED and Counts II, IV, V, VI, and VII of the Complaint are DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE.
BY THE COURT:
/s/ Ann D. Montgomery
ANN D. MONTGOMERY
U.S. DISTRICT JUDGE
Dated: November 9, 2009.


End of Document

