Randall v. Smith & Edwards Co.
United States District Court for the District of Utah
May 31, 2023, Decided; May 31, 2023, Filed
Case No. 1:20-cv-00183-DBB

Reporter
2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 95996 *; 2023 WL 3742818
DEANNA RANDALL, individually and on behalf of the ESTATE OF KEVIN RANDALL, Plaintiffs, v. SMITH & EDWARDS COMPANY, a Utah corporation; JASON PEEK, an individual, and EMMALEE WOODLAND, an individual, Defendants.
Counsel:  [*1] For Deanna Randall, individually and on behalf of the Estate of Kevin Randall, Plaintiff: Jeffrey J. Steele, LEAD ATTORNEY, STEELE ADAMS HOSMAN, COTTONWOOD HEIGHTS, UT; Alyssa J. Wood, Justin Martin Hosman, STEELE ADAMS HOSMAN, SANDY, UT.
For Smith & Edwards Company, a Utah corporation, Jason Peek, an individual, Emmalee Woodland, an individual, Defendants: Ruth A. Shapiro, LEAD ATTORNEY, Brenda E. Weinberg, SNOW CHRISTENSEN & MARTINEAU, SALT LAKE CITY, UT.
Judges: David Barlow, United States District Judge. Magistrate Judge Jared C. Bennett.
Opinion by: David Barlow
Opinion



MEMORANDUM DECISION AND ORDER GRANTING IN PART AND DENYING IN PART [79] DEFENDANTS' MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT AND DENYING [81] PLAINTIFFS' MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
Before the court are Plaintiffs Deanna Randall and the Estate of Kevin Randall's and Defendants Smith and Edwards Company, Jason Peek, and Emmalee Woodland's cross-motions for summary judgment.1 Both parties seek summary judgment on Plaintiffs' five remaining causes of action for violations of the Family and Medical Leave Act, violations of the Americans with Disabilities Act, and intentional infliction of emotional distress. The claims arise out of Kevin Randall's employment with and termination from Smith and [*2]  Edwards Company while he was suffering from End Stage Liver Disease. For the reasons that follow, the court grants in part and denies in part Defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment2 and denies Plaintiffs' Motion for Summary Judgment.3

BACKGROUND
Smith and Edwards Company ("Smith & Edwards") is a Utah corporation. It has two retail stores located in Utah.4 In addition, it markets products online and ships them throughout the United States.5 It employs approximately 200 employees.6
Between 2017 and 2020, EmmaLee Woodland was Smith & Edwards' Web Store Manager.7 As Web Store Manager, Ms. Woodland directed the growth of Smith & Edwards' online catalog by updating the company website, maintaining the Amazon Seller Account, and overseeing customer service for online customers.8 She supervised the Web Store Associate position.9
Smith & Edwards hired Kevin Randall as a Web Store Associate at Smith & Edwards in September 2017.10 He was classified as a full-time employee11 and received health insurance through the company.12 The Web Store Associate position "is part of the team adding products to [Smith & Edwards'] website as well as providing customer support, building Smith & Edwards' online [*3]  presence, and creating online content for the store's customers."13 The most important duty is "putting products on the website."14 That entails referencing a spreadsheet created by Ms. Woodland, gathering the dimensions for the products on the spreadsheet, collecting and resizing images of those products, writing descriptions for those products, and then uploading that information into the inventory database and the Smith & Edwards website.15 It is the best practice for a Web Store Associate to gather product dimensions by physically retrieving the product, carrying the product up and down the long, steep staircase to their office, and taking its measurements for shipping purposes.16 However, an associate could also retrieve the product's measurements from online sources.17 This process of adding products into the online inventory is typically described as "product imports," "product uploads," or "SKUs" by Smith & Edwards and its employees.18 The ratio of product imports to written descriptions (or "product descriptions") is not equal; an employee may complete many more product imports than written descriptions in a month.19 This is because some products share written descriptions (e.g., one clothing [*4]  description can be used for all colors and sizes of that piece of clothing, but each size and color item is a unique product).20 Mr. Randall had a product import benchmark of "200 to 250, depending on how many weeks were in the month."21

Smith & Edwards Employee Policy Manual
At Smith & Edwards, all employment relationships are at will.22 The manual provides that all employees are subject to a three-month evaluation period after they are hired.23 After 90 days, their manager will evaluate whether the employee meets the requirements of their position.24 For employees with "performance issues" post-dating the evaluation period, a manager may give them additional training, downgrade their position, or re-assign them if possible.25 At that point, an employee may be placed on a 90-day probationary period.26 If after two warnings an employee's performance has not improved, the manual provides for the employee's termination.27
The Employee Policy Manual also describes Smith & Edwards' "Progressive Discipline Policy and Procedure."28 It identifies certain offenses and then provides that those offenses will result in immediate dismissal, termination [*5]  after review, termination after a written warning, or termination after two or more warnings.29 As is relevant here, under the "Termination after Two or More Warnings" heading, the following offenses are included: "Violations of the policies outlined in this employee policy manual" and "[f]ailure to perform duties in a consistently acceptable manner."30 It provides that,
If you engage in behavior in this category, you will first be given a verbal warning by your manager and reminded of the Company policy regarding the behavior. If your behavior continues to include these actions, your manager will issue a written warning detailing the problem behavior, the corrective steps required, and a time limit for improvement. You will be placed on a 90-day probationary period. When a written warning is issued, your manager may suspend you for 3 days without pay. If your problem behavior continues, your employment will be terminated.31
Regarding expected conduct, the manual informs employees that "[c]ell phones are prohibited when [an] employee is clocked in," that it is "unacceptable to visit other departments and converse with co-workers about non-work related matters," and that "[u]sing [*6]  social media while at work, except while on breaks or lunches, is strictly prohibited."32 It also describes Smith & Edwards' policy on family and medical leave and disability accommodation.33 Mr. Randall's Initial Employment Performance at Smith & Edwards
Mr. Randall began working as a Web Store Associate in September 2017. Four months later, Ms. Woodland gave Mr. Randall a raise because "he was meeting the necessities of his job."34 Then, around seven months in, Ms. Woodland completed a performance evaluation with Mr. Randall.35 On an April 2018 Performance Evaluation form, Ms. Woodland marked that Mr. Randall "Fully Meets Job Requirements" in seven of the form's ten categories: "Job Knowledge," "Work Safety," "Adaptability," "Attitude," "Initiative," "Judgment," and "Overall Effectiveness."36 He "Exceed[ed] Job Requirements" in the "Dependability" category.37 In the "Volume of Work" and "Quality of Work" categories, Ms. Woodland marked that Mr. Randall "Meets Minimum Requirements."38 She recorded that his "Strengths" were "Punctuality, Dependability, Adaptability, [and] Willingness to learn/be taught."39 His "Weaknesses" were his "Process Retention" and easy distractibility.40 She wrote down [*7]  that his "Accomplishments" included importing around 200 products in 2018.41 Under his "Responsibilities," she wrote, "[i]mport at least 280 products to the website monthly."42 She noted that Mr. Randall "was warned about Social Media use @ work on 4/13/18" and that he "agreed to stop that practice."43 However, Ms. Woodland recalls that Mr. Randall did not stop using his cell phone at work—he "improved for a short period of time, probably a week to two weeks, and then he fell right back into the same behavior."44
On July 17, 2018, Ms. Woodland held a second evaluation of Mr. Randall,45 prompted by Mr. Randall's failure to notify Ms. Woodland that he was about six hours behind on a project before its deadline.46 While Ms. Woodland recorded that she had "usually been satisfied w/ work completed" and that "people enjoy [Mr. Randall's] presence in the office," she noted that Mr. Randall showed "continued disregard toward the feedback [and] instruction [that Ms. Woodland was] providing."47 She issued a verbal warning and informed Mr. Randall he would receive a written warning the next time he did not complete a project on time without communicating that he was behind or if he continued [*8]  to use cell phones and personal email improperly at work.48
Two months later, in September 2018, Mr. Randall received a second raise "[a]s incentive to stay at the store and try to perform well."49 The next month, Ms. Woodland and Mr. Randall completed a performance evaluation of Mr. Randall.50 Ms. Woodland marked that Mr. Randall "Fully Me[t] Job Requirements" in the "Job Knowledge," "Quality of Work," "Work Safety," "Adaptability," "Attitude," "Initiative," and "Overall Effectiveness categories."51 Ms. Woodland marked that he "Exceed[ed] Job Requirements" in the "Dependability" category and "Me[t] Minimum Requirements" in the "Volume of Work" and "Judgment" categories.52 They set a "[g]oal" for Mr. Randall to "[s]tay more focused" and "[e]nd conversations quickly."53 During 2018, Ms. Woodland found issues with Mr. Randall's work four times and talked to him about those issues each time.54
In January and then again in June 2019, Ms. Woodland recalls having a conversation with Mr. Randall about his slow "pace of work."55 In September 2019, Ms. Woodland initiated another performance evaluation of Mr. Randall.56 This time, Mr. Randall "Exceed[ed] Job Requirements" in the "Job Knowledge," "Work [*9]  Safety," "Attitude," and "Dependability" categories.57 He "Fully Me[t] Job Requirements" in the "Quality of Work," "Adaptability," "Initiative," "Judgment," and "Overall Effectiveness" categories.58 His "Volume of Work" fell somewhere between "Meets Minimum Requirements" and "Fully Meets Job Requirements."59 She noted that Mr. Randall "[h]elped contribute to achieving the 2019 yearly SKU goal in 9 months," "[s]uccessfully helped many customers find a resolution to their concern after contacting us," and "[a]chieved his monthly SKU goal in the month of August."60 Under "[W]eaknesses," Ms. Woodland noted "[v]olume of work": "[n]eed to work on the volume of products prepared for the website."61 She added that "[t]alking too long with other employees," "[r]etaining information/processes," and "[s]taying on task @ your desk" were other weaknesses.62 Attached to the Performance Evaluation form was an Action Plan that included items for "[m]ore practice with SCS," "[w]riting descriptions vs. [c]opy + [p]asting," "decrease 'chatty' time at the desk (Both of Us)," "[t]ell myself to focus," and for Ms. Woodland to "ask 'What are you working on' more."63 Mr. Randall's End Stage Liver Disease Diagnosis and [*10]  Subsequent Employment Performance
Until fall 2019, Mr. Randall had been the only Web Store Associate.64 That September, another Web Store Associate was hired part-time.65 In October 2019, Mr. Randall was diagnosed with End Stage Liver Disease ("ESLD").66 He met with Jason Peek, Human Resource Manager for Smith & Edwards, and Ms. Woodland that month and told them he had liver disease and would need a transplant.67 Mr. Peek and Ms. Woodland told him, "if you need time off, please take it."68 Mr. Randall told them "he would if he needed to."69
The next month, Mr. Randall received a written Final Warning on a Smith and Edwards Employee Warning Notice form.70 The offense types were "Substandard Work" and "Failure to follow written/verbal instructions."71 The "Description of the Infraction" provided that "[p]roducts were placed in the wrong category" and "[r]estricted shipping products weren't marked accordingly."72 Additionally, "[d]escriptions were exactly the same for all 26 products imported."73 This evinced a "[f]ailure to follow directions given verbally [and] listed in the Notes google doc" and "[f]ailure to adhere to outlined guidelines."74 The warning added that "[i]f major infractions [*11]  occur on a future import (multiple mistakes on 1 import), [Mr. Randall's] employment w[ould] be terminated."75 Mr. Randall was not placed on a probationary period.76 On the back of the warning, Ms. Woodland added that,
Multiple verbal warnings have been received prior to the receipt of this final warning. The employee's projects have often needed additional work from his manager to correct mistakes that occurred when the imports were completed. The employee has had multiple conversations and requests to comply with the provided guidelines from his manager prior to this final warning being issued.77
Ms. Woodland had not documented the prior verbal warnings in Mr. Randall's personnel file.78 After this litigation was commenced, Ms. Woodland went back over project spreadsheets in Mr. Randall's project folder "to document issues with [Mr.] Randall's work."79 In total, she documented six instances that preceded the Final Warning in which his spreadsheets had issues.80
In February 2020, Mr. Randall was approved to be listed for a liver transplant.81 He received Family and Medical Leave Act ("FMLA") paperwork from Smith & Edwards on March 2, 2020.82 On March 11, 2020, Mr. Randall's health care [*12]  provider, Dr. Richard Gilroy, and his transplant coordinator, Craig Myrick, completed the FMLA Certification of Health Care Provider for Employee's Serious Health Condition form ("Certification").83 Dr. Gilroy recorded that Mr. Randall's condition had commenced in October 2019 and the "[p]robable duration of [the] condition" was "until liver transplant."84 He marked that Mr. Randall would "need to have treatment visits at least twice per year due to the condition," and that Mr. Randall was not "unable to perform any of [his] job functions due to the condition."85 Dr. Gilroy wrote that "End Stage Liver Disease (ESLD) requires compliance with multi-disciplinary team care plan including routine lab testing and other diagnostic testing."86 He marked that Mr. Randall would be incapacitated for a single continuous period of time due to his medical condition, estimating that the period of incapacity would be "12 weeks."87 He marked that Mr. Randall would need to attend follow-up treatment appointments or work part-time or on a reduced scheduled because of his medical condition, and that these treatments or the reduced number of hours of work were medically necessary.88 In the section of the form designated [*13]  for Dr. Gilroy to "[e]stimate treatment schedule," he wrote, "Post transplant care plan requires variable appts from weekly to monthly schedule."89 He also marked that the condition would cause "episodic flare-ups periodically preventing [Mr. Randall] from performing [his] job functions," and that it was "medically necessary for the employee to be absent from work during the flare-ups" because "ESLD is progressive. Possibility of further decline is always possible."90 He estimated the frequency of flare-ups would be once per month for two to three days.91
Mr. Randall returned this Certification to Mr. Peek sometime in March 2020.92 Mr. Peek issued a "Designation Notice" on March 13, 2020.93 It stated that "Your FMLA leave request is approved. All leave taken for this reason will be designated as FMLA leave."94 In his deposition, Mr. Peek stated that the leave was conditionally approved, pending the date Mr. Randall went in for his transplant surgery.95
Once the COVID-19 pandemic hit, Craig Smith, an owner of Smith & Edwards, and Ms. Woodland made the decision to have Mr. Randall work from home due to his medical condition.96 On March 17, 2020, Ms. Woodland sent Mr. Randall [*14]  an email with the subject line, "Work from Home."97 She wrote, "I want you to make sure and take care of yourself during this time. As you mentioned on the phone, your [sic] a bit more susceptible because of your liver stuff, so please take as much time away from the store as you need and feel necessary."98 She also listed "expected responsibilities." These consisted of checking emails and forwarding them, writing product descriptions for the projects placed in Mr. Randall's folder, and approving Amazon return requests.99 Ms. Woodland also mentioned one nonessential duty: printing Amazon orders.100
Between March and June 2020, the Smith & Edwards web store experienced a 65 to 75 percent increase in online orders.101 Web Store Associates had more work due to the increase, especially with customer service calls and refunds.102 The workload became "much more difficult to manage" if one of the two Web Store Associates (Mr. Randall and the part-time employee who was hired in September 2019) was out.103 Ms. Woodland felt as though she did not have enough employees to handle the increased workload, but she understood that "there was not room in [the] budget for an additional employee" so she did [*15]  not "pursue the topic."104
On April 1, 2020, Mr. Randall messaged Ms. Woodland and told her he was third on the transplant list.105 Ms. Woodland responded, "This is fantastic news. Let us know when you get the call so I can get that ten days counting down for your recovery."106 On April 3, 2020, Ms. Woodland messaged Mr. Randall saying, "They all miss you, too. They've been asking me how you are doing. It felt great to give [Mr. Peek] that update on your liver status. He's very excited."107
On April 29, 2020, Ms. Woodland wrote to Mr. Randall and said, "You've been doing a great job and taking care of e-mails and it looks as though you've been pretty good at writing descriptions and all that jazz. Keep up the great work and keep me in the loop with what is going on medically so we can work with you the best way possible."108 Later in that conversation, Mr. Randall responded, "I appreciate everything you are doing for me. I haven't been sleeping well yet. I am tired all the time. I try to get up and walk around and that wears me out."109 Ms. Woodland asked him for any updates on his transplant timeline.110 Mr. Randall informed her that he was still third on the list.111
On June [*16]  3, 2020, after Mr. Randall made a comment about getting a liver, Ms. Woodland asked if Mr. Randall had "[a]ny additional news on how that's coming along."112 He told her he was still at third on the transplant list.113 Mr. Randall told Ms. Woodland he wanted to visit, but he was not "sure if [he] c[ould] make it up the stairs."114 Ms. Woodland told him, "[i]f that's safe for you to do so and you want to schedule a day you [sic] visit, I'll arrange to have the upstairs come to you."115 At the time, Ms. Woodland understood that Mr. Randall could not walk up the stairs because of his medical condition.116
Mr. Randall took time off to attend doctors' appointments between October 2019 and June 2020.117 Mr. Randall notified Ms. Woodland about his doctors' appointments,118 and Ms. Woodland would schedule him to leave early on those days.119 Mr. Randall was required to clock out when he went to an appointment.120
Mr. Randall's wife, Deanna Randall, worked from home during the beginning of the pandemic as well.121 She worked in their kitchen, and Mr. Randall worked in their living room.122 She reports that she heard Mr. Randall request accommodations for his diminished ability to work.123 He requested "[h]is [*17]  hours to be lowered and his workload to be lowered."124 Mrs. Randall further states that she heard Mr. Randall ask for a decrease in his product upload goal twice in May 2020.125 She states that she later heard him ask if he could have more flexibility with the number of product uploads he was required to do on a daily basis.126 In contrast, Ms. Woodland states that Mr. Randall never asked if he could do less product descriptions.127 Mr. Peek, who handles requests for accommodations,128 states that Mr. Randall never requested a decrease in workload or work hours, only the ability to go to doctors' appointments.129
On June 9, 2020, Ms. Woodland gave Mr. Randall a second Final Warning for "Substandard Work."130 She described that, "[w]hile working from home . . . the number of descriptions written were far below the minimum expected. The required monthly minimum is ⁓ 250 products, or 50 per week. The number of descriptions written between March 17 and June 9 was approx. 85."131 The "Plan for Improvement" consisted of "writ[ing] a minimum of 10 descriptions per day, while also checking emails + approving Amazon Return Requests . . . ."132 "Inability to meet the work requirements specified regarding [*18]  descriptions + other requirements after 2 weeks will result in termination."133 Mr. Peek participated in the phone call during which Ms. Woodland gave Mr. Randall the Final Warning.134 Mr. Randall told Mr. Peek and Ms. Woodland that this plan for improvement was doable.135
On June 20, 2020, Mr. Randall messaged Ms. Woodland to tell her "I don't feel well. I'm going to go lay down for a bit."136 On June 27, 2020, nearing the end of the two-week period, Mr. Randall messaged Ms. Woodland and told her, "Hey, I may have to go in to the InstaCare today because I'm leaking."137 Later that day, he messaged her again, saying, "I can't take this anymore. I'm going to the clinic."138

Termination
At 12:15 a.m. on June 29, 2020, Mr. Randall received his first call notifying him that a liver transplant was available.139 As he and Mrs. Randall were preparing to leave for the hospital, they received a follow-up call, informing them that the transplant team was rejecting the offer because the liver was bad.140 Later that day, Mr. Peek called Mr. Randall.141 Mr. Randall told Mr. Peek about his early morning transplant alert.142 Mr. Peek then informed Mr. Randall that Smith & Edwards had to terminate his employment because [*19]  Mr. Randall was not completing the target number of descriptions per day.143 When asked if he had any questions, Mr. Randall responded, "No. I just don't know what I'm going to do about insurance."144
At some point, Mr. Randall called Mr. Peek back.145 Mr. Randall "stated he turned in FMLA paperwork," and "this is a reason he should . . . not have been terminated."146 Mr. Peek told Mr. Randall that Mr. Randall "had never taken any leave, which FMLA is used for."147 Mr. Peek reminded Mr. Randall that he "was always allowed time off for doctors' appointments or if he was sick."148 Mr. Peek told Mr. Randall that Mr. Randall "had been working every day and he was planning on using his FMLA leave after he had had his surgery."149
While having received a notice about their eligibility for COBRA coverage, the Randalls did not initially pay for the coverage.150 That meant that on July 1, 2020—two days after his termination—Mr. Randall was no longer insured.151 This resulted in his status becoming "inactive" on the transplant list, making him ineligible to receive a liver.152
Mrs. Randall reports that Mr. Randall stopped eating, stopped exercising, and began sleeping all day.153 Concurrently, Mrs. Randall [*20]  "began experiencing intense and severe panic."154 She "worr[ied] about how [she] could support [her] family with one income, [and] how this would affect [Mr. Randall] mentally and physically."155 She "worried intensely that [Mr. Randall] would die" and "felt powerless and desperate."156 Mrs. Randall had difficulty sleeping at night. [She] could not eat, . . . [she] lost 60 pounds during this time, and [she] began losing [her] hair."157
At some point in July, Mrs. Randall's employer began to pay the Randalls' COBRA insurance costs.158 Consequently, on July 29, 2020, Mr. Randall regained "active" status on the transplant list.159 Mr. Randall was admitted to the hospital on August 2, 2020 for a possible organ offer, but the transplant did not occur.160 He received another offer on August 10, 2020.161 Again, the transplant did not occur.162 Then, on September 13, 2020, Mr. Randall was taken into surgery to receive a transplant, but the transplant was canceled due to his "clear non-tolerability."163 Mr. Randall was taken back to the ICU.164 The doctors informed Mrs. Randall that Mr. Randall was "no longer eligible to be on the transplant list and that they were just going to make him comfortable until he passed [*21]  on his own."165 On September 16, 2020, Mr. Randall died as a result of End Stage Liver Disease.166 He was 58 years old.167 After his death, Mrs. Randall "continued to experience hair loss, difficulty sleeping, weight loss, increased depression, anxiety, nightmares, and panic attacks, among other things."168
On December 2, 2020, Plaintiffs filed this action in state court.169 The complaint included causes of actions for wrongful death, discrimination due to disability status under the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), failure to provide reasonable accommodation under the ADA, retaliation under the Family and Medical Leave Act, interference with FMLA leave, negligence, intentional infliction of emotional distress, negligent infliction of emotional distress, and negligent employment.170 On December 22, 2020, Defendants removed the case to this court.171
On June 9, 2022, the parties filed a notice with the court, stating that they had stipulated to voluntary dismissal of Plaintiffs' wrongful death, negligence, and negligent infliction of emotional distress claims.172 In their opposition, Plaintiffs also stipulated to the dismissal of their negligent employment claim.173 On December 15, 2022, the parties filed cross-motions for summary [*22]  judgment on all the remaining claims.174 The cross-motions were fully briefed in February 2023.

STANDARD
"Under Rule 56(c), summary judgment is proper 'if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.'"175 "Only disputes over facts that might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law will properly preclude the entry of summary judgment."176 "[S]ummary judgment will not lie if the dispute about a material fact is 'genuine,' that is, if the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party."177 "[A]t the summary judgment stage the judge's function is not . . . to weigh the evidence and determine the truth of the matter but to determine whether there is a genuine issue for trial."178 "[T]he trial judge shall then grant summary judgment if there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and if the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law."179
"The filing of cross-motions for summary judgment does not necessarily concede the absence of a material [*23]  issue of fact."180 "This must be so because by the filing of a motion a party concedes that no issue of fact exists under the theory he is advancing, but he does not thereby so concede that no issues remain in the event his adversary's theory is adopted."181 "Accordingly, '[c]ross motions for summary judgment are to be treated separately; the denial of one does not require the grant of another.'"182

EVIDENTIARY OBJECTIONS
"'To determine whether genuine issues of material fact make a jury trial necessary, a court necessarily may consider only the evidence that would be available to the jury' in some form."183 "The requirement is that the party submitting the evidence show that it will be possible to put the information, the substance or content of the evidence, into an admissible form."184 "Hearsay testimony that would be inadmissible at trial cannot be used to defeat a motion for summary judgment because 'a third party's description of a witness' supposed testimony is 'not suitable grist for the summary judgment mill.'"185
Here, Defendants make numerous evidentiary objections to Plaintiffs' statement of undisputed facts. The court addresses those necessary to deciding the motions. [*24] 

I. Mrs. Randall's Testimony about Ms. Woodland's Exchanges with Mr. Randall Is Inadmissible Hearsay.
First, Defendants object to Plaintiffs' use of a statement from Mrs. Randall's deposition in which Mrs. Randall asserts that Ms. Woodland would speak to Mr. Randall in a belittling manner.186 Defendants argue that it is hearsay and not based on personal knowledge.187 Plaintiffs claim that "[o]ne or more exceptions to hearsay apply pursuant to Rule 803 including 803(1), 803(2), 803(3)."188
The basis for the factual assertion is a number of statements by Mrs. Randall describing what Mr. Randall told her Ms. Woodland said. Hearsay "means a statement that the declarant does not make while testifying at the current trial or hearing and a party offers in evidence to prove the truth of the matter asserted in the statement."189 Here, none of the statements are being offered to prove the truth of the matter asserted—Plaintiffs are not attempting to prove that Mr. Randall was any of the terms Ms. Woodland purportedly used to describe him. Moreover, Ms. Woodland is an opposing party, and therefore her statements are not hearsay when offered by Plaintiffs.190
However, Mrs. Randall is not testifying just to Ms. Woodland's statements; [*25]  she is testifying that Mr. Randall related those statements to her. She is offering her husband's statements for the truth of the matter asserted—that "Ms. Woodland said . . . ." They are offered to prove the fact of Ms. Woodland making those statements about him, to him.
Because the statements from Mr. Randall to Mrs. Randall are hearsay, an exemption or exception must apply for them to be admissible. Plaintiffs argue that Mr. Randall's statements fall into the exceptions for present sense impressions, excited utterances, or then-existing mental, emotional, or physical conditions.191 But because all three of those exceptions require that the declarant make the statement in close temporal proximity to the event, condition, state of mind, or feeling, and because no facts have been identified that suggest Mr. Randall's statements to Mrs. Randall were close in time to Ms. Woodland's statements to Mr. Randall, there is no basis for finding that those exceptions apply. Therefore, the court will not consider those statements for purposes of summary judgment.

II. The FMLA Certification Is Admissible as a Record of a Regularly Conducted Activity.
Defendants next argue that the Certification of Health [*26]  Care Provider for Employee's Serious Health Condition is inadmissible hearsay.192 Plaintiffs argue that "[o]ne or more exceptions to hearsay apply pursuant to Rule 803 including 803(4), 803(6), 803(8). Moreover, Craig Myrick and Dr. Gilroy can testify as to their own statements in the Certification."193 And, Defendants rely on the same Certification in their undisputed fact section.194
The Certification is a form from the Wage and Hour Division of the Department of Labor.195 There appear to be three different contributors to the form: a person who filled in the "For Completion by the EMPLOYER" section, a person who wrote responses in the "For Completion by the EMPLOYEE" section, and a person who wrote responses in the "For Completion by the HEALTH CARE PROVIDER" section.196 According to the form, the "Provider's name" is "Richard Gilroy, MD."197 Dr. Gilroy and Mr. Myrick recall assisting Mr. Randall with his FMLA paperwork.198
The Certification is hearsay if offered to prove the truth of any of the statements in the form. Federal Rule of Evidence 803(6) provides a hearsay exception for "records of a regularly conducted activity," commonly referred to as the business records exception.199 Under this exception, a "record of an act, event, condition, opinion, [*27]  or diagnosis" is admissible if "the record was made at or near the time by--or from information transmitted by--someone with knowledge; the record was kept in the course of a regularly conducted activity of a business, organization, occupation, or calling, whether or not for profit; making the record was a regular practice of that activity; all these conditions are shown by the testimony of the custodian . . . ; and the opponent does not show that the source of information or the method or circumstances of preparation indicate a lack of trustworthiness."200
The Certification fits squarely into Rule 803(6)'s exception for records of a regularly conducted activity. It was made in March 2020 by Mr. Peek, Dr. Gilroy, Mr. Myrick, and presumably Mr. Randall (although the only information he directly contributed was his name). It was kept in the course of a regularly conducted activity of the transplant team—Dr. Gilroy stated that he often assists transplant patients with such FMLA paperwork because "[t]hat's part of [his] job."201 The Certification is a form provided by the Wage and Labor Division of the Department of Labor, meaning that making it is a regular practice of assisting transplant patients [*28]  seeking FMLA leave, and Dr. Gilroy can testify to these facts. Defendants have not shown that the evidence is untrustworthy; to the contrary, Defendants rely on it as the basis for undisputed facts in their Motion for Summary Judgment. Finally, the Certification does not contain any of Mr. Randall's statements, so there is no additional hearsay contained within the document to consider. Therefore, the court will consider the Certification.

III. Mrs. Randall's Testimony about Mr. Randall's Requests for Accommodations Is Admissible; Her Testimony about Ms. Woodland's Responses Is Inadmissible Hearsay.
Next, Defendants argue that Mrs. Randall's statements about Mr. Randall's requests for accommodations and whether Smith & Edwards granted such requests are inadmissible hearsay and are not based on personal knowledge.202 Plaintiffs respond that "[o]ne or more exceptions to hearsay apply pursuant to Rule 803 including 803(1), 803(2), 803(3)."203
In her deposition, Mrs. Randall stated that while Mr. Randall was working for Smith & Edwards, she heard him request accommodations such as decreasing his hours and his workload.204 When Mr. Randall was working from home, beginning in March 2020, Mr. Randall worked in the living room [*29]  and Mrs. Randall worked in the kitchen.205 She reports that she heard Mr. Randall request, more than once, accommodations for his diminished ability to work.206 He also requested accommodations to attend his medical appointments.207 Mrs. Randall stated that, "[e]arly on," Ms. Woodland reduced Mr. Randall's requirement for product descriptions from twelve-and-a-half per day to ten per day.208 But "[a]s his health began to get worse and his mental capacity began to decline, [Mr. Randall] asked a couple of more times if they could reduce it even more."209
This evidence does not appear to be hearsay because Mr. Randall's alleged utterances are not statements offered for the truth of the matter asserted. A "statement" is "a person's oral assertion, written assertion, or nonverbal conduct, if the person intended it as an assertion."210 And, while questions may "in some way convey an implicit message," "the important question is whether an assertion was intended."211 Mr. Randall's requests were not intended assertions; he was asking his supervisor a question. There is no "truth of the matter asserted" to Mr. Randall's requests.
However, Ms. Woodland's responses to Mr. Randall's requests require a [*30]  different analysis. Ms. Woodland's responses are out of court statements offered for the truth of the matter asserted: that Smith & Edwards denied some of Mr. Randall's requests for accommodations. An exemption or exception must apply for them to be admissible, and an exemption applies: statements by an opposing party.212
The admissibility issue is that Mrs. Randall does not provide a basis for the court to find she has personal knowledge of these statements. Federal Rule of Evidence 602 provides that "[a] witness may testify to a matter only if evidence is introduced sufficient to support a finding that the witness has personal knowledge of the matter."213 While Mrs. Randall testifies that she heard Mr. Randall request accommodations, there is no record evidence that she heard Ms. Woodland's responses as well. Because there is no record evidence indicating that Mrs. Randall has personal knowledge of Ms. Woodland's responses, this becomes a hearsay within hearsay issue: Ms. Woodland told Mr. Randall, who apparently then told Mrs. Randall. For the statements to be admissible, there must be a hearsay exemption or exception for the layer of hearsay in which Mr. Randall conveyed Ms. Woodland's denials to Mrs. Randall. However, [*31]  there is no record evidence providing the necessary facts for the court to find that Mr. Randall relayed Ms. Woodland's statements while or immediately after she said them—as required by Rule 803(1)—or while he was still excited by the event of her making those statements—as required by Rule 803(2). Further, repeating Ms. Woodland's statements are not statements of Mr. Randall's then-existing state of mind or emotional, sensory, or physical condition. Accordingly, the court will not consider this evidence.

IV. Mr. Randall's Communications to Ms. Woodland about His Symptoms Are Admissible.
Next, Defendants object to the evidence of Mr. Randall's communications to Ms. Woodland about his symptoms.214 Plaintiffs respond that "[o]ne or more exceptions to hearsay apply pursuant to Rule 803 including 803(1), 803(2), (803)(3) [sic], 803(6).215
In her deposition, Ms. Woodland stated that Mr. Randall told her in April 2020 that he was tired all the time and that he got worn out by walking around the house.216 Mr. Randall's statements to Ms. Woodland are hearsay if offered for the truth of the matter asserted (but if offered for effect on the listener, they are not hearsay). However, the exception provided by Federal Rule of Evidence 803(3) applies to these statements: they are statements of [*32]  the declarant's then-existing physical condition such as bodily health or mental feeling. The "all the time" part of the statement does not qualify for this exception, because it describes more than Mr. Randall's then-existing condition. Therefore, this part of Mr. Randall's statement to Ms. Woodland will not be considered by the court.

V. Mr. Randall's Messages to Ms. Woodland Are Admissible, Both for Non-Hearsay and Hearsay Purposes.
Defendants also object to Mr. Randall's statements to Ms. Woodland notifying her about his need to go to an urgent care clinic due to him "leaking" on June 27, 2020.217 Plaintiffs argue that "[o]ne or more exceptions to hearsay apply pursuant to Rule 803 including 803(1), 803(2), (803)(3) [sic], 803(6)."218
As with Mr. Randall's other messages to Ms. Woodland, these messages are not hearsay if offered to prove the effect on Ms. Woodland (she understood Mr. Randall had to go to the Instacare219 ) or notice to Ms. Woodland. If offered for the truth of the matter asserted—that Mr. Randall was "leaking" and believed that he might need to seek medical care, the hearsay exception in Rule 803(3) applies. These are statements made by Mr. Randall about his then-existing physical condition ("I'm leaking") and his state of [*33]  mind (intent to go to Instacare). Therefore, this evidence will be considered.

VI. Mr. Myrick's Testimony about Whether Mr. Randall Was Using Intermittent FMLA Leave Is Inadmissible Because He Lacks Personal Knowledge.
Defendants object to Mr. Myrick's testimony that Mr. Myrick understood that Mr. Randall was actively taking intermittent FMLA beginning in March 2020.220 They believe such evidence is hearsay and not based on personal knowledge.221 Plaintiffs respond that "[o]ne or more exceptions to hearsay apply pursuant to Rule 803 including 803(1), 803(2), 803(3), 803(4), [and] 803(6)."222
Mr. Myrick's understanding of whether Mr. Randall was using FMLA leave prior to his termination is speculation and is not based on personal knowledge. Mr. Myrick testified that it was "more of an assumption on [his] part."223 This testimony is barred by Rule 602, and the court will not consider it.

VII. Mr. Parker's Statements about Smith & Edwards' Termination of Mr. Randall Are Inadmissible Because He Lacks Personal Knowledge.
Defendants next object to Randy Parker's statements characterizing Smith & Edwards' termination of Mr. Randall and his statements about what Smith & Edwards knew.224 Defendants argue that this is inadmissible character evidence, not [*34]  based on personal knowledge, and an unsupported opinion.225 Plaintiffs respond that Mr. Parker has personal knowledge of Mr. Randall's treatment and statements made by Smith & Edwards.226
Mr. Parker was a manager of a department at Smith & Edwards while Mr. Randall worked there.227 He was not Mr. Randall's supervisor, and he did not work directly with Mr. Randall, except for when Mr. Randall had questions on products.228 In his deposition, he repeatedly acknowledged that he did not have first-hand knowledge of Mr. Randall's employment.229 Mr. Parker described that Mr. Randall "was in another office" so Mr. Parker would not have been able to "observe [his treatment] personally."230 Instead, he heard certain things from Mr. or Mrs. Randall.231 Considering the record evidence, Mr. Parker does not appear to have personal knowledge of the purportedly undisputed facts for which Plaintiffs rely on his testimony. Therefore, the court will not consider it.

DISCUSSION

I. Plaintiffs' ADA and FMLA Claims Are Not Preempted by ERISA.
The Employee Retirement Income Security Act's ("ERISA") preemption clause provides that it "shall supersede any and all State laws insofar as they may now or hereafter relate to any employee benefit plan."232 "Before [*35]  preemption will be found, three requirements must be met[:] [t]here must be a state law, an employee benefit plan, and the state law must 'relate to' the employee benefit plan."233
Plaintiffs' federal claims—under the Family and Medical Leave Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act—are not preempted by ERISA as they are not state law.234 That leaves Plaintiffs' remaining state law claims for intentional infliction of emotional distress ("IIED"). The court need not resolve whether the IIED claims are preempted because, as discussed in Section III below, the IIED claims are not cognizable.

II. Plaintiffs' ADA and FMLA Claims Survive Mr. Randall's Death.
"The question of the survival of an action grounded in federal law is governed by federal common law when, as here, there is no expression of contrary intent."235 "The general rule under the federal common law is that an action for a penalty does not survive the death of the plaintiff."236 "Typically, a court is required to infer from a reading of the relevant statute and its history whether a cause of action is penal or remedial in nature."237 For this, there is a "three-factor analysis requiring an assessment of '1) whether the purpose of the [*36]  statute was to redress individual wrongs or more general wrongs to the public; 2) whether recovery under the statute runs to the harmed individual or to the public; and 3) whether the recovery authorized by the statute is wholly disproportionate to the harm suffered.'"238
In other contexts, the Tenth Circuit has described the ADA as having "broad remedial purposes,"239 and the Supreme Court has described the FMLA as a "comprehensive remedial mechanism."240 The parties have not cited and the court is not aware of any binding authority expressly holding that the ADA or the FMLA are remedial or penal in nature for purposes of claim survival. Accordingly, the court applies the three-factor analysis for each statute.
"The ADA's purposes include 'assuring . . . 'full participation'' in society for individuals with disabilities, as well as 'equality of opportunity,' so that disabled individuals may 'compete on an equal basis and . . . pursue those opportunities for which our free society is justifiably famous.'"241 This purpose is to address individual wrongs against persons with disabilities. Recovery under the ADA runs to the harmed individual: "the complaining party may recover compensatory [*37]  and punitive damages . . . from the respondent."242 Recovery is proportionate to the harm suffered because a plaintiff may only recover punitive damages if the defendant acted with malice or reckless indifference, and there are limitations on the sum of damages awarded.243 Therefore, the ADA is remedial in nature.244 In enacting the FMLA, "Congress was attempting to alleviate the economic burdens to both the employee and to his or her family of illness-related job-loss" [and] "attempting to prevent those with serious health problems from being discriminated against by their employers."245 This purpose is clearly to address individual wrongs to individuals rather than more general wrongs to the public. Additionally, recovery under the FMLA runs to the individual: "Any employer who violates . . . this title shall be liable to any eligible employee affected."246 Finally, damages are proportionate. The FMLA provides for compensatory damages—"any wages, salary, employment benefits, or other compensation denied or lost to such employee by reason of the violation" or "any actual monetary losses sustained by the employee as a direct result of the violation"—and for liquidated damages equal to that sum unless [*38]  the employer acted in good faith.247 The Tenth Circuit has held that the "relief provided in FMLA . . . parallels the provisions of the FLSA,"248 and the Supreme Court has found that the FLSA's "liquidated damage provision is not penal in its nature."249 Accordingly, the FMLA, including its liquidated damages provision, is remedial in nature.250
This means that unless a statute applies, the ADA and FMLA claims survived Mr. Randall's death. In their reply, Defendants argue that federal common law does not apply because "the Tenth Circuit already determined long ago that 42 U.S.C. § 1988 applies to the ADA and other employment-related claims, and therefore state statutes determine survival of personal injury actions involving employment and discrimination claims."251 Defendants point to case law concerning Title VII and ADA claims, and then argue that "[t]here is no reason to apply a different standard to FMLA" because the facts behind the ADA and FMLA claims are "virtually undistinguishable."252 Plaintiffs' position is that by the "express language" of § 1988(a), it does not apply to claims under the ADA or FMLA.253 They also argue that "[d]ismissing Plaintiffs' claims under Utah's survival [*39]  statute would be 'inconsistent' with federal law," but that "[e]ven if the court looks to Utah's survival statute pursuant to § 1988(a), Plaintiffs' ADA and FMLA claims survive."254
In Robertson v. Wegmann, the Supreme Court held that the decision as to the applicable survivorship rule in § 1983 actions is governed by 42 U.S.C. § 1988(a).255 Section 1988(a) provides that:
The jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters conferred on the district courts by the provisions of titles 13, 24, and 70 of the Revised Statutes for the protection of all persons in the United States in their civil rights, and for their vindication, shall be exercised and enforced in conformity with the laws of the United States, so far as such laws are suitable to carry the same into effect; but in all cases where they are not adapted to the object, or are deficient in the provisions necessary to furnish suitable remedies and punish offenses against law, the common law, as modified and changed by the constitution and statutes of the State wherein the court having jurisdiction of such civil or criminal cause is held, so far as the same is not inconsistent with the Constitution and laws of the United States, shall be extended to and govern the said courts in the trial and disposition of the [*40]  cause, and, if it is of a criminal nature, in the infliction of punishment on the party found guilty.256
As the Court noted, "one specific area not covered by federal law is that relating to 'the survival of civil rights actions under § 1983 upon the death of either the plaintiff or defendant.'"257 "Under § 1988, this state statutory law, modifying the common law, provides the principal reference point in determining survival of civil rights actions, subject to the important proviso that state law may not be applied when it is 'inconsistent with the Constitution and laws of the United States.'"258
In subsequent decisions, the Supreme Court has applied § 1988(a) to other "Reconstruction Civil Rights Acts" claims under §§ 1981, 1983, 1985, and 1986.259 Following Robertson, the Tenth Circuit has repeatedly applied § 1988(a) to § 1983 actions.260 It has also applied § 1988(a) to § 1981 cases.261 And during the 1990s, it also applied § 1988(a) to two Title VII actions.262 Notably, Title VII is part of the Civil Rights Act of 1964—not the Reconstruction Civil Rights Acts—and is not contained in "titles 13, 24, and 70 of the Revised Statutes."263
In Slade for Estate of Slade v. U.S. Postal Service, the Tenth Circuit held [*41]  that the "relevant law" to determine whether a Title VII claim survived the decedent's death was the state statute for survival of personal injury actions.264 The court cited to Smith for the proposition that "[t]he question of the survival of an action grounded in federal law is governed by federal common law when, as here, there is no expression of contrary intent."265 But it then quoted from a Seventh Circuit decision—a decision on a § 1983 claim, not a Title VII claim—for its next sentence: "[I]f federal law does not provide a rule of decision in a civil rights case, federal law will incorporate the appropriate state law, unless that law is 'inconsistent with the Constitution and laws of the United States.'"266 It then identified Oklahoma law as the "relevant law" and applied it, finding that the claim survived the former plaintiff's death.267
In Karnes v. SCI Colorado Funeral Services, Inc., the Tenth Circuit again applied § 1988(a) to a Title VII claim. This time, however, the circuit court engaged with the text of § 1988(a) and then applied the analysis from Burnett v. Grattan.268 It found that the applicable federal statute, 42 U.S.C. § 1981a, was not deficient and that, even if it had been, state law was not consistent with federal law.269 [*42]  Therefore, state law did not provide the burden of proof for punitive damages in Title VII actions.270
In the 1990s and 2000s, three other circuits applied § 1988(a) to ADA, Title VII, or Rehabilitation Act ("RA") claims.271 However, a modern trend is emerging in which circuit courts find § 1988(a) inapplicable to causes of actions other than those provided by "provisions of titles 13, 24, and 70 of the Revised Statutes."272 Starting in 2017, three circuits have so found.
In 2017, the Eighth Circuit observed that, while "[a] number of courts have nonetheless looked to § 1988(a) to address the survivability of ADA claims," § 1988(a) does not apply to the ADA.273 This is because § 1988(a) has "expressly limited application to actions brought under 'titles 13, 24, and 70 of the Revised Statutes,'" none of which include the ADA.274
A few months later, the Third Circuit considered whether § 1988(a) applied to violations of the Fair Housing Act.275 The Third Circuit examined the text of § 1988(a), reasoning that,
On its face, the statute applies to certain statutes—those found within three Titles of the Revised Statutes, "titles 13, 24, and 70." If the Fair Housing Act had been contained within one of these three Titles, it would fall within Section 1988(a). Of course, the Fair Housing Act was enacted almost a century after the Revised Statutes. It was never codified in its Titles 13, 24 or 70. Therefore, Section 1988(a) by its plain [*43]  meaning does not apply to the Fair Housing Act.276
The Third Circuit found this "text-based conclusion" was "consistent with the legislative history, which shows that Section 1988(a) has always applied to designated statutes only. Section 1988(a) has never applied globally to any statute that could be labelled a 'civil rights' law."277 Instead, it only applies to "the Reconstruction-era civil rights statutes, including what are now 42 U.S.C. §§ 1981, 1982 and 1983."278
The Ninth Circuit confronted the same issue in 2018, holding that § 1988(a) did not apply to ADA claims.279 Like the Third Circuit, it turned to the statutory text: "According to the text of 42 U.S.C. § 1988(a) itself, the provision applies to 'civil and criminal matters' brought under the 'provisions of titles 13, 24, and 70 of the Revised Statutes,' which do not include the ADA and RA."280 It then considered the legislative history of § 1988(a), observing that while Congress had frequently amended § 1988(b), it had not amended § 1988(a) since 1874.281 "In short, § 1988(a) explicitly and unambiguously includes only certain civil rights statutes and omits others, such as the ADA and RA."282 The court noted that "some circuits do apply § 1988(a) to civil rights statutes not explicitly listed," but that "[n]one of those opinions engage in any analysis of the actual statutory language of § 1988(a). Rather, they proceed apparently [*44]  'under the unsupported assumption that it applies broadly to any and all actions that could be characterized as sounding in 'civil rights.'"283
Whether or not the Tenth Circuit would come to the same conclusion regarding the ADA is not for this court to decide. Slade for Estate of Slade v. U.S. Postal Service is not dispositive because it concerned a Title VII claim under the Civil Rights Act of 1964, not a claim under the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1991. But because the Tenth Circuit previously has applied § 1988(a) beyond the titles listed in its text, and because two district courts in the circuit have applied it to ADA claims,284 the court applies the § 1988(a) analysis to Plaintiffs' ADA claims for the sake of completeness.285 Both paths lead to the same place.
42 U.S.C. § 1988(a) "authorizes federal courts to undertake a three-step process to determine whether to borrow law from another source to aid their enforcement of federal civil rights statutes."286 "Section 1988 first directs that courts look to federal law 'so far as such laws are suitable to carry [the civil and criminal civil rights statutes] into effect.'"287 "Second, if federal law is 'not adapted to the object' or is 'deficient in the provisions necessary to furnish suitable remedies and punish [*45]  offenses,' courts must consider borrowing the law of the forum state."288 "Third, the federal court must reject the application of state law if it is 'inconsistent with the Constitution and laws of the United States.'"289
When federal law does not cover a specific area, there is a "deficiency."290 For example, there is a deficiency in federal law concerning the survivability of civil rights actions under § 1983—the law does not provide a federal rule.291 The same is true for the ADA: "the ADA . . . [is] silent on whether claims brought under [it] abate at the time of a claimant's death."292 Accordingly, federal law is deficient concerning the survivability of ADA claims.
Having determined that federal law is deficient, the court must turn to state statutes governing the survival of state actions. "[T]his state statutory law, modifying the common law, provides the principal reference point in determining survival of civil rights actions."293 Utah's survivorship statute provides that "[a] cause of action arising out of personal injury to an individual . . . does not abate upon the death of the wrongdoer or the injured individual."294 The statute does not define "personal injury to the individual."
In [*46]  Gressman v. State, the Utah Supreme Court considered whether a factual innocence claim survived the death of the plaintiff.295 The factual innocence statute did not address the survivability of claims, so the Court examined Utah's general survival statute to determine whether it supplanted the common law rule of abatement in the case.296 It found that the "closest common law analogs to [the] factual innocence claim [we]re false imprisonment and malicious prosecution."297 It observed that both claims were "categorized as torts against the person . . . because these torts infringe on an individual's personal liberty interests."298 It considered how other states and the U.S. Supreme Court have defined the claims as personal injury torts.299 The Court noted that "the history and context of the adoption of the current version of the survival statute demonstrate[d] that the legislature did not intend that the statute be confined to actions for physical injury," especially "[i]n light of the well-established principle that a statutory reference to 'personal injury' claims includes all personal torts."300 It determined that "'person' in the phrase 'personal injury to a person' emphasizes the inclusion of all [*47]  personal tort claims in the survival statute."301 "Taken as a whole, therefore, the definition of 'person' is broader than an individual's natural body and is necessarily coextensive with the 'interests of personality' vindicated by personal tort law."302 Accordingly, because the claims' "common law analogs . . . are commonly included in the definition of actions for 'personal injury' or 'injury to the person' under survival statutes, and because a similar federal statutory claim has been defined as a personal injury action for the purposes of statutes of limitations, [the factual innocence] statutory claim survive[d] because it [wa]s an action for 'personal injury to a person.'"303
Here, Plaintiffs assert ADA claims. The Supreme Court directs that "the matter of characterization" of such claims is a question of federal law.304 Section 1988(a)'s analysis is typically straight-forward for § 1983 and § 1981 claims because the Supreme Court has held that such claims are most like personal injury actions.305 If § 1988(a) applies to ADA claims because they are "civil rights" causes of actions analogous to § 1983 and § 1981, it follows that ADA claims also are characterized as personal injury claims. Further, there is a wealth [*48]  of federal case law that ADA claims are "best characterized as one[s] for personal injury."306 Therefore, the court characterizes the ADA claims as personal injury torts. This means that under Utah law, Plaintiffs' ADA claims are "cause[s] of action arising out of personal injury to an individual"307 and that they "do[] not abate upon the death of . . . the injured individual."308
Further, even if Utah's survivorship statute resulted in Plaintiffs' ADA claims being abated, the claims would still survive because that result would be inconsistent with the ADA. "In resolving questions of inconsistency between state and federal law raised under § 1988, courts must look not only at particular federal statutes and constitutional provisions, but also at 'the policies expressed in [them].'"309 "Of particular importance is whether application of state law 'would be inconsistent with the federal policy underlying the cause of action under consideration.'"310 When a state law "'d[oes] not provide for survival of any tort actions,' or if it significantly restricts the types of actions that survive," it may be inconsistent with federal law.311
In Robertson, the Supreme Court found that a Louisiana survivorship statute [*49]  was not inconsistent with federal policies even though it caused abatement of the claim because it had "no independent adverse effect on the policies underlying" the federal statute.312 There, the Louisiana statute barred the § 1983 action brought by the executor of the plaintiff's estate because the executor did not satisfy the statute's requirements in that he was not a spouse, child, parent, or sibling of the deceased plaintiff.313 The abatement did not undermine § 1983's policies because the "goal of compensating those injured by a deprivation of rights provides no basis for requiring compensation of one who is merely suing as the executor of the deceased's estate."314 Further, most § 1983 actions would survive the plaintiff's death under Louisiana's statute.315
In Karnes v. SCI Colorado Funeral Services, Inc., the Tenth Circuit held that Colorado law was inconsistent with federal policies when it required punitive damages to be proven beyond a reasonable doubt.316 This was because the federal legislation, Title VII, constituted "a broad remedial measure 'designed to assure equality of employment opportunities.'"317 "By allowing the recovery of punitive damages, [the federal law] provides that in appropriate [*50]  circumstances, damage awards in Title VII actions may serve to punish outrageous discriminatory conduct and to deter similar conduct in the future."318 The high evidentiary burden imposed by Colorado law could not be "harmonized with the policy underlying" the federal law.319 This burden was "generally inhospitable" to punitive damages claims, diminishing the "remedial and deterrent effects of punitive damage awards" and undermining important Congressional policies.320
Concerning the claims at issue here, "the broad, general purpose of the ADA [i]s to eliminate discrimination against people with disabilities."321 To that end, the ADA prohibits covered employers from "discriminat[ing] against a qualified individual on the basis of the disability in regard to . . . [the] terms, conditions, and privileges of employment."322 If Utah law did not provide for any ADA claims to survive the death of the person with the disability, it would make Utah "generally inhospitable" to ADA claims. This is because "ADA claims specifically involve disabled plaintiffs alleging they were discriminated against because of their disability," meaning that the "very nature of the ADA makes it more likely the aggrieved [*51]  party will die before the case is complete given the health issue which brings him or her under the statute's protection."323 "Congress passed the ADA to eradicate discrimination against disabled persons, some of whom may be targeted precisely because of their poor health. A state law allowing claims to abate when the aggrieved party dies impedes this broad remedial purpose."324
Defendants point to a district court's discussion of Colorado's survivorship statute in Rosenblum v. Colorado Department of Health 325 for the proposition that the argument "that abatement of ADA claims would be inconsistent with the purposes of the ADA . . . has been rejected by courts in the Tenth Circuit."326 However, in Rosenblum, the court was addressing solely the availability of damages after the plaintiff's death when the Colorado survivorship statute expressly limited the types of damages recoverable after a plaintiff's death327—not the entire ADA claim. Rosenblum does not change the analysis or the result here.
In conclusion, federal common law would allow Plaintiffs' ADA and FMLA claims to survive because they are remedial, and the application of § 1988(a) to Plaintiffs' ADA claims does not result in a different outcome. Therefore, Plaintiffs' [*52]  ADA and FMLA claims did not abate on Mr. Randall's death.

III. Plaintiffs' Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress Claims Fail Because Defendants' Conduct Was Not Outrageous as a Matter of Law.
"Under Utah law, a plaintiff must prove four elements to establish an intentional infliction of emotional distress claim: '(i) the [defendant's] conduct [complained of] was outrageous and intolerable in that it offended . . . generally accepted standards of decency and morality; (ii) [the defendant] intended to cause, or acted in reckless disregard of the likelihood of causing, emotional distress; (iii) [the plaintiff] suffered severe emotional distress; and (iv) [the defendant's] conduct proximately caused [the] emotional distress."328 "If the trial court determines that a defendant's conduct was not outrageous as a matter of law, then the plaintiff's claim fails, and a court may properly grant the defendant summary judgment on an intentional infliction of emotional distress claim."329
"A court is to determine whether a 'defendant's conduct may reasonably be regarded as so extreme and outrageous as to permit recovery.'"330 "[C]onduct is not outrageous simply because it is 'tortious, injurious, or [*53]  malicious, or because it would give rise to punitive damages, or because it is illegal.'"331 Similarly, conduct is not outrageous because it is "unreasonable, unkind, or unfair."332 "In the employment context, . . . liability . . . may be found only where the conduct complained of has been so extreme in degree as to go beyond all possible bounds of decency."333
"While termination can be an emotionally distressing event in one's life, mere termination alone does not constitute the intentional infliction of emotional distress."334 This is because, "[u]ndoubtedly, every employee who believes he has a legitimate grievance concerning his discharge from employment experiences some emotional anguish as a result of that belief."335 Only when the termination involves additional circumstances that make the employer's acts "go beyond all possible bounds of decency" do Utah courts permit the claim to go to the jury.
For example, the Utah Supreme Court, in Retherford v. AT & T Communications of Mountain States, Inc., held that "months of persecution by [] co-workers," in which the co-workers "shadowed [the plaintiff's] movements, intimidated her with threatening looks and remarks, and manipulated circumstances [*54]  at her work in ways that made her job markedly more stressful, all in retaliation for her good-faith complaint of sexual harassment"336 were sufficient to "reasonably be regarded as so extreme and outrageous as to permit recovery.'"337 And in Cabaness v. Thomas, the Court found a jury could determine that a supervisor's conduct was outrageous where he "consistently verbally harassed, intimidated, and ridiculed the employees he supervised," "made the work of his subordinates harder without providing any justification for doing so," "evinced a disregard for safety procedures," "regularly threatened to fire" employees, "insult[ed] and demean[ed] [the plaintiff] by, among other things, calling him 'dumbass,' 'jackass,' and 'asshole,' and using cutting sarcasm," told the plaintiff to "get rid of [his] wife," "knee[d] an employee in the groin with enough force to cause the employee to fall to the floor in pain," and "singled . . . out [the plaintiff who had just returned after a leave of absence for depression] in an employee meeting, threatened to fire him, and criticized him about personal issues in front of other employees."338 On the opposite end of the spectrum, the Court found that being discharged [*55]  and given "a false reason for [the] dismissal" was insufficient for establishing a genuine issue of material fact regarding "outrageous" conduct.339
Plaintiffs argue that their IIED claim is not solely based on Mr. Randall's termination,340 but they cite no Utah case permitting an IIED claim on facts similar to their own.341 And, considering the evidence, there are no parallels between the facts in this case and the facts in the cases where the Utah Supreme Court has found sufficient evidence for a jury to determine whether certain conduct is "outrageous." Viewed in the light most favorable to Plaintiffs, the evidence would permit a reasonable fact finder to determine that Mr. Randall was an employee who mostly performed satisfactorily, but who regularly failed to meet the benchmark set for his production of product imports and who—at least during the first year of his employment—failed to follow company policy regarding personal cell phone use, social media use, and chatting with coworkers. Two and a half years into his employment, while Mr. Randall was waiting on a liver transplant, Smith & Edwards set a requirement for Mr. Randall's production that was very high for him, knowing Mr. Randall [*56]  had never produced at that level. Mr. Randall failed to meet the new requirement and Defendants fired him, knowing that would mean he would lose his employer's contribution to his health insurance benefit. The fact finder could also determine that his termination was in violation of the ADA and the FMLA.
While reasonable minds could find this evidence of Defendants' actions toward Mr. Randall to be "unreasonable, unkind, or unfair"342 and even illegal,343 they could not reasonably differ regarding whether Defendants' actions can "be regarded as so extreme and outrageous as to permit recovery."344 Firing Mr. Randall at the time in question was undoubtedly unkind and may have been unfair and unreasonable as well; but it does not meet the standard set by case law for actions "utterly intolerable in a civilized community."345 Unlike Retherford and Cabaness, there is not a "continuous and ongoing pattern" of "insult[s], indignit[ies], or threat[s]."346 Mr. Randall was an at-will Web Store Associate at a company experiencing much higher than usual online sales who was not performing at the level the company desired. His termination was not the culmination of months of verbal abuse or persecution. Even accompanied by the [*57]  serious circumstances—Mr. Randall's liver disease and the loss of his employer's contribution to his health insurance benefit—Defendants' conduct does not meet the "outrageous, intolerable and offensive" standard under Utah law.347
Plaintiffs argue that "[t]he District of Utah has already determined that under Utah law disability discrimination is a sufficient basis for an IIED claim."348 But the argument that any claim of disability discrimination, no matter the record evidence, categorically results in an IIED claim that goes to the jury is not supported. In Richardson v. Valley Asphalt, the complaint alleged Defendants fired plaintiff shortly after he disclosed his AIDS diagnosis, telling plaintiff's wife that "no one wanted to work with her husband because he had AIDS," and threatening her to make her husband withdraw his claim for unemployment benefits.349 The district court likened the allegations to the sexual harassment alleged in Retherford v. AT&T Communications,350 discussed above, in which the plaintiff alleged "months of persecution by her co-workers . . . in retaliation for her good-faith complaint of sexual harassment."351 Plaintiffs here do not have any admissible evidence [*58]  of harassment on the basis of Mr. Randall's disability. In short, the facts of this case do not rise to the level of those in Richardson or Retherford.
Defendants are granted judgment on Plaintiffs' IIED claims.352

IV. There Are Genuine Issues of Material Fact that Preclude Summary Judgment on Plaintiffs' Claims under the Americans with Disabilities Act.
"In general, the ADA provides that '[n]o covered entity shall discriminate against a qualified individual on the basis of disability in regard to job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment.'"353 An employer may violate the ADA by discriminating against an employee on the basis of the employee's disability or "by not making reasonable accommodation to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability."354
Plaintiffs allege that Defendants both (A) discriminated against Mr. Randall on the basis of his disability and (B) failed to provide reasonable accommodation to Mr. Randall.

A. There Is a Genuine Dispute of Material Fact as to Whether Defendants Discriminated Against Mr. Randall on the Basis of His Disability [*59] .
Under McDonnell Douglas's three-part analysis, "[t]o establish a prima facie case under the ADA, a plaintiff must demonstrate: (1) that she is a disabled person within the meaning of the ADA, (2) that she is qualified, that is, she is able to perform the essential functions of the job, with or without reasonable accommodation, and (3) that the employer terminated her employment under circumstances which give rise to an inference that the termination was based on her disability."355
The parties dispute whether Mr. Randall had a disability within the meaning of the ADA, whether he was qualified to perform the essential functions of the Web Store Associate position, and whether he can show that Smith & Edwards terminated him under circumstances that give rise to an inference that the termination was based on his ESLD. The court discusses each in turn.

1. There Is a Genuine Issue of Material Fact as to Whether Plaintiffs Have Established a Prima Facie Case of Disability Discrimination.
a. There Is a Genuine Issue of Material Fact as to Whether Mr. Randall Had a Disability for Purposes of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
Under the ADA, "[t]he term 'disability' means, with respect to an individual [*60]  . . . a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities of such individual; a record of such an impairment; or being regarded as having such an impairment."356 "To satisfy this definition, 'a plaintiff must (1) have a recognized impairment, (2) identify one or more appropriate major life activities, and (3) show the impairment substantially limits one or more of those activities.'"357 "Whether a plaintiff has met the first two requirements are questions of law for the court."358 "But whether the impairment substantially limits a major life activity is ordinarily a question of fact for the jury."359
i. Mr. Randall Had a Physical Impairment.
"The ADA does not define the term 'physical or mental impairment.'"360 Under the definition promulgated by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in its regulations issued to implement Title 1 of the ADA,
Physical or mental impairment means . . . [a]ny physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss affecting one or more body systems, such as neurological, musculoskeletal, special sense organs, respiratory (including speech organs), cardiovascular, reproductive, digestive, genitourinary, [*61]  immune, circulatory, hemic, lymphatic, skin, and endocrine . . . .361
Plaintiffs have submitted evidence showing Mr. Randall had a physiological condition affecting his digestive system during some of the time period in question: he was diagnosed with End Stage Liver Disease in October 2019.362 Defendants do not dispute this, nor argue that this is not a physical impairment under the ADA.
ii. Record Evidence Supports a Finding that Mr. Randall's Impairment Affected at least One Major Life Activity.
The next question is whether Plaintiffs have identified at least one "major life activity" that was affected by Mr. Randall's impairment. A "major life activity" may be "caring for oneself, performing manual tasks, seeing, hearing, eating, sleeping, walking, standing, lifting, bending, speaking, breathing, learning, reading, concentrating, thinking, communicating, and working."363
The undisputed record evidence supports a finding that Mr. Randall's ESLD affected at least one major life activity. Mr. Myrick testified that Mr. Randall had encephalopathy as a result of ESLD.364 "[T]he unscientific term for [encephalopathy] is foggy thinking. [Affected individuals] just don't think clearly."365 Mr. Randall [*62]  experienced difficulty concentrating.366 Sometimes, he had to "really think about" simple questions.367 As the disease progressed, he got worse and worse.368 He had a "hard time concentrating" and was "very, very forgetful."369 In Mr. Randall's November 9, 2019 "Employee Warning Notice," Ms. Woodland wrote that Mr. Randall was "fail[ing] to follow directions given verbally [and] listed in the Notes google doc."370 In other words, there is evidence that Mr. Randall's ESLD may have affected his ability to learn, concentrate, think, and, by extension, work—four major life activities.
There also is record evidence that Mr. Randall "had swelling in his abdomen and legs."371 This made it "difficult for him to go up and down the stairs."372 This affected his ability to perform the "major life activity" of walking. In short, the uncontroverted record evidence supports a finding that Mr. Randall's ESLD affected at least one major life activity.
iii. There Is a Genuine Issue of Material Fact as to Whether Mr. Randall's Impairment Substantially Limited a Major Life Activity.
"The final element of the ADA's definition of disability describes the relationship that must exist between the first two elements." [*63] 373 "A disability exists under the statute only where a physical or mental impairment 'substantially limits' a major life activity."374 "An impairment is substantially limiting when it renders an individual either unable or significantly restricted in her ability to perform a major life activity 'compared to the average person in the general population.'"375 "Three factors govern this inquiry: '(1) the nature and severity of the impairment; (2) the duration or expected duration of the impairment; and (3) the permanent or long term impact or the expected permanent or long term impact of or resulting from the impairment.'"376
Although "temporary, non-chronic impairments of short duration, with little or no long term or permanent impact, are usually not disabilities," "an impairment does not necessarily have to be permanent to rise to the level of a disability. Some conditions may be long-term, or potentially long-term, in that their duration is indefinite and unknowable or is expected to be at least several months. Such conditions, if severe, may constitute disabilities."377
"Because this is a factual determination, the relevant question . . . is whether [the plaintiff] has presented enough evidence to [*64]  create a genuine dispute as to any material fact that necessitates resolution by a jury."378
Plaintiffs have submitted evidence that Mr. Randall was diagnosed with ESLD seven months before his termination from Smith & Edwards,379 and the disease resulted in his death just a few months after his termination.380 Mr. Randall reportedly experienced encephalopathy, fatigue, and swelling in his abdomen and legs as symptoms of the disease.381 There is record evidence from which a fact finder could determine that these symptoms impacted his ability to think, learn, concentrate, work, and walk. The expected duration of the impairment was "until liver transplant,"382 which as of February 2020, was estimated to be seven to nine months.383 There was a high likelihood of no permanent or long-term impact from the impairment as long as Mr. Randall received a transplant.384
"Taken together, there is enough evidence in the record for a jury to conclude that [Mr. Randall's] impairments substantially limited his ability to [learn, think, concentrate, work, and walk] in comparison to the abilities of an average person."385 Even though his ESLD was not expected to be permanent, it persisted [*65]  for almost a year after diagnosis and it eventually was severe enough to result in Mr. Randall's death. This is enough evidence for a reasonable jury, if it credits the evidence, to find that Mr. Randall's ESLD substantially limited a major life activity.
b. There Is a Genuine Issue of Material Fact as to Whether Mr. Randall Was Qualified to Perform the Essential Functions of His Job.
"The ADA defines a 'qualified individual with a disability' as 'an individual with a disability who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds or desires.'"386 "As a condition to performing the essential functions of an employment position, however, an individual must first satisfy 'the requisite skill, experience, education and other job-related requirements of the employment position.'"387 "If a plaintiff fails to establish that he has met either step of this analysis, he is not a 'qualified individual' within the meaning of § 12111(8)."388
Defendants argue that "Mr. Randall was not a qualified individual because he could not perform the essential functions of his job, which included 200-250 product [imports] per month."389 Plaintiffs [*66]  respond that the number of product imports or descriptions is not an essential function of the job; the task—creating product imports—is.390 They argue that "the [number] of product uploads was inconsistent, varied among employees based upon their capabilities, [the task was] not time sensitive, and the goals were a moving target," "undermin[ing] Defendants' assertion that the product upload [number] was 'essential.'"391
"The plaintiff bears the burden of showing she is able to perform the essential functions of her job."392 "'Essential functions' are 'the fundamental job duties of the employment position the individual with a disability holds or desires.'"393 "Evidence of whether a particular function is essential to a job includes (but is not necessarily limited to) (1) the employer's judgment as to which functions are essential, (2) written job descriptions prepared before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job, (3) the consequences of not requiring the incumbent to perform the function, and (4) the current work experience of incumbents in similar jobs."394 "The question of whether a job requirement is a necessary requisite to employment initially focuses on whether an employer actually [*67]  requires all employees in the particular position to satisfy the alleged job-related requirement."395 "Provided that any necessary job specification is job-related, uniformly-enforced, and consistent with business necessity, the employer has the right to establish what a job is and what is required to perform it."396 "The question of whether an employee can perform the essential functions of her job is a mixed question of law and fact."397
Turning to the record evidence, Smith & Edwards' "Web Store Associate" job description states that "responsibilities may include: [w]riting product descriptions, [p]roviding customer support online, via email, and via phone, [c]ontacting manufacturers to obtain product information, [and] [r]e-sizing images and other related tasks."398 After Mr. Randall's ESLD diagnosis, Ms. Woodland felt that Mr. Randall could still perform the functions of his job and had no concern that he was unable to perform the functions of his job because "[h]e never gave me cause for concern."399 Ms. Woodland states that there was a minimum number of product imports that each employee had to do, but "[i]t varied per individual"400 based on their "demonstrated . . . ability" to produce [*68]  a certain number per month.401 Ms. Woodland set Mr. Randall's minimum number of product imports as "200 to 250, depending on how many weeks were in the month."402 However, unlike product imports, there was not a requirement for number of written descriptions until Mr. Randall's June 2020 Final Warning.403 He had averaged 52 written descriptions per month over some unknown period of his employment.404 There is evidence that Mr. Randall continued to write adequate product descriptions until his termination—the stated issue was the quantity.405
Regarding the "consequences of not requiring the incumbent to perform the function," there is no indicated record evidence that Smith & Edwards was falling behind on its yearly SKU goals between March and June 2020, and there is evidence that two other employees—Ms. Woodland and Jordan Borgschatz—also performed this task and that Ms. Woodland could complete an SKU in seven to ten minutes.406 A reasonable jury could infer that the consequences of not requiring Mr. Randall to perform the function (assuming the number of written product descriptions is a function) were negligible.
Considering "the current work experience of incumbents in similar [*69]  jobs," the other Web Store Associates—only one of whom overlapped with Mr. Randall's employment—did not have a requirement to produce a certain number of written descriptions, but when Ms. Woodland compiled an average, it is clear that other employees completed far more than Mr. Randall, with another full-time employee averaging 223 and a part-time (29-30 hours per week) employee averaging 121.407
Next, assuming Mr. Randall could not perform an essential function of his job based on the fact that he was not meeting the required number of written descriptions, there is evidence that with an accommodation, Mr. Randall could meet a pro-rated requirement of written descriptions. Mr. Randall wrote four to five descriptions per day over his last two weeks of employment,408 which equates to 80-100 per month. Ms. Woodland stated that the quality of Mr. Randall's written descriptions was sufficient.409 A reasonable jury could conclude that had Mr. Randall been granted the ability to work part-time, and his requirement for written descriptions diminished proportionately, he would have been able to perform that function of his job with the accommodation.
Plaintiffs have provided sufficient evidence [*70]  that Mr. Randall was qualified, to require submission to the jury. While producing product imports and creating written descriptions were certainly "essential functions" of Mr. Randall's job, there is evidence from which a reasonable jury could conclude that the specific number of written descriptions was not an essential function of the Web Store Associate position. Of course, the fact finder could also find that there was some minimum number of written descriptions and that minimum number was higher than that produced by Mr. Randall, especially considering the evidence of other employees' higher outputs.410
c. There Is Record Evidence to Support a Finding that Mr. Randall Suffered an Adverse Employment Action Because of His ESLD.
"In order to demonstrate 'discrimination,' a plaintiff generally must show that he has suffered an adverse employment action because of the disability."411 "Because the statute only prohibits discrimination 'on the basis of disability,' there must be a nexus between the disability and the adverse employment action. In other words, it is not enough that an adverse employment action is suffered by an individual with a disability; rather, the disabled individual [*71]  must show that the adverse action was 'on the basis of' the disability."412 This requires that the plaintiff "present some affirmative evidence that disability was a determining factor in the employer's decision. This burden is not onerous, but it is also not empty or perfunctory."413 "[T]he plaintiff must show that she was terminated because of her disability, or that the employer terminated the plaintiff 'under circumstances which give rise to an inference that the termination was based on her disability.'"414 "The plaintiff must present evidence that, if the trier of fact finds it credible, and the employer remains silent, she would be entitled to judgment as a matter of law."415
The timing of Mr. Randall's termination could give rise to an inference that his termination was based on his ESLD. "'[P]rotected conduct closely followed by adverse action may justify an inference of retaliatory motive' even though [the Tenth Circuit] ha[s] 'rejected attempts to unduly stretch the 'close temporal proximity' required under this standard."416 Even when "temporal proximity of . . . events may be insufficient, standing alone, to raise an inference" of being based on the employee's disability, "in combination [*72]  with . . . additional circumstantial evidence," it may create genuine issues of material fact.417 Mr. Randall notified Defendants of his ESLD diagnosis in October 2019.418 In March 2020, he completed FMLA paperwork, on which his physician specified that he would need 12 weeks to recover from transplant surgery.419 Ms. Woodland and Mr. Peek understood that Mr. Randall's plan was to take leave for his transplant surgery and recovery.420 Throughout April, Ms. Woodland knew Mr. Randall was third on the transplant list.421 Ms. Woodland continued to request updates from Mr. Randall about his transplant status.422 He was fired on June 29, 2020, the same day he received his first liver offer.423 The temporal proximity of his impending transplant surgery and his termination could support an inference of pretext.
Further, the record evidence shows that at the same time Ms. Woodland was planning for Mr. Randall to be on leave for 12 weeks due to his ESLD, Smith & Edwards was experiencing a 65 to 75 percent increase in online orders.424 The workload "became much more difficult to manage" when one of the two Web Store Associates was out.425 Ms. Woodland believed that, due to budgetary reasons, she could not hire another [*73]  Web Store Associate.426 This could give rise to an inference that the action was based on Mr. Randall's ESLD, because Ms. Woodland feared that Mr. Randall's absence due to his liver condition would be unmanageable.427 Once Mr. Randall was fired, Ms. Woodland would have the budget to hire another Web Store Associate who would not need leave due to a disability.
This is sufficient for a prima facie case. Because Plaintiffs have shown that there is an issue of material fact as to Mr. Randall's disability, evidence of an adverse employment action, and sufficient evidence that suggests Mr. Randall's ESLD could have been a determining factor in the employment decision, they have met their prima facie burden.

2. Defendants Offered a Legitimate, Nondiscriminatory Reason for Terminating Mr. Randall.
"Having established her prima facie case, the burden under McDonnell Douglas then shifts to [Defendants] to demonstrate a legitimate, nonretaliatory reason for [the] termination decision."428 This is an "exceedingly light" burden.429 An employee's "poor job performance, poor attitude, and failure to maintain adequate job-related skills" can be legitimate reasons.430
Here, Defendants argue that they fired [*74]  Mr. Randall because "of his poor performance."431 Defendants point to Mr. Randall's HR record, in which his supervisor documented numerous times that Mr. Randall struggled to fully meet the volume of work job requirements. For example, in two of Mr. Randall's 2018 performance evaluations he only received a "Meets Minimum Requirements" mark for his volume of work.432 Defendants also point to the fact that Mr. Randall had issues with the quality of his work. In November 2019, Mr. Randall received a Final Warning for the quality of his work; among many other deficiencies on a spreadsheet, he had not marked firearms as "restricted shipping" items.433 In preparation for litigation, Ms. Woodland went back over spreadsheets in Mr. Randall's project folder "to document issues with [Mr.] Randall's work."434 In total, she documented seven instances in which his spreadsheets had issues.435 Defendants also point to the fact that Mr. Randall received a verbal warning in July 2018 for not completing a project on time and (for the second time) using his cell phone and personal email while at work.436 Finally, Defendants point to Mr. Randall's low production number of written descriptions between March and June 2020. [*75] 437
This is sufficient to meet Defendants' burden. Accordingly, Defendants' evidence satisfies their obligation to provide a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason.

3. There Is a Genuine Issue of Material Fact as to Whether Defendants' Nondiscriminatory Reason for Terminating Mr. Randall Was Pretextual.
At this point in the McDonnell Douglas framework, the burden shifts back to Plaintiffs to demonstrate that the employer's reason for terminating Mr. Randall's employment was pretextual. "[T]he relevant question is whether the reason articulated by the employer was the real reason for the challenged action."438 "[A] plaintiff demonstrates pretext by showing either that a discriminatory reason more likely motivated the employer or that the employer's proffered explanation is unworthy of credence."439 Such a showing requires a plaintiff to present "evidence of such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, incoherencies, or contradictions in the employer's proffered legitimate reasons for its action that a reasonable fact finder" could find those reasons unworthy of belief.440 "In determining whether the proffered reason for a decision was pretextual, [the court] examine[s] the facts as they appear [*76]  to the person making the decision."441
Plaintiffs argue that, "[i]n sharp contrast to the narrative that [Mr. Randall's] work performance was poor from the outset of his employment, [Ms.] Woodland's own performance reviews of [Mr. Randall] are overall positive, and show that [Mr. Randall] almost always 'fully met requirements,' and often 'exceeded requirements.'"442
A reasonable jury could decide either way on pretext based on Mr. Randall's performance history. While Mr. Randall's performance was volatile his first year—he received two raises but also two contemporaneously-documented warnings—he received his best performance review his second year, which documented that he met his SKU goal at least for the month before the evaluation.443 That performance review followed months after Ms. Woodland recalls encouraging Mr. Randall to increase his volume of work: she remembers talking to him in January and June 2019,444 and his performance evaluation occurred in September 2019.445 After June 2019, there is no record evidence that Mr. Randall's volume of work was lower than Ms. Woodland desired. Between June 2019 and June 2020, Mr. Randall received a written warning about the quality of his work—he made [*77]  numerous mistakes on a number of SKUs in November 2019446—and Ms. Woodland found he had "improperly completed" an SKU spreadsheet in February 2020.447 But Mr. Randall was terminated for his output quantity, not quality, a characteristic of his work for which there is no record evidence that he had received warning, criticism, or feedback since a year earlier. A fact finder could determine this meant that Mr. Randall was producing at the desired level because Ms. Woodland did not conduct performance evaluations when employees were "performing in their job duties."448 The last evidence of feedback that Ms. Woodland gave to Mr. Randall about his work before his June 9, 2020 Final Warning was on April 29, 2020.449 That day, she told Mr. Randall, "You've been doing a great job and taking care of e-mails and it looks as though you've been pretty good at writing descriptions and all that jazz. Keep up the great work . . . ."450
Plaintiffs next argue that the reason for termination—failure to meet production requirements—is pretextual because other employees were not treated similarly to Mr. Randall concerning their written description output.451 The record evidence shows that each Web Store Associate had [*78]  a "goal" or "benchmark" regarding the number of product imports (as distinct from written descriptions).452 Ms. Woodland explained that "[s]ome [Web Store Associates] had higher output expectations because they were quicker at working, as far as creating product listings for our website. And others had lesser requirements because of the pace that—at which they worked. They weren't able to get as much done, so their requirement was less."453 Employees who worked faster were given more work, and employees who did not work as fast were given less work.454 The speed at which employees worked depended on "how quickly [the associate] walks and moves through the store to collect products" and "their typing speed."455 Each Web Store Associate's "workload varied depending on each individual," and the required minimum number of product imports "varied per individual."456 Associates received a Smith & Edwards gift card if they hit their monthly benchmark.457 The amount on the gift card varied depending on the extent to which they exceeded their benchmark.458 Associates who did not met their benchmark by a significant number could receive verbal warnings to increase productivity.459 As noted earlier, there is record [*79]  evidence from which a jury could conclude that Mr. Randall often was less productive than other employees or than his employer desired.
When Mr. Randall was hired, there was not a required minimum number of written descriptions.460 Ms. Woodland "implemented [the minimum number requirement] with [Mr. Randall] later on"461—during the last two weeks of his employment.462 She never implemented the benchmark with any of the other associates.463 Looking at Mr. Randall's record, he averaged 52 written descriptions per month.464 In his last two weeks, Ms. Woodland set a requirement of 10 per day, or 50 per week, 200 per month—which amounts to four times the number Mr. Randall averaged prior to that.465 He was terminated for not reaching the 10 description per day requirement, a requirement that was not in Mr. Randall's job description, did not exist before June 2020, and was never implemented for any other associate. Finally, his probationary period was two weeks when the Smith and Edwards Employee Policy Manual appears to describe a 90-day probationary period for such an offense.466 This is evidence from which a jury could find Defendants' "proffered legitimate reasons for [their] action . [*80]  . . [as] unworthy of belief."467 Of course, the fact finder also could conclude that the written description requirement was needed for Mr. Randall because his productivity was generally low, with record evidence supporting the view that this was a feature of his work performance stretching back over a significant period of time.
For all of the foregoing reasons, a reasonable jury could decide this issue either way. Accordingly, summary judgment on the ADA disability discrimination claim is denied.

B. There Is a Genuine Issue of Material Fact as to Whether Defendants Failed to Provide Mr. Randall Reasonable Accommodation.
"The ADA defines the phrase 'discriminate against a qualified individual on the basis of disability' to include 'not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability unless the employer can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business of the employer.'"468 "[A] failure to accommodate claim is evaluated under a modified McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework."469 This is because the claim "does not require that an employer's [*81]  action be motivated by a discriminatory animus directed at the disability."470 "Rather, any failure to provide reasonable accommodations for a disability is necessarily 'because of a disability'—the accommodations are only deemed reasonable (and, thus, required) if they are needed because of the disability—and no proof of a particularized discriminatory animus is exigible."471 Under the first step of the modified framework, a plaintiff must demonstrate that "1) she was disabled, 2) she was otherwise qualified, 3) she requested a plausibly reasonable accommodation, and 4) the [employer] refused to accommodate her disability."472 "Meeting this test 'is not onerous.'"473
"If a plaintiff establishes a prima facie claim, the burden shifts to the defendant to present evidence either 'conclusively rebutting one or more elements of plaintiff's prima facie case' or 'establishing an affirmative defense.'"474 "If the employer satisfies either, the employer is entitled to summary judgment unless the employee presents evidence establishing a genuine dispute about the affirmative defenses or rehabilitates any challenged elements of her prima facie case sufficiently to establish at least a genuine dispute [*82]  of material fact."475
The court has already discussed whether Mr. Randall had a disability for purposes of the ADA and whether Mr. Randall was qualified. The parties further dispute (1) whether Mr. Randall requested an accommodation, (2) whether any such request was reasonable, (3) whether Defendants engaged in the interactive process, and (4) whether Defendants refused to accommodate Mr. Randall's purported disability.

1. Plaintiff Established a Prima Facie Case of Failure to Provide Reasonable Accommodation.
a. There Is Record Evidence that Mr. Randall Made a Request for Accommodation.
"[B]efore an employer's duty to provide reasonable accommodations . . . is triggered under the ADA, the employee must make an adequate request, thereby putting the employer on notice."476 "Although the notice or request 'does not have to be in writing, be made by the employee, or formally invoke the magic words 'reasonable accommodation,'' it 'nonetheless must make clear that the employee wants assistance for his or her disability.'"477
Defendants argue that Mr. Randall "made no request for an accommodation."478 They argue that Dr. Gilroy's FMLA Certification, which Mr. Randall gave to Mr. Peek, "indicates that [*83]  Mr. Randall did not need an accommodation because it stated that the medical condition did not make him unable to perform any of his job functions."479 Further, they contend the Certification and Mr. Randall "failed to specify when he would need that time off," so Mr. Randall did not make an adequate request for accommodation.480
The record evidence shows that Mr. Randall informed Mr. Peek and Ms. Woodland about his ESLD diagnosis,481 that he received FMLA paperwork from Smith & Edwards,482 that Dr. Gilroy filled out the FMLA Certification,483 that Mr. Randall returned it to Mr. Peek,484 and that Mr. Peek and Ms. Woodland understood that Mr. Randall would be taking leave when he received a liver transplant offer.485 Defendants' assertion that this is not a request for accommodation because it is not specific enough is patently untenable given the unpredictable nature of organ transplants. Defendants understood that Mr. Randall had liver disease, he needed a liver transplant surgery, and his surgery was dependent on receiving a liver offer. Mr. Randall repeatedly communicated with Ms. Woodland about his status on the transplant list.486 This was a request for a reasonable accommodation.
If it credits [*84]  Mrs. Randall's testimony, a reasonable jury also could find that Mr. Randall requested "[h]is hours to be lowered and his workload to be lowered."487 The request was due to his "diminished ability to work" because he was "forgetful and confused at times"488 and because he had "a lot of doctors' appointments that he had to leave for," making it difficult to complete his workload because "he was gone a lot for doctors' appointments."489 If the fact finder credits this testimony, it would be a clear request for assistance with his ESLD, and therefore a request for a reasonable accommodation.
Finally, there is record evidence that Mr. Randall requested flexibility to attend doctors' appointments.490 Neither party contests that this was a request for a reasonable accommodation or that it was granted.
b. A Jury Could Find that Mr. Randall Requested a Plausibly Reasonable Accommodation.
"The determination of whether a requested accommodation is reasonable 'must be made on the facts of each case taking into consideration the particular individual's disability and employment position.'"491 "'Reasonable accommodation' means 'those accommodations which presently, or in the near future, enable the employee [*85]  to perform the essential functions of his job.'"492 "The ADA defines 'reasonable accommodation' to 'include . . . job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, reassignment to a vacant position, acquisition or modification of equipment or devices, appropriate adjustment or modifications of examinations, training materials or policies, ... and other similar accommodations for individuals with disabilities.'"493
To begin, there is a genuine issue of material fact concerning whether Mr. Randall needed any accommodation before he was terminated. As discussed earlier, there is evidence from which a reasonable jury could conclude that Mr. Randall was performing all the essential functions of his job up until his termination. If Mr. Randall was "qualified" without accommodation, then Plaintiffs' failure to accommodate claim on that basis fails. But because a reasonable jury could find that Mr. Randall was qualified with accommodation (decreased hours and thereby reduced workload) before his planned leave for surgery, the court considers Mr. Randall's two requests that could have been implemented before his surgery.
As noted earlier, Mrs. Randall has testified that she overheard Mr. Randall [*86]  requesting that his hours and workload be decreased.494 The evidence shows that Mr. Randall, who received an $11.50 hourly wage,495 was not performing "time sensitive" projects.496 This means that Mr. Randall's requested accommodation—decreased hours—would not necessarily result in "shift[ing] h[is] work onto other employees."497 If the fact finder credits Mrs. Randall's testimony as to Mr. Randall's requests, it could conclude that this was a plausibly reasonable request.
"It is well-settled that a request for leave may lead to a 'reasonable' accommodation—such a request may allow an employee sufficient time to recover from an injury or illness such that the employee can perform the essential functions of the job . . . in the future."498 "There are two limits on the bounds of reasonableness for a leave of absence. The first limit is clear: The employee must provide the employer an estimated date when she can resume her essential duties."499 "The second is durational. A leave request must assure an employer that an employee can perform the essential functions of her position in the 'near future.'"500 "Whether an accommodation is reasonable under the ADA is a mixed question of law and fact."501
Mr. Randall [*87]  requested 12 weeks of FMLA leave.502 Defendants understood that Mr. Randall's need for leave would end after his transplant surgery.503 They knew that he was on the transplant list as of March 2020,504 that he was third on the list as of April, and that a call could come any day.505 While no one, including Defendants, knew when Mr. Randall's surgery would be, there is enough evidence for the inference that they knew it would be sometime in the near future; it was not an "indefinite period of time."506 They also had reason to believe that Mr. Randall would return to work within, at most, 12 weeks of his surgery,507 although there also is record evidence that Ms. Woodland believed he would return even sooner (within 10 days).508 This evidence could allow a reasonable jury to conclude that Mr. Randall's request was within the limits on the bounds of reasonableness for a leave of absence in the context of an organ transplant: there was an expected end time frame and Smith & Edwards had reason to believe that Mr. Randall would be able to perform the essential functions of his job in the near future.
c. There Is a Genuine Dispute of Material Fact as to Whether Defendants Engaged in an Interactive Process [*88]  with Mr. Randall.
Plaintiffs argue that Defendants failed to engage in the interactive process required by the ADA.509 Plaintiffs contend that "Defendants never attempted to identify [Mr. Randall's] precise limitations or discuss his reasonable accommodations in depth—even when [Mr. Randall] brought up his limitations to [Ms.] Woodland."510 Plaintiffs point out that Mr. Peek never talked to Mr. Randall about the ADA after learning Mr. Randall had liver failure and contend that Mr. Peek never connected with Mr. Randall about Dr. Gilroy's statements in the FMLA Certification about Mr. Randall's potential for flare-ups, need for reduced work hours, and time off for treatment and transplant surgery.511 They argue that Defendants "merely asking [Mr. Randall] about his medical appointments and about his placement on the transplant list does not meet this burden."512
Defendants reply that Mr. Randall talked to Mr. Peek and Ms. Woodland "about his need to take time off for doctors' appointments before his transplant procedure," and they told "him to take time off if he needed it."513 They point out that Mr. Randall "would [] frequently talk with [Ms.] Woodland about his doctors' appointments, medical leave, [*89]  and medical treatment and inform [Ms.] Woodland when he was taking time off for his doctors' appointments, which she approved."514 This, Defendants argue, satisfied their duty to engage in the interactive process.515
"To facilitate the reasonable accommodation, '[t]he federal regulations implementing the ADA envision an interactive process that requires participation by both parties.'"516 "The obligation to participate in this interactive process is inherent in the statutory requirement that the employer offer a disabled, but otherwise qualified employee a reasonable accommodation."517 "[T]he interactive process must ordinarily begin with the employee providing notice to the employer of the employee's disability and any resulting limitations."518 This triggers the employer's duty "to initiate an informal, interactive process with the qualified individual with a disability in need of the accommodation. This process should identify the precise limitations resulting from the disability and potential reasonable accommodations that could overcome those limitations."519 "The interactive process requires the good faith participation of both the employer and the employee."520
Here, there is record evidence [*90]  that Mr. Randall gave Mr. Peek his FMLA Certification.521 That Certification described limitations associated with Mr. Randall's ESLD: unavailability due to possible evaluation and treatment prior to his liver transplant, routine lab and diagnostic testing, the need for follow-up treatment or a reduced schedule, and episodic flare-ups that would prevent Mr. Randall from performing his job, as well as the possibility of additional limitations due to the disease's progression and Mr. Randall's health's possible further decline.522 Mr. Randall asked for the ability "to go to doctors' appointments."523 From this evidence, a reasonable fact finder could determine that Mr. Randall initiated the interactive process.
Next, there also is record evidence that would permit the conclusion that Defendants engaged in the interactive process: Defendants offered for Mr. Randall to work at home,524 for Mr. Randall to take time off for his doctors' appointments,525 and for Mr. Randall to have modified work duties due to him not being physically present in the office (such as not taking product dimension measurements).526 A jury could find these interactions, and the ongoing dialogue about how Mr. Randall was doing, sufficient. [*91] 
But there is also evidence from which the jury could find that Defendants did not in good faith attempt to identify Mr. Randall's precise limitations after he informed them he had ESLD and needed a transplant. The record is unclear about the degree to which Smith & Edwards sought to understand Mr. Randall's limitations. There also is no identified record evidence that Defendants discussed any requests for fewer hours527 other than that Ms. Woodland informed Mr. Randall that he had to work at least 30 hours per week to maintain his health insurance benefit.528 From this evidence, a jury could find that Defendants "made no effort to discover exactly what [Mr. Randall]'s limitations were at that time, nor in exploring with [Mr. Randall] whether there were any accommodations that would have enable h[im] to [continue] to work at that time, or in the near future, even with h[is] limitations."529
d. There Is Evidence that at least One of Mr. Randall's Requests for a Plausibly Reasonable Accommodation Was Denied.
The final element of Plaintiffs' prima facie case requires that Plaintiffs put on evidence that, if credited, demonstrate that Mr. Randall's request for a plausibly reasonable accommodation [*92]  was denied. Plaintiffs have done so. First, while there is a factual dispute as to whether Mr. Randall made a request to work fewer hours, there is evidence from which the fact finder could infer that any such request was denied: Mr. Peek and Ms. Woodland both testified that Mr. Randall did not work less hours while he was waiting on a transplant.530 Second, a reasonable jury could find that Mr. Randall's request for leave post-transplant surgery, while nominally granted,531 was effectively denied because Mr. Randall was fired before he could take that leave.532 While there is a factual dispute as to whether Defendants granted Mr. Randall his request for a reduced workload,533 the evidence of the two denials is sufficient for Plaintiffs' prima facie case.

2. There Is a Genuine Dispute of Material Fact as to Whether Defendants Reasonably Accommodated Mr. Randall.
Because Plaintiffs have established "a prima facie claim, the burden shifts to [Defendants] to present evidence either 'conclusively rebutting one or more elements of plaintiff's prima facie case' or 'establishing an affirmative defense.'"534
Defendants contend that they accommodated Mr. Randall by reducing his workload from "twelve-and-a-half [*93]  descriptions a day down to ten a day"535 and they decreased the number of hours that Mr. Randall needed to work.536 Further, "[b]y the end of his employment, Smith and Edwards completely eliminated an essential job function of processing Amazon orders and reduced his quota or product descriptions to just ten product descriptions per week."537
Defendants cite to Mrs. Randall's deposition for these contentions, even while having argued that her statements on these issues are "inadmissible hearsay . . . and are not based on personal knowledge."538 Mrs. Randall's statements on these issues are inadmissible because they are based on statements that Mr. Randall purportedly made to her, are offered for the truth of the matter asserted, and do not qualify for an exception or exemption. Concerning Defendants' last argument—that they "completely eliminated an essential job function of processing Amazon orders and reduced his quota of product descriptions to just ten product descriptions per week"—Defendants cite no support for this statement in the record. To the contrary, Ms. Woodland's notes on Mr. Randall's Final Warning state that Mr. Randall was required to "also check[] emails + approv[e] Amazon [*94]  Return Requests" over his final two weeks.539 And the ten product descriptions requirement was per day,540 not per week, a massive increase over Mr. Randall's average (52 per month).541 There is no quota to compare it to because there was never a requirement set on written descriptions before June 9, 2020.542 Finally, the record evidence is that Mr. Randall was no longer required to print Amazon orders,543 but, as noted above, he was still required to process return requests.544
Nevertheless, there is some record evidence that Defendants provided accommodations to Mr. Randall. For example, the record shows that Smith & Edwards offered for Mr. Randall to work from home because of his susceptibility to COVID-19 due to his liver condition,545 that some of his responsibilities were eliminated due to him working from home (handling customer service phone calls, "running around working with the shipping department," taking product dimensions, and printing Amazon orders),546 and that Mr. Randall was granted permission to take time off for doctors' appointments.547 While this evidence does not "conclusively rebut[] one or more elements of plaintiff's prima facie case' or 'establish[] an affirmative defense," [*95] 548 it does create an issue of material fact concerning whether these were reasonable accommodations.
In conclusion, there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Mr. Randall required a reasonable accommodation to perform the essential functions of his job, whether Defendants engaged in the interactive process, and whether Defendants denied Mr. Randall reasonable accommodation. Neither side is entitled to summary judgment.

V. There Are Genuine Issues of Material Fact that Preclude Summary Judgment on Plaintiffs' Claims under the Family and Medical Leave Act.
The FMLA seeks to address the issue of "inadequate job security for employees who have serious health conditions that prevent them from working for temporary periods" by "entitl[ing] employees to take reasonable leave for medical reasons."549 Specifically, it provides that an "eligible employee shall be entitled to a total of 12 workweeks of leave during any 12-month period . . . [b]ecause of a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform the functions of the position of such employee."550 Leave for this reason "may be taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule when medically necessary."551
The [*96]  statute makes it "unlawful for any employer to interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of or the attempt to exercise, any right provided" by the FMLA.552 A violation of this provision is referred to as an "interference" claim. The statute also provides for a retaliation claim by making it "unlawful for any employer to discharge or in any other manner discriminate against any individual for opposing any practice made unlawful by" the FMLA.553 Plaintiffs bring both an interference claim and a retaliation claim under the FMLA.

A. There Are Genuine Issues of Material Fact that Preclude Summary Judgment on Plaintiffs' FMLA Interference Claim.
"To prevail on an FMLA interference claim, the employee must show that she was entitled to FMLA leave, that some adverse action by the employer interfered with her right to take that leave, and 'that the employer's action was related to the exercise or attempted exercise of [her] FMLA rights.'"554 "An employer can defend against the claim, however, by showing that the employee would have been terminated . . . regardless of the request for FMLA leave."555
1. Record Evidence Supports a Finding that Mr. Randall Was Entitled to FMLA Leave.
It is undisputed [*97]  that Mr. Randall was qualified for FMLA leave and that Smith & Edwards is a covered employer under the FMLA.556 However, Defendants assert that Mr. Randall was not exercising his rights under FMLA because (1) he did not provide Smith & Edwards with specific dates for his leave in the FMLA Certification and (2) he did not specify that when he would clock out for doctors' appointments for his ESLD treatment that he was taking intermittent leave.557
"[L]eave is qualifying 'if (1) it is the result of a 'serious health condition' that (2) 'makes the employee unable to perform the functions' of [his] job.'"558 The FMLA "does not require a covered employee to specifically ask for FMLA benefits. An employee need not expressly assert rights under the FMLA or even mention the FMLA."559 "The critical question is whether the information imparted to the employer is sufficient to reasonably apprise it of the employee's request to take time off for a serious health condition."560 "It is the employer's responsibility to designate leave as FMLA-qualifying, . . . but the employee must explain the reasons for the needed leave and 'state a qualifying reason for the needed leave.'"561
In Crowell v. Denver Health and [*98]  Hospital Authority, the Tenth Circuit considered whether an employee was entitled to FMLA leave.562 There, the plaintiff-employee requested leave for a shoulder surgery.563 On the FMLA medical certification form, her physician marked the box for "continuous leave" but also answered "yes" to the question concerning whether the condition would cause episodic flare-ups periodically preventing the employee from performing her job functions.564 The employer interpreted this as a request for continuous rather than intermittent leave.565 The employee then took time off work to go to the emergency room for chest pain and argued that she was entitled to FMLA leave for that visit, but the employer denied it.566 The employer asserted that the emergency room visit was not related to the chronic shoulder condition for which the plaintiff was eligible for FMLA.567 The court agreed, finding that there was an absence of evidence supporting the employee's position that the FMLA leave for which she was qualified covered the emergency room visit.568
The record evidence shows that Mr. Randall notified Mr. Peek and Ms. Woodland of his serious health condition in October 2019,569 that Mr. Peek gave [*99]  him FMLA paperwork, that Mr. Randall's doctor filled out the paperwork in March 2020,570 and that Mr. Randall communicated with Ms. Woodland about his doctors' appointments and urgent care visits related to his serious health condition,571 as well as with Mr. Peek about his plan to take time off following his transplant surgery.572 This is enough to show that Mr. Randall was entitled to FMLA leave for his doctors' appointments leading up to his surgery, his urgent care visits related to his ESLD, and for recovery from his transplant surgery: he had a serious health condition and the leave was the result of that condition. While there is the same discrepancy on Mr. Randall's Certification form (as was the case in Crowell), there is no dispute that Mr. Randall's treating physicians believed he would need time off for doctors' appointments and flare ups before the transplant573 and that the time off Mr. Randall took was related to his serious health condition. Further, the fact that a date was not provided on the form is immaterial here; Mr. Randall reasonably communicated with his employer about his need for leave, the reason for his need, and gave Smith & Edwards sufficient notice. Therefore, he was entitled [*100]  to FMLA leave for his ESLD, and the doctors' appointments, medical visits, and planned transplant surgery were FMLA-qualifying leave.
2. Defendants Took an Adverse Action that Prevented Mr. Randall from Taking FMLA Leave.
"In order to satisfy the second element of an interference claim, the employee must show that she was prevented from taking the full 12 weeks' of leave guaranteed by the FMLA, denied reinstatement following leave, or denied initial permission to take leave."574 This element is satisfied by Plaintiffs' showing that Mr. Randall was prevented from taking his full 12 weeks' of FMLA leave because he was terminated.
3. There Is a Genuine Issue of Material Fact as to Whether Mr. Randall's Termination Was Related to his FMLA Leave.
"If an employer interferes with the FMLA-created right to medical leave . . . a deprivation of this right is a violation regardless of the employer's intent."575 "[T]iming can be particularly suggestive in determining whether termination relates to the exercise of FMLA rights."576 However, "an employee may be dismissed, preventing her from exercising her statutory right to FMLA leave . . . if the dismissal would have occurred regardless of the employee's [*101]  request for or taking of FMLA leave."577 "For an employer to demonstrate that it would have terminated the employee anyway, it must provide evidence of alternative reasons for termination."578 "[S]ummary judgment for the employer is warranted only when there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact regarding the grounds for termination."579 This most commonly occurs when the employer can demonstrate that the employee clearly violated a consistently-enforced company policy.580
In Smith v. Diffee Ford-Lincoln-Mercury, Inc., the Tenth Circuit held that the plaintiff had sufficient evidence for an interference claim under the FMLA.581 There, the plaintiff requested FMLA leave for her own serious health condition.582 Her supervisor had been asking her to begin a warranty claims training for junior employees for the last three or four years, but no deadline had ever been set.583 She did not complete the training, and was formally reprimanded four months before her diagnosis of cancer.584 After she was diagnosed, she requested leave.585 There was no formal deadline for completing the training for any of the other employees, but her supervisor told her she had to complete the training before she took leave. [*102] 586 She did not, and she was terminated while she was on leave.587 Considering that the evidence showed there was no formal emphasis on the importance of training, there was a lack of monitoring or reporting of training progress, and the temporal proximity of the FMLA leave and her dismissal, the court held that "the jury could reasonably infer that, had [the plaintiff] been healthy, [the employer] would have permitted her to continue indefinitely at her job without training anyone."588 Accordingly, the employer was not entitled to summary judgment.589
However, "the FMLA does not protect an employee from performance problems caused by the condition for which FMLA leave is taken, nor does it require that an employee be given an opportunity to show improved job performance when not ill."590 In McBride v. CITGO Petroleum Corp., the Tenth Circuit found that an employee was terminated for performance issues rather than for exercising her right to FMLA leave.591 There, the plaintiff-employee was diagnosed with severe depression during her fourteenth year as an employee of CITGO.592 Within a year of her diagnosis, over a two-month period, her supervisor met with her four times regarding [*103]  deficiencies in her work performance.593 She was given a letter that warned that failure to improve could result in termination.594 Her depression became totally debilitating the same month she received that letter, and she requested FMLA leave shortly thereafter.595 While she was on leave, her supervisor discovered several problems with her prior work—a number of unprocessed invoices that dated back several months and had not been timely paid and improper payments to a vendor.596 When she returned from leave, she was asked for an explanation but she failed to give a satisfactory answer.597 CITGO then terminated her employment.598 Even though her performance problems may have been a result of her illness, this did not establish the connection between her use of FMLA and her termination.599 Because the plaintiff was not terminated for reasons related to the request or for the taking of FMLA leave, summary judgment for the employer was proper.600
Here, a reasonable jury could find that Mr. Randall's employment termination was related to his request for FMLA leave. In March 2020, Mr. Randall received FMLA paperwork and returned it to Mr. Peek.601 At that point, Mr. Peek and Ms. Woodland [*104]  knew Mr. Randall would be taking 12 weeks of leave.602 As noted earlier, from March through June 2020, Smith & Edwards experienced a 65 to 75 percent increase in online orders, creating more work for Web Store Associates.603 Ms. Woodland knew Mr. Randall could have transplant surgery soon.604 Because she understood that he was taking FMLA leave to recover from the surgery,605 she knew she would be without one of her two staff members for months, during a period when the web store was exceptionally busy.606 Then, knowing Mr. Randall was waiting for a call with a liver offer and could begin a continuous, multi-month leave at any moment, Ms. Woodland and Mr. Peek imposed a new requirement for Mr. Randall (a certain number of written descriptions),607 a requirement set at nearly quadruple his prior output.608 Finally, on the same day that Mr. Randall received his first liver offer, Smith & Edwards terminated Mr. Randall's employment based on his failure to meet the written description number requirement.609
On the other hand, there is also record evidence that would permit a reasonable jury to find that Smith & Edwards' decision to terminate Mr. Randall's employment was, as in McBride, due to Mr. Randall's [*105]  ongoing performance issues, which were perhaps due in part or full to his medical condition but unrelated to his FMLA leave. There is a trail of documentation throughout Mr. Randall's employment of his performance issues: in April 2018, he was warned about social media use at work,610 in July 2018, he was warned about his failure to meet a deadline and his ongoing use of his cell phone at work,611 in November 2019 he was given a final warning for substandard work and failing to follow directions—during which Ms. Woodland noted he had been warned multiple times about this,612 and in June 2020 he was given a warning about his volume of work,613 which had been a consistent "weakness" noted in his performance reviews.614
In other words, there is a genuine dispute of material fact over whether Mr. Randall's termination was related to his exercise of his FMLA rights or whether he would have been terminated regardless. Accordingly, summary judgment on the FMLA interference claim is denied.

B. There Is a Genuine Issue of Material Fact that Precludes Summary Judgment on Plaintiffs' FMLA Retaliation Claim.
A "retaliation claim is premised on an adverse employment action that was allegedly motivated by the employee's [*106]  choice to take the protected leave."615 It "differ[s]" from an interference claim "with respect to the timing of the adverse action."616 "[A] retaliation claim may be brought when the employee successfully took FMLA leave, was restored to her prior employment status, and was adversely affected by an employment action based on incidents post-dating her return to work."617
"To establish a prima facie case of FMLA retaliation, an employee must prove that she: (1) availed herself of a protected right under the FMLA; (2) was adversely affected by an employment decision; and (3) that there was a causal connection between the two actions."618 "Under the McDonnell Douglas framework, the burden then shifts to the [employer] to offer a legitimate reason for her termination, and if it does, then back to [the employee] to present evidence to suggest the stated reason was pretextual."619
This analysis largely mirrors that for an FMLA interference claim, except that here, the employer's intent matters. As discussed above, Defendants have produced evidence that Mr. Randall's termination was the result of a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason: Mr. Randall could not produce the requisite number of written descriptions [*107]  in those final two weeks. And, as discussed in the ADA analysis, Plaintiffs have offered evidence that raises a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Defendants' proffered reason was pretextual: the number of written descriptions requirement was implemented for the first-time during Mr. Randall's last two weeks620—three months after Mr. Randall received a Designation Notice621 and just prior to his first liver offer622—the required number was set far above Mr. Randall's proven capacity over the prior two and a half years,623 other Web Store Associates who did not meet a benchmark were not placed on probation,624 and Mr. Randall's probationary period was much shorter than the 90 days described in the Employee Policy Manual.625 As a genuine issue of material fact exists, summary judgment is precluded on this claim.

ORDER
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that Defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment is GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART. Defendants are granted judgment on Plaintiffs' Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress cause of action.
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that Plaintiffs' Motion for Summary Judgment is DENIED.
Signed May 31, 2023.
BY THE COURT
/s/ David Barlow
David Barlow
United States District Judge


End of Document

