Revplus, Inc. v. Donde
United States District Court for the Central District of California
September 14, 2012, Decided; September 14, 2012, Filed
SACV 11-1583 AG (ANx)

Reporter
2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 199211 *
REVPLUS, INC. v. ANTON DONDE, et al.
Counsel:  [*1] For Revplus Inc, a California corporation, Plaintiff: Amir M Kahana, Amir M Kahana PC, Irvine, CA USA; Edward B Raskin, Joshua Meir Caplan, Kahana Raskin & Kassinove LLP, Irvine, CA USA.
For Anton Donde, a foreign citizen domiciled abroad, Silan NZ Limited, a New Zealand company, Defendants, Counter Claimants: Kevin R Lussier, James H Berry, Jr, Berry and Lussier APC, Los Angeles, CA USA.
For David Hearn, an individual, Morris Karolicki, an individual, Steven Bloch, an individual, Graham Reaney, an individual, Roes, 1 through 30, inclusive, Counter Defendants: Amir M Kahana, Amir M Kahana PC, Irvine, CA USA.
For Revplus Inc, a California corporation, Counter Defendant: Amir M Kahana, Amir M Kahana PC, Irvine, CA USA; Edward B Raskin, Joshua Meir Caplan, Kahana Raskin & Kassinove LLP, Irvine, CA USA.
Judges: ANDREW J. GUILFORD.
Opinion by: ANDREW J. GUILFORD
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES - GENERAL

Proceedings: [IN CHAMBERS] ORDER GRANTING REVPLUS' MOTION TO DISMISS COUNTER-CLAIMS TWO AND THREE; DENYING MOTION TO DISMISS COUNTER-CLAIM FOUR
Defendants and Counter-Plaintiffs Anton Donde ("Donde") and Silan NZ ("Silan") (collectively, "Counter-Plaintiffs") filed a First Amended Counter-Complaint ("FACC") against Plaintiffs and Counter-Defendants [*2]  RevPlus, Inc. ("RevPlus"), David Hearn ("Hearn"), Morris Karolicki ("Karolicki"), Steven Bloch ("Bloch"), and Graham Reany ("Reany") (collectively, "Counter-Defendants").
RevPlus now files a Motion to Dismiss Counter-Claims Two, Three, and Four ("Motion").
The Court GRANTS in part and DENIES in part the Motion.

BACKGROUND
The following facts come from the FACC. The Court assumes these facts are true for the purposes of this Motion, as it must. RevPlus was formerly called Speed Tax, but will be referred to as RevPlus for purposes of this Motion consistent with the papers filed by the parties. (FACC ¶ 5.)
Donde is the founder and former director and CEO of RevPlus. (Id. ¶¶ 1, 5-6.) Donde is also the sole shareholder of Silan. (Id. ¶ 14.) Both Donde and Silan are minority shareholders of Revplus. (Id. ¶¶ 11, 14.) Counter-Defendants collectively control a majority of the shares of RevPlus, and several also serve as directors. (Id. ¶ 11.)
In 2009, Hearn allegedly informed Donde that Hearn was seeking cash payments and additional equity interests in RevPlus. (Id. ¶ 32.) Donde opposed Hearn's request because he believed it was contrary to the interests of the shareholders. (Id. ¶¶ 32-33.) From [*3]  that moment forward, Hearn and the other Counter-Defendants retaliated against Donde, attempting to oust him from the company, to deprive him of his employment benefits, and to install Hearn as CEO. (Id.) These actions included false claims that Donde had voluntarily resigned. (Id. ¶ 34.)
In addition, Hearn allegedly "took steps [against Donde] that he reasonably should have known would be seriously detrimental to Donde's health and safety." (Id. ¶ 39.) Specifically, Donde suffered a "life-threatening instance of deep vein thrombosis ("DVT")" when returning from a business trip in a confined coach seat. (Id.) Donde spent several days in an intensive care unit to recover. (Id.) Donde alleges that because there is a high risk of reoccurrence, doctors advise DVT survivors to only travel business class. (Id.) But "RevPlus failed to engage in the statutorily required interactive process to attempt to reasonably accommodate those disabilities." (Id. ¶ 48.) Instead, "[k]nowing of the risks to Donde of continuing to fly coach for long distances, Hearn expressly forbade Donde to fly business class[.]" (Id. ¶ 38.) Donde was "forced to fly in economy class thereafter," and suffered a second serious [*4]  episode of DVT in 2011 as a "direct result." (Id.)
In March 2011, a company expressed interest in acquiring RevPlus. (Id. ¶ 41.) Donde expended "great efforts" to complete the acquisition on the most favorable terms possible, even though he "was diagnosed with cancer in or about March 2011 and . . . was required to undergo surgery and other therapies as a result." (Id. ¶ 43.) In significant part due to Donde's efforts, the acquiring company paid approximately $4 million cash for RevPlus. (Id. ¶ 44.)
Because Donde and Silan together own approximately 18% of RevPlus, they should have received about $800,000 in distributions from the acquisition. (Id. ¶ 46.) They have received nothing. (Id.) In fact, Defendants have refused to confirm the amount of shares that Donde and Silan own which warrant distributions. (Id.)
At some unspecified time during or after the acquisition, Counter-Defendants terminated Donde's employment and formed an Executive Committee designed to freeze Donde out of any Board decisions. (Id. ¶¶ 52-54, Ex. B.) Counter-Defendants "gave Donde no notice that they deemed his employment to be terminated, or the effective date of that termination" and "retroactively declared his [*5]  employment terminated[.]" (Id. ¶ 47.) They also failed to pay Donde the proper wages and benefits. (Id.) Instead, they filed the original complaint in this action, which, among other things, sues Donde for seeking to enforce his employment agreement. (Id. ¶ 64.) Donde alleges that the filing of the complaint was a "retaliatory and punitive act." (Id. ¶ 53.)
Counter-Plaintiffs broadly allege that the various "actions taken against Donde were motivated by an intention to exploit his disabilities, namely, cancer and associated conditions and DVT." (Id. ¶ 48.)

PRELIMINARY MATTERS
RevPlus asks this Court to take judicial notice of two documents: minutes of a meeting of the board of directors of RevPlus, and letters from Counter-Plaintiffs' attorney to RevPlus' corporate attorney.
The Court may consider three kinds of documents when ruling on a motion to dismiss. First, the Court may consider documents attached to the Complaint. See Fed R. Civ. P. 10(c) ("A copy of a written instrument that is an exhibit to a pleading is a part of the pleading for all purposes."); see also U.S. v. Ritchie, 342 F.3d 903, 907-08 (9th Cir. 2003) (court may consider documents attached to the complaint).
Second, the Court may consider documents "whose contents are alleged in a complaint [*6]  and whose authenticity no party questions, but which are not physically attached to the pleading." Branch v. Tunnell, 14 F.3d 449, 454 (9th Cir.1994) (overruled on other grounds by Galbraith v. Cnty. of Santa Clara, 307 F.3d 1119 (9th Cir.2002)).
Third, the Court may take judicial notice of documents and their contents under Federal Rule of Evidence 201(b). "The court may judicially notice a fact that is not subject to reasonable dispute because it: (1) is generally known within the trial court's territorial jurisdiction; or (2) can be accurately and readily determined from sources whose accuracy cannot reasonably be questioned." Fed. R. Evid. 201(b). Courts may take judicial notice of "undisputed matters of public record," but generally may not take judicial notice of "disputed facts stated in public records." Lee v. City of Los Angeles, 250 F.3d 668, 690 (9th Cir. 2001) (emphasis in original).
The Court generally does not take judicial notice of documents on a Motion to Dismiss, which tests the pleadings. Accordingly, the parties should focus their arguments on the pleadings, and not on factual arguments based on extrinsic evidence. See, e.g., Cooper v. Pickett, 137 F.3d 616, 622 (9th Cir. 1998) (quoting Branch, 14 F.3d at 453) ("In ruling on a motion to dismiss, a district court generally 'may not consider any material beyond the pleadings.'").
These documents do not qualify for an exception from this general rule. The Court DENIES the request for judicial notice.

LEGAL STANDARD [*7] 
A court should dismiss a complaint when its allegations fail to state a claim upon which relief can be granted. Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6). A complaint need only include "a short and plain statement of the claim showing that the pleader is entitled to relief." Fed. R. Civ. P. 8(a)(2). "'[D]etailed factual allegations' are not required." Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 129 S. Ct. 1937, 1940, 173 L. Ed. 2d 868 (2009) (citing Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 555, 127 S. Ct. 1955, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929 (2007) (stating that "a complaint attacked by a Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss does not need detailed factual allegations")). The Court must accept as true all factual allegations in the complaint and must draw all reasonable inferences from those allegations, construing the complaint in the light most favorable to the plaintiff. Pollard v. Geo Group, Inc., 607 F.3d 583, 585 n.3 (9th Cir. 2010).
But the complaint must allege "sufficient factual matter, accepted as true, to 'state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face.'" Iqbal, 129 S. Ct. at 1949 (quoting Twombly, 550 U.S. at 570). "A claim has facial plausibility when the pleaded factual content allows the court to draw the reasonable inference that the defendant is liable for the misconduct alleged." Iqbal, 129 S. Ct at 1940 (citing Twombly, 550 U.S. at 556). A court should not accept "threadbare recitals of a cause of action's elements, supported by mere conclusory statements," id., or "allegations that are merely conclusory, unwarranted deductions of fact, or unreasonable inferences," Sprewell v. Golden State Warriors, 266 F.3d 979, 988 (9th Cir. 2001). The Ninth Circuit [*8]  recently addressed post-Iqbal pleading standards in Starr v. Baca, 652 F.3d 1202, 1204 (9th Cir. 2011). The Starr court held that allegations "must contain sufficient allegations of underlying facts to give fair notice and to enable the opposing party to defend itself effectively . . . [and] plausibly suggest an entitlement to relief, such that it is not unfair to require the opposing party to be subjected to the expense of discovery and continued litigation." Id; see also Balderas v. Countrywide Bank, N.A., 664 F.3d 787, 790-91 (9th Cir. Dec. 29, 2011) ("Complaints need only allege facts with sufficient specificity to notify defendants of plaintiffs' claims" and "support a theory that is not facially implausible.")
If the Court decides to dismiss a complaint, it must also decide whether to grant leave to amend. "A district court may deny a plaintiff leave to amend if it determines that allegation of other facts consistent with the challenged pleading could not possibly cure the deficiency . . . or if the plaintiff had several opportunities to amend its complaint and repeatedly failed to cure deficiencies." Telesaurus VPC, LLC v. Power, 623 F.3d 998, 1003 (9th Cir. 2010). A claim may be dismissed with prejudice if "amendment would be futile." Swartz v. KPMG LLP, 476 F.3d 756, 761 (9th Cir. 2007) (citing Albrecht v. Lund, 845 F.2d 193, 195 (9th Cir. 1988)).

ANALYSIS
This Motion only challenges Counter-Claims Two, Three, and Four. Counter-Claim Two is by all Counter-Plaintiffs against [*9]  all Counter-Defendants for Breach of Fiduciary Duty. Counter-Claim Three is by Donde against RevPlus for Disability Discrimination, Failure to Provide Reasonable Accommodations, Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process, and Retaliation. Counter-Claim Four is by Donde against RevPlus for Wrongful Discharge in Violation of Public Policy. The Court analyzes each in turn.

1. COUNTER-CLAIM TWO: BREACH OF FIDUCIARY DUTY
Counter-Claim Two is a claim of breach of fiduciary duty against all Defendants, including Revplus who now brings this Motion. In its original briefing, Revplus argued that this Counter-Claim must fail because it is in whole or part a derivative claim, and thus could not be raised by individual litigants. Unlike an individual claim, a "shareholder's derivative claim seeks to recover for the benefit of the corporation and its whole body of shareholders when injury is caused to the corporation that may not otherwise be redressed because of failure of the corporation to act." Jones v. H. F. Ahmanson & Co., 1 Cal.3d 93, 106, 81 Cal. Rptr. 592, 460 P.2d 464 (1969).
At oral argument, RevPlus concentrated on a tangential argument that was only briefly mentioned in its original Motion. Specifically, RevPlus argued that the Second Counter-Claim must fail because a [*10]  company does not directly owe its shareholders a fiduciary duty, and cannot be held vicariously liable for any such breach by its officers and directors. Thus, regardless of whether a breach of fiduciary duty claim is brought by individual shareholders or in derivative form, it can only be asserted against individual officers and directors, not the company itself. The Court asked for supplemental briefing on this issue.
Although the Ninth Circuit has not addressed Revplus' argument, the Sixth Circuit has strongly upheld RevPlus' argument. Radol v. Thomas, 772 F.2d 244, 248 (6th Cir. 1985). The Sixth Circuit found that the argument that the corporation itself owes the shareholders a fiduciary duty "is based on a fundamental misunderstanding[]." Id. at 258. A corporation's duties are "defined by statute" and do not include any fiduciary duty to its shareholders. Id. While individual directors do owe the shareholders a fiduciary duty, "[l]iability for breach of the directors' fiduciary obligation could not possibly run against the corporation itself, for this would create the absurdity of satisfying the shareholders' claims against the directors from the corporation, which is owned by the shareholders." Id. Likewise, the Supreme Court of Delaware [*11]  found that "[i]t would be an analytical anomaly . . . to treat corporate directors as agents of the corporation when they are acting as fiduciaries of the stockholders in managing the business and affairs of the corporation. Arnold v. Society for Bancorp., Inc., 678 A.2d 533, 540 (1996).
The Court agrees with the logic of the Sixth Circuit and the Delaware Supreme Court. The corporation itself does not owe any fiduciary duty to the shareholders. It would be unworkable to allow shareholders to sue the corporation for the directors' breach of fiduciary duty. None of the law cited by the Counter-Defendants concerns breach of fiduciary duty claims, but rather concerns tort claims. If Counter-Defendants wish to raise claims against the corporation under a tort theory, they must properly allege those claims.
The COURT GRANTS the Motion as to the Second Counter-Claim.

2. COUNTER-CLAIM THREE: DISABILITY DISCRIMINATION
The Third Counter-Claim is brought by Donde against RevPlus. It asserts four bases for relief. First, that Revplus discriminated against him in violation of the California Fair Employment and Housing Act, Cal. Govt. Code § 12940 et seq., ("FEHA") on the basis of his actual or perceived disabilities and medical conditions. Second, that Revplus failed to reasonably accommodate [*12]  Donde's disabilities. Third, that Revplus failed to engage in the required interactive process to consider accommodations. Fourth, that Revplus retaliated against Donde for opposing what he reasonably believed to be unlawful discrimination.
2.1 Shotgun Pleading
RevPlus asks this Court to dismiss this Counter-Claim in its entirety because it "effectively combines several claims." (Mot. 15:5-9.) The Court agrees that Donde has impermissibly lumped together several claims into one. See, e.g., A.M. v. Albertsons, LLC, 178 Cal. App. 4th 455, 463-64, 100 Cal. Rptr. 3d 449 (2009) ("The failure to accommodate and the failure to engage in the interactive process are separate, independent claims involving different proof of facts."). This "shotgun" style pleading should be discouraged because it confuses both the parties and the court. See, e.g., Mason v. Cnty. of Orange, 251 F.R.D. 562, 563-64 (C.D. Cal. 2008) (quoting Anderson v. District Board of Trustees, 77 F.3d 364, 366-67 (11th Cir. 1996)) ("[E]xperience teaches that, unless cases are pled clearly and precisely, issues are not joined, discovery is not controlled, the trial court's docket becomes unmanageable, the litigants suffer, and society loses confidence in the court's ability to administer justice.").
The Court GRANTS the Motion as to Counter-Claim Three in its entirety for shotgun pleading.
In the interests of justice and to aid any efforts to amend, the [*13]  Court will also analyze each sub-claim in turn. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 1. Thus, any amendment must accomplish two things. It must separate out each basis for relief as an independent claim, and it must heed the corresponding substantive analysis.
2.2 Disability Discrimination
RevPlus challenges Donde's disability discrimination claim on two grounds. First, it argues that Donde has not shown that his DVT was a covered physical disability or medical condition. Physical disabilities under FEHA includes conditions that affect the cardiovascular system and limit a major life activity. Cal. Govt. Code § 12926(f)(l)(A)-(B). A person is also physically disabled under FEHA if they are "regarded or treated by" the individual's employer as having, or having had, any condition that "makes achievement of a major life activity difficult," or as "having, or having had," a health impairment that "has no present disabling effect but may become a physical disability[.]" Cal. Govt. Code § 12926(j)(3)-(5).
Here, Donde alleges that he suffered from DVT, a condition that affects the cardiovascular system, as well as from cancer. He alleged that he had one major DVT incident which required him to remain in intensive care for several days. And he alleges that RevPlus knew about this incident. Finally, [*14]  Donde alleges that RevPlus fired him because of his "actual or perceived disabilities and medical conditions." (FACC ¶¶ 48, 89.) This is sufficient to allege that Donde was physically disabled under FEHA. See, e.g., Gelfo v. Lockheed Martin Corp., 140 Cal. App. 4th 34, 60, 43 Cal. Rptr. 3d 874 (2006) (finding physical disability existed where employer regarded plaintiff as disabled, whether or not he actually was).
Second, RevPlus insists that Donde has not shown that he was discriminated against because of a physical disability or medical condition. See Cal. Gov't. Code § 12940(a) (barring discrimination "because of" a disability). Here, Donde alleges that RevPlus was aware of his medical conditions, that he was adversely treated by the RevPlus, and that his disability was a motivating factor behind RevPlus' adverse acts. (FACC ¶ 89.)
Counter-Defendants argue that these allegations are belied by the rest of the FACC. They point to allegations in the FACC claiming that Counter-Defendants intended to punish Donde for his opposition to Hearn, not for his disability. There, Donde claims that Counter-Defendants "exploit[ed]" his medical condition as part of this business dispute. (FACC ¶ 48.) It is true that this characterization of the facts suggests an alternative version of Counter-Defendants' [*15]  intent. But Donde is entitled to allege multiple theories of recovery to support alternate grounds for relief, especially on the issue of intent. Donde's disability discrimination allegations are sufficient, although they must be realleged as a separate claim.
2.3 Failure to Reasonably Accommodate
A claim for failure to reasonably accommodate requires showing that the employer "fail[ed] to make reasonable accommodation for the known physical or mental disability of an applicant or employee." Cal. Gov't. Code § 12940(m); see, e.g., A.M., 178 Cal. App. 4th at 465. Reasonable accommodations means those accommodations that allow an employee to perform the essential functions of his job. See, e.g., Scotch v. Art Institute of California-Orange County, Inc., 173 Cal. App. 4th 986, 994, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d 338 (2009).
Here, Donde asserts that RevPlus was aware that he suffered from DVT, but refused to provide him with medically-necessary business-class accommodations while flying, which led to a reoccurrence of his DVT while flying coach. That is sufficient to state a claim for failure to provide reasonable accommodations. At this stage of the proceeding, Donde is not required to allege that flying was an essential element of his job. See, e.g., Kirbyson v. Tesoro, No. 09-3990 SC, 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 18174, 2010 WL 761054 at *6 (N.D. Cal. Mar. 2, 2010) (pleading not required to allege essential functions [*16]  of position or establish specifics of disability). He is also not required to demonstrate that there was a pattern of discrimination or that he was not able to perform other aspects of his job successfully. A.M., 178 Cal. App.4th at 465 (employer failed to accommodate cancer patient by not providing additional bathroom break on a single occasion).
Donde's failure to reasonably accommodate allegations are sufficient, although they must be re-alleged as a separate claim.
2.4 Failure to Engage in Interactive Process
It is also an unlawful employment practice under the FEHA for an employer to fail to engage in a good faith interactive process with the employee to determine an effective reasonable accommodation if an employee with a known physical disability requests one. Cal. Govt. Code § 12940(n); see also Gelfo, 140 Cal. App. 4th at 61.
Here, Donde asserts that "[k]nowing of the risks to Donde of continuing to fly coach for long distances, Hearn expressly forbade Donde to fly business class[.]" (FACC ¶ 39.) He further alleges that RevPlus "failed to engage in the interactive process with Donde to find an acceptable reasonable accommodation" to flying business class. (Id. ¶ 88.) RevPlus asserts that this showing does not provide "necessary facts," and is merely "legal conclusions." [*17]  (Mot. 19:15-28.) The Court disagrees. The pleading, while thin, is sufficient to establish a claim for failure to engage in interactive process.
Donde's failure to engage in interactive process allegations are sufficient, although they must be re-alleged as a separate claim.
2.5 Retaliation
FEHA prohibits an employer from retaliating against an employee who "has opposed" any practice forbidden by the FEHA. Cal. Govt. Code § 12940(h). RevPlus argues that Donde has failed to make the required showing because he did not allege that he ever opposed any of Counter-Defendants' practices under the FEHA, or that he was ever adversely targeted because of that opposition. Donde insists that he properly stated a retaliation claim because he alleged that "he requested accommodation." (Opp. 19:18.)
Here, the Court agrees with RevPlus. Donde's allegation that he merely requested business-class flight accommodations is not sufficient to state a claim for retaliation. See, e.g., Kelley v. Corrections Corp. of America, 750 F. Supp. 2d 1132, 1143-44 (E.D. Cal. 2010) ("[T]here is no case the court can find to support the proposition that a mere request for an accommodation is a protected activity [sufficient to state a retaliation claim]."). The FACC does not contain specific allegations that Donde ever opposed FEHA's [*18]  decision to deny him business class travel. None of the other allegations specifically state that Donde opposed any other act violating FEHA. The FACC also does not specifically allege that RevPlus took any actions to punish Donde for any such opposition.
Donde's retaliation allegations are not sufficient to survive this Motion. Also, any amendment must be re-alleged as a separate claim.
2.6 Conclusion
The Court GRANTS the Motion as to Counter-Claim Three in its entirety on the grounds of shotgun pleading.
The Court also GRANTS the Motion as to any retaliation allegations in Counter-Claim Three.

3. COUNTER-CLAIM FOUR: WRONGFUL TERMINATION
RevPlus opposes this Counter-Claim on several grounds. First, it opposes Counter-Claim Four because extrinsic evidence supposedly demonstrates that Donde voluntarily resigned. Again, the Court will not take judicial notice of or otherwise consider this document on a motion to dismiss.
Second, RevPlus challenges Counter-Claim Four because Donde failed to allege that he was terminated for a reason that violated public policy. But disability discrimination under the FEHA "can form the basis of a common law wrongful discharge claim[.]" City of Moorpark v. Sup. Ct., 18 Cal. 4th 1143, 1161, 77 Cal. Rptr. 2d 445, 959 P.2d 752 (1998). Even though Counter-Claim [*19]  Two must be dismissed for shotgun pleading, the Court also found that Donde's disability discrimination allegations are substantively sufficient. Donde's disability discrimination allegations are sufficient to uphold his wrongful discharge claim.
The Court DENIES the Motion as to Counter-Claim Four.

DISPOSITION
The Court GRANTS the Motion as to Counter-Claim Two, as to RevPlus only. This Counter-Claim still stands against the other Defendants.
The Court GRANTS the Motion as to Counter-Claim Three in its entirety on the grounds of shotgun pleading. Also, the Court GRANTS the Motion as to any retaliation allegations in Counter-Claim Three.
The Court DENIES the Motion as to Counter-Claim Four.
The Court will allow Counter-Plaintiffs to amend the FACC as to Counter-Claim Three only, bearing in mind the findings of this Order. Telesaurus, 623 F.3d at 998. Any amended counter-complaint must be filed within 14 days of this Order. If no amendment is timely filed, dismissal will be automatic.


End of Document

