Riggleman v. Valley Health Urgent Care
United States District Court for the Northern District of West Virginia
December 2, 2019, Decided; December 2, 2019, Filed
CIVIL ACTION NO. 3:19-CV-95

Reporter
2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 233076 *; 2019 WL 10056966
DYLAN RIGGLEMAN, Plaintiff, v. VALLEY HEALTH URGENT CARE, Defendant.
Prior History: Riggleman v. Valley Health Urgent Care, 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 234483, 2019 WL 10056965 (N.D. W. Va., Aug. 7, 2019)
Counsel:  [*1] For Dylan Riggleman, Plaintiff: Harley O. Staggers, Jr., LEAD ATTORNEY, Staggers & Staggers, Keyser, WV USA.
For Valley Health Urgent Care, Defendant: Charles F. Printz, Jr., LEAD ATTORNEY, William L. Burner, Bowles Rice LLP, Martinsburg Office, Martinsburg, WV USA.
Judges: JOHN PRESTON BAILEY, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: JOHN PRESTON BAILEY
Opinion



ORDER GRANTING VALLEY HEALTH'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
Currently pending before this Court are Valley Health's Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. 43] and Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment [Doc. 48]. Both motions have been fully briefed and are now ripe for decision. For the reasons stated below, this Court will grant Valley Health's Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. 43], and deny as moot Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment [Doc. 48].

BACKGROUND

I. The Complaint
In the Complaint, the plaintiff, Dylan Riggleman, alleges that he has a physical, intellectual, and psychiatric disability, that he was employed at Valley Health Urgent Care ("Valley Health"), and that Valley Health treated plaintiff as if he had a disability in violation of W.Va. Code § 5-11-9, The West Virginia Human Rights Act ("WVHRA"). [Doc. 1-2 ¶¶ 4, 5, 17]. Specifically, plaintiff was [*2]  asked to submit to a fitness for duty examination, which necessitated being transported to Winchester, Virginia by an armed escort. Id. at ¶¶ 8-9. Plaintiff refused to be transported to Winchester and he contends that this "resulted in Defendant Valley Health Urgent Care treating plaintiff as if he had a disability" and he was terminated from his position at Valley Health. Id. at ¶ 17. Plaintiff contends that but-for plaintiff's protected status, Valley Health would not have terminated him from his position. Id. at ¶ 18. Although not specified in the Complaint, later filings from the plaintiff make clear that when he was about twenty-years of age he was sexually assaulted by an armed police officer, that he now has post-traumatic stress disorder ("PTSD"), and that riding to the fitness for duty examination with a security guard would have triggered his PTSD. [Doc. 48-1 at ¶¶ 5, 7].

II. Valley Health's Motion for Summary Judgment
On October 25, 2019, defendant filed Valley Health's Motion for Summary Judgment. In the accompanying memorandum, defendant raises four arguments why plaintiff cannot prove the six elements of Skaggs v. Elk Run Coal Co., Inc., 198 W.Va. 51, 479 S.E.2d 561 (1996), necessary to prevail on a claim under the WVHRA. First, Valley Health [*3]  argues that Riggleman was a current drug user as defined by Schafer v. Preston Memorial Hosp. Corp., 107 F.3d 274 (4th Cir. 1997), and that therefore under the WVHRA he is not a disabled person. [Doc. 43-1 at 10-11]. Second, Valley Health argues that Riggleman cannot show that defendant was aware of plaintiff's disability because he did not disclose his PTSD or request a reasonable accommodation. Id. at 14. Valley Health points out that Riggleman disclosed only that he had been the victim of a prior sexual assault. Id. Third, Valley Health argues that the remaining four factors either support defendant's position or are inapplicable. Id. at 22. In particular, defendant contends that the third factor of Skaggs requires that the reasonable accommodation be necessary to perform an essential job function, and that here, taking a fitness for duty examination is not an essential function. Id. at 23. Finally, Valley Health contends that plaintiff's Complaint could not survive a motion to dismiss as it does not state a cognizable claim. Id. at 24.

III. Plaintiff's Response
In his memorandum in response, Riggleman raises three arguments why summary judgment in favor of the defendant should not be granted. First, plaintiff argues that there are questions of fact regarding whether Riggleman was a [*4]  "current drug user" at the time of the incident and that defendant relies on inferences to reach that point. [Doc. 50 at 3-4]. Second, plaintiff contends that whether defendant knew or should have known that Riggleman needed an accommodation is a question of fact because he had informed management of his past sexual assault and because a management employee had volunteered to drive plaintiff to Winchester. Id. at 5. Third, plaintiff argues that Valley Health should have provided a reasonable accommodation by allowing a management employee to drive Riggleman. Id. at 6.

IV. Defendant's Reply
In reply, Valley Health correctly points out that plaintiff's response was untimely filed. [Doc. 52 at 2]. Nonetheless, Valley Health argues that it is entitled to summary judgment on the merits of the case because Riggleman cannot refute the arguments put forth in the original motion. Specifically, the audio recording of the alleged events, made by plaintiff, makes clear that Riggleman's concern at the time of the incident was with his embarrassment in regard to other employees, not with riding with the security guard. Id. at 4. Further, defendant asserts that it has given the Court "ample evidence that Plaintiff was a 'current [*5]  user' of drugs at the time of his termination" and thus not afforded protection under the WVHRA. Id. at 5. Finally, Valley Health points out that plaintiff has not offered a response to defendant's argument regarding the third Skaggs factor. Id.

V. Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment
On October 31, 2019, Riggleman filed Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment [Doc. 48]. There, plaintiff asks this Court to grant partial summary judgment on the issues of (1) whether defendant failed to allow a reasonable accommodation of plaintiff's disability; and (2) whether defendant can raise an affirmative defense that plaintiff failed to mitigate his damages. Id. In the accompanying memorandum, plaintiff argues that defendant was aware plaintiff had been sexually assaulted in the past, that reasonable accommodations existed, specifically a management employee could have driven Riggleman to the fitness for duty examination, and that defendant refused to allow such accommodation. [Doc. 48-1]. Further, plaintiff asserts that defendant cannot meet the burden of showing that Riggleman failed to mitigate damages. Id. at 8-9.

VI. Defendant's Response
Valley Health filed a response addressing several of [*6]  the plaintiff's assertions. Defendant argues that in several places plaintiff has mischaracterized evidence in his motion, including ignoring the recording taken by plaintiff, cherry-picking a description of plaintiff from a witness's testimony out of context, and claiming that plaintiff told Valley Health of his need for an accommodation, citing as evidence lines from plaintiff's own deposition. [Doc. 49 at 1-10]. Defendant also goes through each of the six elements, addressing plaintiff's motion; in particular, defendant argues that despite plaintiff's assertion, Valley Health did not know of Mr. Riggleman's PTSD because, "[h]aving been sexually assaulted is not a disability." Id. at 3. As to the affirmative defense of failure to mitigate damages, defendant argues that plaintiff's argument was previously rejected by the Circuit Court of Berkeley County in this case and that this Court should reject it for the same reasons. Id. at 11-12.

VII. Plaintiff's Reply
Plaintiff's reply reiterates his arguments for each of the six elements and for the affirmative defense. However, what is relevant for plaintiff's motion for summary judgment is the arguments plaintiff raises regarding the reasonable accommodation [*7]  and the affirmative defense. Plaintiff contends that it was defendant's policy to have employees escorted to Winchester by a security guard and that defendant was inflexible in this policy, thus refusing to provide an accommodation. [Doc. 51 at 4]. Although plaintiff argues that this case is distinguishable from a case quoted by the Berkeley County Court, he does not appear to acknowledge that that court ruled against striking Valley Health's affirmative defense of failure to mitigate damages. [Doc. 51 at 7].

LEGAL STANDARD
Rule 56 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure provides that summary judgment is appropriate "if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c); see Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). A genuine issue exists "if the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the non-moving party." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). Thus, the Court must conduct "the threshold inquiry of determining whether there is the need for a trial — whether, in other words, there are any genuine factual issues that properly can be resolved only by a finder [*8]  of fact because they may reasonably be resolved in favor of either party." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 250.
Additionally, the party opposing summary judgment "must do more than simply show that there is some metaphysical doubt as to the material facts." Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co., Ltd. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986). That is, once the movant has met its burden to show absence of material fact, the party opposing summary judgment must then come forward with affidavits or other evidence demonstrating there is indeed a genuine issue for trial. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c); Celotex Corp., 477 U.S. at 323-25; Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248. "If the evidence is merely colorable, or is not significantly probative, summary judgment may be granted." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249 (citations omitted).

DISCUSSION
The Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia has discussed the duty of employers under the West Virginia Human Rights Act to provide reasonable accommodation for an employee with a known impairment to allow the employee to perform essential functions of the job. Skaggs v. Elk Run Coal Co., 198 W.Va. 51, 65, 479 S.E.2d 561, 575 (1996). Under Skaggs, that Court held that "[t]o state a claim for breach of that duty, a plaintiff may prove the following elements:
(1) The plaintiff is a qualified person with a disability;
(2) The employer was aware of the plaintiff's disability;
(3) The plaintiff required an accommodation in order to perform the essential functions of the job; [*9] 
(4) A reasonable accommodation existed that would meet the plaintiff's needs;
(5) The employer knew or should have known of the plaintiff's needs and of the accommodation; and
(6) The employer failed to provide the accommodation."
Id. Further, "[a]n employer may defend against a claim of reasonable accommodation by disputing any of the above elements." Id. at 66 (emphasis added). Accordingly, if Valley Health can show that a reasonable jury could not find in favor of Riggleman on at least one of the Skaggs elements, summary judgment in favor of Valley Health is appropriate.
Upon review of the record before it, this Court finds that plaintiff cannot show that Valley Health was aware of plaintiffs disability or that Valley Health knew or should have known of Riggleman's need for an accommodation. While genuine disputes of fact may exist1 as to other elements in this case, a reasonable jury could not find for Riggleman on these issues.

I. Riggleman cannot show that Valley Health was aware of his disability.
Plaintiff contends that he is a qualified person with a disability, namely, post-traumatic stress disorder ("PTSD"). [Doc. 50 at 5]. This Court assumes, arguendo, that plaintiff could establish [*10]  that fact at trial. Plaintiff claims that the evidence is "overwhelming" that defendant knew of Mr. Riggleman's disability. Id. Plaintiff bases this assertion on the undisputed fact that he informed Valley Health that he had previously been the victim of a sexual assault. Id. However, there are no facts to indicate that plaintiff told Valley Health that he suffered from PTSD or otherwise explicitly indicated he had a disability. This does not end the analysis, however. Plaintiff is correct in noting that the question includes whether defendant "should have known." Id. There are certainly situations in which a reasonable employer would have reason to know of an employee's disability without having been directly told. Here, however, that evidence is lacking. As the defendant aptly states, "[h]aving been sexually assaulted is not a disability." [Doc. 49 at 3]. Plaintiff is asking this Court to accept the argument that an employer who learns that an employee has been the victim of a past sexual assault should therefore be treated as having knowledge of that employee's PTSD. This is simply not enough to establish the awareness element of Skaggs. Because the plaintiff cannot establish an [*11]  essential element of his claim, Valley Health is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.

II. Riggleman cannot show that Valley Health knew or should have known of Riggleman's needs and of the accommodation.
Further, even if Riggleman could establish the second Skaggs element, he is unable to establish the fifth element, that "the employer knew or should have known of the plaintiff's needs and of the accommodation." Even accepting plaintiff's argument that disclosing his past sexual assault should have put Valley Health on notice of his disability, Valley Health still had no notice of his need for an accommodation nor of what that accommodation might be. Although the WVHRA is distinct from the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), "cases decided under the ADA are also helpful in deciding our cases under the West Virginia Human Rights Act." Hosaflook v. Consolidation Coal Co., 201 W.Va. 325, 479 S.E.2d 174, footnote 10 (1997). Analyzing the requirement of an employee to inform an employer of their need for an accommodation, the Fourth Circuit found: "[t]he burden to provide notice is not an onerous one: the employee does not need to mention the ADA or use the phrase "reasonable accommodation," but need only inform the employer of both the disability and the employee's [*12]  need for accommodations for that disability." Schneider v. Giant of Maryland, LLC, 389 F.Appx. 263, 270 (4th Cir. 2010) (unpublished per curiam). At no point during Riggleman's surreptitious recordings of the incident does he indicate that he needs another way of being transported to Winchester, Virginia, or otherwise indicate to Valley Health staff that his objection to the fitness for duty exam is with the security guard transporting him. Rather, several times Riggleman makes it clear that the reason he is refusing the exam is due to embarrassment about what his coworkers will think: when asked if he is not wanting to follow through with the exam, he responds
"Well, no, I just — I just feel like there's no point for me to even, I guess, like work here now because I'm — I'm too embarrassed to even go out there and show my face in front of everybody because I — you all did it and, I guess, like, I feel like it was publically — it wasn't done discreetly."
[Doc. 43-17 at 9, lines 8-16]. Similarly, he indicates the reason he is refusing the exam: "I'm not doing it because of the drug testing or anything, I'm doing it now because I'm embarrassed to work here." Id. at 23, lines 6-8. Even when a Valley Health management employee tries to find out if the security guard is [*13]  the reason he is uncomfortable taking the exam, Riggleman does not indicate that that is why he is refusing:
"Ms. Marshall: What, I mean, what makes — is it just the security guard coming in here that's done that to you, was it before, because it sounds like Kristy was very discreet and just called you in to her office.
Mr. Riggleman: Yeah, but then this whole thing hasn't been discreet. Like I've had to walk out of this room a couple times, I — I've been out there. Like people know that, okay, he — why isn't — he — you know, this is not a big building, and so, you." Id. at 38, lines 7-15. Shortly after that, Ms. Marshall tells him "you should just work with me and let me do everything I can to make you feel safe and — and get this behind you." Id. at 39, lines 13-15.
In short, Riggleman had every attempt to indicate to Valley Health that he required an accommodation, and Valley Health was beyond reasonable in its efforts to allow him to take the fitness for duty examination. It is unreasonable to expect that without any more Valley Health should have known of Riggleman's need for an accommodation. His now-proposed legal theory that he would have taken the examination if only he had been offered another [*14]  transportation option is in direct conflict with what he told his employer at the time. Accordingly, no reasonable jury could find for Riggleman on the fifth element of Skaggs, and Valley Health is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
Because the ruling on defendant's motion is dispositive in this case, the Court declines to address plaintiff's motion for partial summary judgment on the issues of whether Valley Health failed to allow a reasonable accommodation and whether Valley Health may raise as an affirmative defense failure to mitigate damages.

CONCLUSION
For the aforementioned reasons, Valley Health's Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. 43] is hereby GRANTED and the case is DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE. Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment [Doc. 48] is DENIED AS MOOT. The Clerk is directed to enter judgment in favor of the defendant and STRIKE this matter from the active docket of the Court.
It is so ORDERED.
The Clerk is directed to transmit copies of this Order to all counsel of record herein.
DATED: December 2, 2019.
/s/ John Preston Bailey
JOHN PRESTON BAILEY
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

