Rivas v. Renaissance Provider Network
United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas, Mcallen Division
January 22, 2010, Decided; January 22, 2010, Filed
CIVIL ACTION NO. M-09-72

Reporter
2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 155748 *
MARGARET ROSE ERALES RIVAS, Plaintiff, VS. RENAISSANCE PROVIDER NETWORK, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Margaret Rose Erales Rivas, Plaintiff: Florencio Lopez, LEAD ATTORNEY, Attorney at Law, Mission, TX USA; Jose Guadalupe Rivas, Attorney At Law, Mcallen, TX USA.
For Renaissance Provider Network, d/b/a Doctors Hospital at Renaissance Limited, Defendant: Raymond A Cowley, LEAD ATTORNEY, Dykema Cox Smith et al, Mcallen, TX USA; C. David Kinder, Dykema Cox Smith, San Antonio, TX USA; Michael Thomas Lennane, Cox Smith et al Inc, San Antonio, TX USA.
Judges: Randy Crane, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Randy Crane
Opinion



ORDER DENYING DEFENDANT'S MOTIONS FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT AND TO STRIKE SUMMARY JUDGMENT EVIDENCE

I. Introduction
Now before the Court are the Motion for Summary Judgment and Motion to Strike Summary Judgment Evidence filed by Defendant Renaissance Provider Network dba Doctor's Hospital at Renaissance Limited. (Docs. 8, 18). Plaintiff Margaret Rose Erales Rivas originally filed this suit in the 92nd Judicial District Court, Hidalgo County, Texas on January 9, 2009. (Doc. 1, Ex. 3). Defendant removed the action to this Court on February 23, 2009 on the uncontested basis that the Court has federal question jurisdiction over Plaintiff's claims brought pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act [*2]  of 1990 ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq. (Doc. 1); see 42 U.S.C. §§ 1331, 1441. Plaintiff claims that Defendant violated the ADA by (1) intentionally discriminating against Plaintiff because of her alleged disability, Multiple Sclerosis ("MS"); and (2) failing to accommodate her disability. (Doc. 1, Ex. 3).
Plaintiff's Original Petition, the live pleading in this case, alleges that the physical manifestations of MS in Plaintiff are "increased sensitivity to heat, numbness to her feet from too much standing or walking and in one instance, temporary blindness." Id. According to Plaintiff, she required the following accommodations from Defendant in order to perform her job as a neonatal nurse: "[a] work environment which is reasonably cool in order to avoid inflaming her MS as well as a reduced work load." Id.1 Plaintiff's intentional discrimination and failure to accommodate claims both consist of her contention that Defendant did not consider making these accommodations available to her even though Plaintiff advised Defendant of her condition and provided supporting documentation from her physician. Id. Plaintiff claims that she was forced to resign from her job as a result of Defendant's alleged refusal to comply with the ADA. [*3]  Id.
Relying on excerpts from Plaintiff's deposition and the affidavits of two of Defendant's employees,2 Defendant now moves for summary judgment on the grounds that (1) Plaintiff did not have an ADA-recognized "disability" at the time of the alleged actions of which she complains, and therefore cannot maintain either her intentional discrimination or failure to accommodate claim; (2) Plaintiff does not even allege intentional discrimination on the basis of her disability; and (3) the accommodations she sought were not ones required by the ADA. (Doc. 8). In response, Plaintiff has offered only one piece of evidence: her own affidavit, in which she attests to matters relevant to Defendant's first asserted grounds for summary judgment. (Doc. 17).3 Defendant moves to strike this affidavit, claiming that it contradicts Plaintiff's deposition testimony and contains conclusory statements. (Doc. 18).

II. Analysis

A. Summary Judgment Standard of Review
A district court will grant summary judgment when there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). A fact is material if it might affect the outcome of the lawsuit under the governing [*4]  law, and a fact is genuinely in dispute only if a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). A party moving for summary judgment has "the initial responsibility of informing the district court of the basis for its motion and identifying those portions of 'the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any' which it believes demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986)(citing Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)). Once the moving party fulfills this responsibility, the non-moving party must "go beyond the pleadings and by her own affidavits, or by the 'depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file,' designate 'specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial.'" Id. at 324 (quoting Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e)). In conducting its review of the summary judgment record, the court "may not make credibility determinations or weigh the evidence" and must resolve doubts and reasonable inferences regarding the facts in favor of the nonmoving party. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 150, 120 S. Ct. 2097, 147 L. Ed. 2d 105 (2000); Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249; Dean v. City of Shreveport, 438 F.3d 448, 454 (5th Cir. 2006).

B. Disability
In relevant part, the ADA prohibits an employer from intentionally discriminating against "a qualified individual with a disability because of the disability of such [*5]  individual in regard to...the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees...and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a).4 The ADA also proscribes discrimination in the form of "not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who is an...employee, unless [the employer] can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business of such [employer]." Id. § 12112(b)(5)(A). Under either theory of discrimination, a plaintiff must establish that she has a disability,5 defined as (1) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such individual; (2) a record of such an impairment; or (3) being regarded as having such an impairment. Id. § 12102(2). The disability must have existed at the time of the events giving rise to her claims. See E.E.O.C. v. Chevron Phillips Chem. Co., LP, 570 F.3d 606, 618 (5th Cir. 2009)(relevant time for assessing existence of disability is time of adverse employment action); Burch v. Coca-Cola Co., 119 F.3d 305, 315 (5th Cir. 1997)(impairment must be substantially limiting at time of requested accommodation).
Upon review of the summary judgment evidence on file, the Court finds that Plaintiff cannot appeal to either of [*6]  the latter two bases for establishing that she had a disability. It is undisputed that Defendant hired Plaintiff in August 2007 to work full-time as a nurse in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit ("NICU") of Doctors Hospital at Renaissance, Inc. (Doc. 8, Ex. A at pp. 21, 26; Ex. B). At the time, NICU consisted of two levels: Level II and Level III. (Doc. 8, Ex. B). Newborn babies who were less acutely ill were placed in Level II. (Doc. 8, Ex. A at p. 39). Level I was the newborn nursery, which was not part of NICU. (Doc. 8, Ex. B). Plaintiff testified in her deposition that "several doctors" diagnosed her with MS in 1997, but acknowledged that she did not disclose the diagnosis to Defendant when she interviewed for and obtained the job because she was in remission and "felt fine" at the time. (Doc. 8, Ex. A at pp. 23-25, 28-29, 117). Shortly after Plaintiff began her employment, staffing and census levels required Defendant to rotate its NICU nurses, including Plaintiff, among all three levels. (Doc. 8, Ex. A at p. 21; Ex. B). NICU head Patricia Burch attests in her affidavit that Plaintiff was also needed in the operating room to assist with "C-section" deliveries. (Doc. 8, Ex. B). Plaintiff's [*7]  undisputed deposition testimony indicates that she did not mention her MS to anyone at work until sometime in March or April of 2008, when she had a short conversation with Ms. Burch in an employee lounge. (Doc. 8, Ex. A at pp. 41-42, 81, 118). According to Plaintiff, she told Ms. Burch that the heat of the "warmers" used in the transition area of Level I was "too much" for her, and was affecting her MS. Id. at pp. 41-42. Then, in a letter to Ms. Burch dated May 9, 2008, Plaintiff stated the following:
As I had informed you previously of my condition of multiple sclerosis, I feel that the pace that the unit is taking, with the increase in census and acuity, that I am not fulfilling my nursing abilities to my or your satisfaction. Because of my recent hypertension episode, I cannot comfortably do [C-sections] either, as I had made you aware. I am very committed to providing the best care to these babies, as it is very close to my heart. I find myself feeling as if I am unable to give the care I feel they need. I don't foresee my health condition improving significantly, and also, my son is also requiring more of my attention as he grows. Therefore, I am writing to inform you that I am submitting my [*8]  two weeks resignation. My only other option, if you agree, is to only work upstairs in Level II, or to go part time if you really need me in Level III.
Id. at pp. 73-75. On approximately May 28, 2008, Ms. Burch and others held a meeting with Plaintiff at which they informed her that they did not consider her MS a disability and would not accommodate her. Id. at pp. 51-54. Plaintiff therefore resigned. Id. Although Plaintiff's pleading represents that she gave Defendant "documentation from her physician which confirmed her condition," the summary judgment record does not contain any evidence to support this allegation. (Doc. 1, Ex. 3). Without more, Plaintiff's informal conversation with Ms. Burch, her letter advising Ms. Burch of her need to resign if not accommodated as requested, and her attendance at the meeting did not build a "record" of a disability. Plaintiff's allegations and the testimony cited above also make apparent that Defendant did not regard her as having a disability. Therefore, Plaintiff can only establish that she was an individual with a disability if she can show that she actually had, at the time of the events giving rise to her claims, "a physical or mental impairment" that "substantially limited" [*9]  one or more "major life activities."
A "physical impairment," which this case indisputably concerns, is defined by the guiding Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC") regulations as "[a]ny physiological disorder, or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: neurological, musculoskeletal, special sense organs, respiratory (including speech organs), cardiovascular, reproductive, digestive, genito-urinary, hemic and lymphatic, skin, and endocrine." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(h)(1).6 Defendant does not contest that MS is a "physical impairment," but this does not end the inquiry. In order to constitute a disability, it must "substantially limit" a "major life activity." Chevron Phillips, 570 F.3d at 614; Dutcher v. Ingalls Shipbuilding, 53 F.3d 723, 726 (5th Cir. 1995); see also Deas v. River West, L.P., 152 F.3d 471, 478 (5th Cir. 1998)(quoting 29 C.F.R. Pt. 1630.2(j), App. (1997))(disability determination "'is not necessarily based on the name or diagnosis of the impairment the person has, but rather on the effect the impairment has on the life of the individual'"). Major life activities are those that are of central importance to daily life, Jenkins v. Cleco Power, LLC, 487 F.3d 309, 315 (5th Cir. 2007), such as "caring for oneself, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, and working," 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(i). The Fifth Circuit also considers standing to be a major [*10]  life activity. Jenkins, 487 F.3d at 315 (quoting Dutcher, 53 F.3d at 725 n.7); see also 29 C.F.R. § 1630 app., § 1630.2(i). To be "substantially limited" means to be unable to perform a major life activity or to be "significantly restricted" in the ability to perform it. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(1).
Defendant claims that Plaintiff cannot show that she had a disability because she testified that she could perform all activities recognized as major life activities from March or April of 2008 until her resignation on May 28, 2008. (Doc. 8; Doc. 8, Ex. A at pp. 59-69). However, the cited testimony was elicited in response to questions by defense counsel about Plaintiff's abilities to perform such activities "most of the time," "not...when [her] illness may have been most acute." Id. at p. 59 (emphasis added). The regulations do not require a showing of total inability to perform a major life activity; an individual need only show that she was "significantly restricted" in her ability to do so. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(1). Whether an individual faces a significant restriction is determined by looking to the "condition, manner or duration" under which the individual can perform the activity in question, when compared to an average person in the general population. Id. Also, in determining whether an individual is substantially limited, [*11]  courts must consider (1) the nature and severity of the impairment; (2) the duration or expected duration of the impairment; and (3) the permanent or long-term impact, or the expected permanent or long-term impact of or resulting from the impairment. Id. § 1630.2(j)(2). Thus, "temporary, non-chronic impairments of short duration, with little or no long term or permanent impact," such as "broken limbs, sprained joints, concussions, appendicitis, and influenza," are usually not disabilities. Chevron-Phillips, 570 F.3d at 619 (quoting 29 C.F.R. § 1630 app., § 1630.2(j))(internal quotations omitted). In contrast, the EEOC Compliance Manual in effect at the time of the events giving rise to Plaintiff's claims indicates that an impairment with a duration that is "indefinite and unknowable or is expected to be at least several months" qualifies as a disability. Id. at 618 (quoting EEOC Compliance Manual (2007) § 902.4(d))(internal quotations omitted). In addition, many courts have recognized that relapsing-remitting conditions like MS can constitute ADA disabilities depending on the nature of each individual case. Id. at 618 (citing with approval cases from other Circuits). Working within these parameters, the Fifth Circuit in Chevron-Phillips noted that chronic fatigue syndrome ("CFS"), "a [*12]  chronic disease of indefinite duration," was "much more akin to...MS...than it is to a broken leg or the flu," and concluded that a reasonable jury could find that the physical manifestations of the plaintiff's CFS that began during her employment and continued for about nine months leading up to her termination were of sufficient severity and expected duration to constitute a disability under the ADA. Id. at 615-20.7 Given the above, the Court finds that any admission by Plaintiff that she could perform major life activities during an approximately three month period, and when her MS was not acute, does not compel a finding that she had no disability. Rather, the determinative question is whether she can raise a genuine issue regarding whether any symptoms she had experienced during her employment were substantially limiting as of March, April, or May 2008, taking into account the chronic nature of the impairment at issue as well as the other factors recited above.
Plaintiff indicated in her deposition that she began to experience symptoms of MS at some point during her employment as a result of standing for long periods of time and in close proximity to the warmers in Levels I and III, and "running [*13]  back and forth from the ORs to the nursery." (Doc. 8, Ex. A at pp. 69-70, 72). Plaintiff explained that "you have to be at the bedside [of the babies in Level III] constantly and they're all under warmers." Id. at p. 69. She acknowledged that Level I was "different," in that "the transition goes quicker"; however, the babies "come so frequently, you never leave." Id. at p. 70. By March or April of 2008, Plaintiff felt that she needed accommodations to perform her job. Id. at p. 118. As noted supra, she told Ms. Burch around that time that the warmers in Level I were "too much" for her, and were affecting her MS. Id. at pp. 41-42. Without more, this testimony does not permit the inference that Plaintiff was substantially limited in a major life activity because it does not identify what Plaintiff's symptoms actually were. It is not enough for Plaintiff to raise a genuine issue regarding whether she began to experience physical manifestations of MS during her employment; the record must contain evidence from which a reasonable jury could conclude that the actual symptoms experienced by Plaintiff were substantially limiting.
Plaintiff's post-deposition affidavit is the only piece of evidence that could remedy this identified deficiency in [*14]  the record, as it explains the physical symptoms of MS that Plaintiff experienced during her employment. (Doc. 17). The affidavit provides:
During the time of my employment at Doctor's Hospital at Renaissance, I was disabled in that normal life functions such as walking were greatly restricted, I could walk only with great pain after several hours on my feet during a normal work shift. Regardless of the temperature in the room, the heat emitted from the machinery used and the proximity to the machinery caused me to have at various times, headaches, high blood pressure, blurred vision and acute skin sensitivity as well as episodes of labored breathing. The more machinery and the greater my exposure to it, the more severe the manifestations of my disability. During times when I am able to rest or remain away from high heat sources my symptoms diminish but I am never completely pain free. I always have trouble walking or standing for long periods and cannot do so at all sometimes. My vision is a constant concern as I have suffered from temporary blindness without warning but usually when under undue stress or heat. I cannot stress any clearer that my condition is real, that I am disabled [*15]  in that my normal life functions are affected. That fact that my symptoms sometimes diminish and I am able to lead a normal life is no justification to discriminate against me and completely ignore the majority of the time when I am disabled as a person who is blind all the time or unable to walk all the time.
(Doc. 17).
Defendant moves to strike the affidavit, first on the grounds that it contradicts Plaintiff's deposition testimony. (Doc. 18). Again, Defendant supports this argument with cited responses to counsel's questions regarding Plaintiff's ability to perform major life activities "most of the time" from March or April of 2008 through May 28, 2008, and not when her illness was acute. The Court finds that Plaintiff's post-deposition explanation of the symptoms she experienced when her condition was acute does not contradict her deposition testimony. The Court also rejects Defendant's additional argument that the affidavit should be stricken as conclusory. Id. Plaintiff's uses of legal terms to assert that she had a disability are, of course, conclusory and will not be considered. However, to the extent that Plaintiff's statements attest to when and under what conditions Plaintiff [*16]  experienced symptoms, and what they actually were, the Court finds that such statements are specific facts within Plaintiff's personal knowledge. SeeFed. R. Civ. P. 56(e)(setting forth requirements for summary judgment affidavit). Therefore, the Court will deny the motion to strike and consider these statements.
Upon consideration of the relevant, admissible statements in the affidavit, and construing them in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, the Court finds that Plaintiff has at least raised a genuine issue as to whether she was substantially limited in the major life activities of seeing, walking, and standing at the time in question.8 The combined experience of blurred vision and total loss of sight under conditions of high heat, as well as loss of sight "without warning," represents a marked departure from the condition and manner under which an average person can see. Also, the average person does not experience great pain after walking or standing for long periods of time, and the total inability to walk or stand is the antithesis of the average person's experience.9 The record as a whole would at least permit a reasonable jury to conclude that Plaintiff had experienced these symptoms on a recurring [*17]  basis at the time she requested accommodations and resigned from her job, and that they were physical manifestations of a chronic condition, and therefore of indefinite or unknown duration. Therefore, the Court will not grant summary judgment on the grounds that Plaintiff has failed to raise a genuine issue regarding whether she had a disability.

C. Intentional Discrimination Claim
Defendant next moves for summary judgment on Plaintiff's claim that Defendant intentionally discriminated against her because of her disability, arguing that Plaintiff has failed to allege discrimination on any basis other than the failure to accommodate. (Doc. 8). As indicated above, claims of intentional discrimination are encompassed by the ADA's prohibition on discrimination against "a qualified individual with a disability because of the disability of such individual in regard to...the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees...and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). The Court acknowledges that Plaintiff's pleading and deposition testimony alleges only that she was constructively discharged from her employment, i.e., forced to resign, because Defendant refused to [*18]  accommodate her. (Doc. 1, Ex. 3; Doc. 8, Ex. A at pp. 52-54, 73-75, 89, 94, 103, 106, 143-44). She does not allege that Defendant otherwise discriminated against her because of her disability.10 However, the Fifth Circuit has directed that an employer may be held liable under § 12112(a) if it reacts to an employee's disclosure of a disability or request for accommodations by discharging her for either reason, or both. Chevron-Phillips, 570 F.3d at 622-25. Therefore, the Court will not grant summary judgment on the grounds that Plaintiff has not alleged intentional discrimination on the part of Defendant.

D. Failure to Accommodate Claim
Finally, Defendant requests summary judgment on Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim on the grounds that the ADA did not require Defendant to give Plaintiff the accommodations she requested. (Doc. 8). The deposition excerpts submitted by Defendant indicate that Plaintiff first mentioned that her MS was affecting her work in March or April of 2008, when she had a informal conversation with Ms. Burch, and that she requested the specific accommodations of working only in Level II or part-time in Level III in a letter to Ms. Burch dated May 9, 2008. (Doc. 8, Ex. A at pp. 41-42, 73-75, 81, 118). Plaintiff [*19]  further testified that the accommodation she wanted was to work in Level II, where she believed it was "cooler, less chaotic, less congested, and an easier situation for me." Id. at pp. 89, 94. Even if these were not accommodations required by the ADA, the Court cannot ignore the following precedent, as set forth in Chevron Phillips:
This court has recognized that where the disability, resulting limitations, and necessary reasonable accommodations, are not open, obvious, and apparent to the employer, the initial burden rests primarily upon the employee...to specifically identify the disability and resulting limitations, and to suggest the reasonable accommodations. Once an employee makes such a request, however, the employer is obligated by law to engage in an interactive process: a meaningful dialogue with the employee to find the best means of accommodating that disability. The process thus requires communication and good-faith exploration. When an employer does not engage in a good faith interactive process, that employer violates the ADA—including when the employer discharges the employee instead of considering the requested accommodations.
Chevron-Phillips, 570 F.3d at 621 (internal quotations and citations omitted). Here, Plaintiff [*20]  testified that she at least made Defendant aware of her condition and how she believed it was affecting her work, and suggested two accommodations. Whether or not they were reasonable ones, and assuming Plaintiff in fact had a disability, Defendant then had an obligation under the law to engage in "a meaningful dialogue...to find the best means of accommodating the disability." Id. The only evidence before the Court on this point is Plaintiff's testimony that her May 9, 2008 letter resulted in a meeting with Ms. Burch and others, at which time these individuals informed Plaintiff that they did not consider her MS a disability and would not accommodate her. (Doc. 8, Ex. A at pp. 51-54). The record contains no evidence that Defendant engaged in the kind of interactive process required under the law. Therefore, even assuming that the ADA did not require Defendant to concede to Plaintiff's requests for permanent placement in Level II or part-time work in Level III, a genuine issue still exists regarding whether Defendant failed to accommodate Plaintiff's disability. Therefore, the Court will deny summary judgment on this claim.

III. Conclusion
For the foregoing reasons, the Court hereby [*21]  ORDERS that Defendant's Motions for Summary Judgment (Doc. 8) and to Strike Summary Judgment Evidence (Doc. 18) are hereby DENIED.
SO ORDERED this 22nd day of January, 2010, at McAllen, Texas.
/s/ Randy Crane
Randy Crane
United States District Judge


End of Document

