Sample v. Holmes Cnty.
United States District Court for the Southern District of Mississippi, Northern Division
August 5, 2015, Filed
CIVIL ACTION NO. 3:12cv303-CWR-FKB

Reporter
2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 136829 *; 2015 WL 5732177
LIZA SAMPLE, PLAINTIFF VS. HOLMES COUNTY, MISSISSIPPI, and HUMPHREY COUNTY, MISSISSIPPI, d/b/a HOLMES-HUMPHREY REGIONAL CORRECTIONAL FACILITY, DEFENDANTS
Prior History: Sample v. Holmes County, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 122589 (S.D. Miss., Aug. 28, 2013)
Counsel:  [*1] For Liza Sample, Plaintiff: Michael Farrell, LEAD ATTORNEY, MIKE FARRELL, PLLC, Jackson, MS.
For Holmes County, Mississippi, Humphreys County, Mississippi, doing business as Holmes-Humphreys Regional Correctional Facility, Defendants: Silas W. McCharen, LEAD ATTORNEY, DANIEL, COKER, HORTON & BELL, Jackson, MS; Emily H. Wilkins, DANIEL, COKER, HORTON & BELL - Jackson, Jackson, MS.
Judges: Carlton W. Reeves, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: Carlton W. Reeves
Opinion



MEMORANDUM OPINION AND ORDER
Before the Court is Defendant Holmes-Humphreys Regional Correctional Facility's Motion for Summary Judgment, Docket No. 41. Defendant supports the motion with its exhibits, Docket No. 41-1 to 41-31; memorandum of law 42; and rebuttal Docket No. 46. Plaintiff Liza Sample opposes the motion with her response, Docket No. 45; memorandum of law, Id.; and exhibits, Docket No. 45-1. After careful consideration of the parties' submissions and the applicable law, the Court finds that the motion should be GRANTED.

I. FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Plaintiff, Liza Sample, a former correctional officer ("CO") at Holmes-Humphreys Regional Correctional Facility's ("HHRCF"), filed suit on May 2, 2012, alleging that HHRCF discharged her [*2]  in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"). (Compl.) Docket No. 1, at 3. Specifically, Sample contends that she was terminated because of her asthma and Defendant's failure to accommodate this disability. Id.
HHRCF is a regional correctional facility which houses incarcerated offenders in the State of Mississippi's custody. Sample worked as a CO from October 22, 2006, until her termination in July of 2010. Docket No. 1, at 2-3. She began as a part-time employee but was promoted to full-time status on May 27, 2008. Id. at 2. Sample was assigned to work in the control tower immediately prior to the reassignment which brought about her departure. Id. The tower is a room on the ground level of the facility used by COs to control "access to the jail and to inmates." Docket No. 41, at 2.
On March 23, 2010, Sample was reassigned to Night Group II, a position which required her to "walk the floor" and perform security checks as well as other duties necessitating inmate interaction. See Docket No. 1, at 2. The reassignment was to take effect on March 30, 2010. Docket No. 41, at 2. On April 1, 2010, the first day of Sample's reassignment, she refused to go in the inmates' housing units. [*3]  Docket No. 42, at 5. Sample informed her employer that she was not able to work in her new position because of her asthma and the related reactions caused by exposure to smoke from inmates' cigarettes. Docket No. 1, at 2; Docket No. 41-3, at 34. On April 2, 2010, Sample submitted a statement from a nurse practitioner, Jolynn M. White, purporting to confirm a diagnosis of asthma and requesting that she be returned to the control tower position, where she would not have to endure exposure to smoke. Docket No. 41-14 (note from Nurse White indicating that Sample should not be exposed to "direct cigarette smoke or any other smokey [sic] triggers"). The deputy warden was informed of Sample's statements, who in turn, relieved Sample of her duties until further notice. Id.
In a letter dated April 5, 2010, Warden Rayford Horton informed Sample that he had been notified of her asthma diagnosis, which prohibited her "from being exposed to smoke or any other type of chemicals." Docket No. 41-15. During Sample's years of employment with HHRCF, smoking was allowed in all areas of the facility, including the inmate cells, and it did not become a smoke free environment until July 2013. Docket No. 42, [*4]  at 3. Warden Horton advised her that, as a corrections professional, she was expected to be "physically and medically fit to perform any given task as it relates to maintaining a safe and controllable environment." Docket No. 41-15. Warden Horton also instructed that, because HHRCF could not create a position that ensured protection from smoke exposure, Sample had to be placed on medical leave unless her doctor could provide documentation verifying that she could perform any needed tasks. Id.
HHRCF received a note from Nurse White dated April 6, 2010, suggesting that Sample be permitted to stay in the tower. Docket No. 41-31, at 2. On April 20, 2010, Sample also provided her employer with a letter from Dr. Rosie Walker-McNair, confirming that she suffered from asthma and that "under no circumstances" could she be allowed to work around smoke. Docket No. 41-21, at 2. Sample filed a charge with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC") on May 1, 2010, alleging disability discrimination and failure of her employer to accommodate her condition, and subsequently received a right to sue. Docket No. 41-19. HHRCF terminated Sample's employment on July 20, 2010, after receiving no [*5]  further communication on the status of her disability.
On May 2, 2012, Sample filed the instant lawsuit invoking the jurisdiction of this Court under the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), alleging disability discrimination which stems from HHRCF's failure to accommodate. Docket No. 1.

II. LEGAL STANDARD
Summary judgment is only appropriate when "the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). A dispute is genuine "if the evidence supporting its resolution in favor of the party opposing summary judgment, together with any inferences in such party's favor that the evidence allows, would be sufficient to support a verdict in favor of that party." St. Amant v. Benoit, 806 F.2d 1294, 1297 (5th Cir. 1987) (citation omitted). A fact is material if it is one that might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). A party seeking to avoid summary judgment must identify admissible evidence in the record showing a fact dispute. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(1)(A). That evidence may include "depositions, . . . affidavits or declarations, . . . or other materials." Id. The Court will "view the evidence and draw reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to the non-movant," [*6]  Maddox v. Townsend & Sons, Inc., 639 F.3d 214, 216 (5th Cir. 2011) (citations omitted), but unsubstantiated assertions are not competent summary judgment evidence. Forsyth v. Barr, 19 F.3d 1527, 1537 (5th Cir. 1994).When evaluating a motion for summary judgment, a court refrains from making credibility determinations and does not weigh evidence or draw from the facts legitimate inferences for the movant. Provident Life & Accident Ins.Co. v. Goel, 274 F.3d 984, 991 (5th Cir. 2001).

III. DISCUSSION
Under the ADA, an employer is prohibited from "discriminat[ing] against a qualified individual with a disability because of the disability." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). The ADA instructs that a "disability" is "a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of [the] individual." 42 U.S.C. § 12102(2)(A). Cases of an employer "discriminat[ing]" include "not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability . . . unless such covered entity can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business of such covered entity." Id. at § 12112(b)(5)(A).
Defendant's summary judgment motion raises the following issues: (1) whether Sample has failed to establish a genuine issue of material fact regarding her status as a qualified individual; and (2) whether there was a position available to accommodate her request. [*7]  Sample maintains there is a genuine dispute of material facts persist regarding whether the control tower was an area that conformed with her medical restrictions and whether HHRCF' could reasonably accommodate her request by moving her back to the control room. The Court disagrees and, for the reasons stated herein, finds that summary judgment is appropriate.

A. Qualified Individual
To present a claim under the ADA, Sample must show that she was a qualified individual for the position at the time of the alleged discrimination. See Burch City of Nacogdoches, 174 F.3d 615, 619 (5th Cir. 1999). A "qualified individual" is one who can perform the essential functions of the employment position, either with or without a reasonable accommodation. 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). The Fifth Circuit embraces a two-tier analysis for determining whether a person is qualified under the ADA:
First, we must determine whether the individual could perform the essential functions of the job, i.e., functions that bear more than a marginal relationship to the job at issue. Second, if (but only if) we conclude that the individual is not able to perform the essential functions of the job, we must determine whether any reasonable accommodation by the employer would enable him to perform those functions. [*8] 
Chandler v. City of Dallas, 2 F.3d 1385, 1393-94 (5th Cir. 1993). At the time of her reassignment, Sample was a certified CO for HHRCF. The record includes the job description for Sample's position.1 It establishes that the essential functions for a certified CO include, inter alia, personal contact and interaction with inmates. For example, Warden Horton explains that certified COs are required to work directly with inmates while performing tasks such as security checks and body counts.2 Inmate interaction is central to the position as it is necessary to maintain a controlled environment.
In light of the facility's policy on smoking at that time, there were no alternative stations within HHRCF which would have enabled Sample to perform the essential functions of her job. According [*9]  to Sample's medical instructions, she was not, "under any circumstances," allowed to have direct exposure to smoke due to her asthma. In 2010, when this incident occurred, HHRCF allowed smoking throughout the facility. More importantly, inmates also were permitted to smoke. As explained below in more detail, it became necessary for HHRCF to remove Sample from the tower because there was a shortage of certified COs available for floor patrol. Being required to "walk the floor" meant that Sample would have had to work directly with inmates, some of whom, in all likelihood, would exercise their right to smoke tobacco products in her presence. Hence, the only suitable accommodation was an assignment, which in effect, would have isolated her from inmate interaction. Based on the job description and her medical restrictions, Sample was not able to perform the essential functions of the CO position.
Sample did not request that HHRCF provide her with a smoke free environment so that she may be allowed to perform the essential functions of her job. Rather, Sample avers that the tower was accommodating to her disability because she had not been exposed to smoke there before.3 But she also admits [*10]  that a small amount of smoke can trigger her asthma.4 Given HHRCF's policy on smoking, the tower did not guarantee protection from smoke exposure. For example, the record does not establish that smoke could not enter the tower from the surrounding areas. Moreover, other officers, those who work alongside Sample as well as those who worked in the tower immediately prior to Sample's shift, were not barred from smoking in the tower. Since any small amount of smoke could trigger her asthma, she would be at risk. Having received no indication of her ability to work with inmates despite her medical restrictions, Defendant was allowed to rely on her doctor's restrictions in finding that she could not perform the essential functions of the job. See Solorio v. Am. Airlines, Inc., No. 00-3780-CIV, 2002 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 7681, 2002 WL 485284, at *6 (S.D. Fla. Feb. 28, 2002) (noting that "[a]n employer complies with the ADA when it bases its employment decision on objective, reliable evidence of the applicant's work restrictions (i.e. the medical opinion of the applicant's own doctor ") (emphasis added)); see also Martin v. State of Kansas, 996 F. Supp. 1282, 1292 (D. Kan. 1998) (reasoning that the "[defendant] was justified in relying on [the doctor's] restrictions and questioning [plaintiff's] ability to perform the essential functions of [*11]  the corrections officer position") (citation omitted).
Furthermore, Sample's request that she be placed back in the tower called for an "interactive process," which involves dialogue between the employer and employee to determine the appropriate accommodation. E.E.O.C. v. Agro Distribution, LLC, 555 F.3d 462, 471 (5th Cir. 2009) (citing 29 C.F.R. pt. 1630, App., § 1630.9). Fulfilling its obligation to engage in the interactive process, Defendant mailed Sample a letter notifying her that, since she was unable to perform her duties, it had no choice but to place her on leave unless her doctor could provide documentation stating otherwise.5 Plaintiff admits that she never followed up with her employer to discuss options available under the directive that she not be exposed to smoke.6 "As with establishing the existence of a handicap, the burden lies with the plaintiff to show that he is otherwise qualified." Chandler, 2 F.3d at 1394 (5th Cir. 1993) (citation omitted). After not receiving a reply from Sample for three months, Defendant transmitted a termination letter.7 The record establishes that the employer and employee were still in the "interactive process" when communications ceased due to the employee's failure to respond. [*12] 
Ultimately, because there were no reasonable accommodations available which would permit Sample to continue to work within her medical restrictions, she was not a qualified individual within the meaning of the ADA.

B. Reasonable Accommodation
Sample contends that HHRCF could have accommodated her asthma by returning her to the control tower position. As noted above, HHRCF says that there was no possible accommodation available for Sample. Additionally, Defendant maintains that providing Plaintiff's requested accommodation would be unreasonable because it would have created an undue hardship. Specifically, Defendant avers that not only would reassigning Sample permanently to the tower conflict with her job description, but that it also was impracticable as this position had been filled by two part-time employees.
The "undue hardship" analysis requires courts to consider factors [*13]  including "the nature and cost of the accommodation;" the size of the facility and the business entity involved in terms of financial resources, personnel, and geography; and the type of operations including composition, structure, and function. Riel v. Elec. Data Sys. Corp., 99 F.3d 678, 681 (5th Cir. 1996) (citation omitted). The inquiry "focuses on the hardships imposed by the plaintiff's preferred accommodation in the context of the particular [employer's] operations." Johnson v. Gambrinus Co./Spoetzl Brewery, 116 F.3d 1052, 1058 (5th Cir. 1997) (citation omitted). To meet the burden of proof on reasonableness, Sample must put "forth evidence of an accommodation that is generally reasonable, or reasonable in the run of cases." Id. (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
HHRCF submits that, effective April 1, 2010, it made position reassignments to comply with budget cuts. It placed part time employees in the control tower, while utilizing certified COs, like Sample, to satisfy the vacancies on Night Group II.8 HHRCF contends that this strategy was economically efficient as it allowed it to fill staffing voids by rearranging the schedules of current staff, instead of hiring new full-time employees.9 Sample was moved to ensure that the required minimum number of certified CO's were on the floor at all times,10 and [*14]  two part-time employees (who worked on an as-needed basis) took her place in the control tower.
Given these circumstances, Sample's preferred accommodation was unreasonable. Since correctional officers assigned to the tower are not required to be certified and since part-time employees receive lower pay than the full-time employees, Defendant reduced its operating expenses by using two part-time officers to work the tower. HHRCF terminated Sample's employment after failing to receive any updates from her on her condition. Out of necessity, the facility assigned a certified correction officer to "walk the floor" during Night Shift II, filling the position to which Sample was supposed to be reassigned.
As mentioned above, Sample essentially wanted to be assigned to a permanent position in the tower, which would have allowed her to [*16]  avoid all inmate contact and guarantee that she would be free from smoke. No such position existed and Defendant was not required to create one. See Hoskins v. Oakland Cnty Sheriff's Dept., 227 F.3d 719 (6th Cir. 2000) (citing Dalton v. Subaru-Isuzu Automotive, Inc., 141 F.3d 667 (7th Cir. 1998) (finding that "an employer's duty to reassign an otherwise qualified disabled employee does not require that the employer create a new job in order to do so")). Also, the ADA does not grant Sample the right to be reassigned to her preferred accommodation. See E.E.O.C. v. Agro Distribution, LLC, 555 F.3d 462, 471 (5th Cir. 2009) (citation omitted) ("The ADA provides a right to reasonable accommodation, not to the employee's preferred accommodation.").
Moreover, under the ADA, a reassignment may be a reasonable accommodation if a vacant position is available. 42 U.S.C. § 12111(9)(B). Sample fails to assert that there were vacancies for which she qualified. Furthermore, even if she had requested such an accommodation, Defendant was under no obligation to transfer the certified correctional officer who filled the vacancy created when she did not report back to work. See Foreman v. Babcock & Wilcox Co., 117 F.3d 800, 810 (5th Cir. 2007) ("Under the ADA, an employer is not required to give what it does not have.").
Sample has failed to show that there is a genuine dispute of material fact regarding whether she was a qualified individual or whether there was a reasonable accommodation HHRCF [*17]  could have provided to address her disability. Accordingly, Defendant is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's ADA discrimination claim.11

IV. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, the Defendant's motion for summary judgment should be GRANTED. A separate Final Judgment consistent with this opinion shall issue on this day.
/s/ Carlton W. Reeves
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

FINAL JUDGMENT
Having entered an Order granting the defendant's motion for summary judgment, see Docket No. 52, the Court finds that final judgment should be entered in favor of the defendant. Accordingly,
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED AND ADJUDGED that judgment is entered in favor of the defendant and that this case is closed.
SO ORDERED, this the 5th day of August, 2015.
/s/ Carlton W. Reeves
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

