Sanchez v. Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.
United States District Court for the Central District of California
March 24, 2020, Decided; March 24, 2020, Filed
CV 19-6837-JFW(MAAx)

Reporter
2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 268571 *
Alma Sanchez -v- Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, et al.
Counsel:  [*1] For Wells Fargo Bank National Association, (Wells Fargo Bank N.A.), Defendant: Michaela R Goldstein, LEAD ATTORNEY, Paul Berkowitz, Sheppard Mullin Richter and Hampton LLP, Los Angeles, CA.
For Alma Sanchez, individually, Plaintiff: Michael J Jaurigue, LEAD ATTORNEY, Ryan A Stubbe, Jaurigue Law Group, Glendale, CA.
For Wells Fargo Bank National Association, (Wells Fargo Bank N.A.), Defendant: Thomas R Kaufman, LEAD ATTORNEY, Sheppard Mullin Richter and Hampton LLP, Los Angeles, CA.
Judges: HONORABLE JOHN F. WALTER, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: JOHN F. WALTER
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES -- GENERAL

PROCEEDINGS (IN CHAMBERS): ORDER GRANTING DEFENDANT WELLS FARGO BANK, N.A.'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT OR, IN THE ALTERNATIVE, PARTIAL SUMMARY JUDGMENT [filed 2/10/20; Docket No. 23]
On February 10, 2020, Defendant Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. ("Wells Fargo") filed a Motion for Summary Judgment on, in the Alternative, Partial Summary Judgment ("Motion"). On February 25, 2020, Plaintiff Alma Sanchez ("Plaintiff") filed her Opposition. On March 2, 2020, Wells Fargo filed a Reply. Pursuant to Rule 78 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and Local Rule 7-15, the Court found the matter appropriate for submission on the papers without oral argument. The matter was, therefore, removed from [*2]  the Court's March 16, 2020 hearing calendar and the parties were given advance notice. After considering the moving, opposing, and reply papers, and the arguments therein, the Court rules as follows:

I. Factual and Procedural Background1

A. Plaintiff's Employment with Wells Fargo
On February 1, 2010, Wells Fargo hired Plaintiff as a part-time Operations Clerk. On March 13, 2011, Wells Fargo promoted her to Operations Clerk II.2 Plaintiff worked as an Operation Clerk II until she voluntarily resigned from Wells Fargo in November 2018.
In her role as Operations Clerk II, Plaintiff worked in Wells Fargo's Downtown Los Angeles Cash Vault and was responsible for counting and verifying currency and checks received from customers in deposit bags.3 Because Operations Clerks must routinely lift bags and trays filled with currency, an essential job function of an Operations Clerk II requires the lifting of more than 50 pounds.
During her employment at Wells Fargo, it is undisputed that Plaintiff was never suspended, demoted, or had her pay reduced. It is also undisputed that Plaintiff never received a corrective action during the entire time that Operations Manager Michael Szeto ("Szeto") was her manager [*3]  (July 2016 until her resignation). In fact, it is undisputed that Plaintiff received favorable performance reviews for 2016 and 2017 and a 7.1 percent discretionary pay increase following her 2017 performance review. Moreover, in response to her 2017 performance review, Plaintiff wrote: "I'm very thankful and fortunate to work for Wells Fargo. I am also very happy to . . . have Michael Szeto as my manager."

B. Plaintiff's Medical Leave of Absence and Maternity Leave
Sometime prior to April 5, 2017, Plaintiff informed Szeto that she was suffering pain to the mid to upper section of the right side of her back from what she believed to be a work-related injury. Based on this information, Wells Fargo authorized Plaintiff to receive free treatment at U.S. Healthworks, and Plaintiff initially received treatment for her injury on April 5, 2017. After her initial treatment, Plaintiff requested, consistent with her doctor's notes, and Wells Fargo provided, a medical leave of absence from April 6 to May 15, 2017. During Plaintiff's leave of absence, Szeto checked in with her from time to time to see how she was feeling.
On May 15, 2017, Plaintiff returned to work without restrictions. On May 31, [*4]  2017, Plaintiff began her maternity leave. On October 27, 2017, Plaintiff returned to work with no work restrictions.

C. Plaintiff's Re-Injury of Her Back and Related Work Restrictions
On July 30, 2018, Plaintiff informed Szeto that she was again suffering from back and hand pain. Plaintiff was again provided treatment by Wells Fargo through U.S. Healthworks and Plaintiff's doctor placed her on the following work restrictions: (1) limited lift, push, and pull up to 15 pounds; and (2) one 10-minute stretch break for every 60 minutes of keyboarding and repetitive motion. Plaintiff's doctor also recommended that she undergo an ergonomics evaluation, which Wells Fargo provided. The ergonomics evaluator evaluated Plaintiff's workstation and recommended that she improve her sitting posture, adjust her seat pan height, and adjust her chair and work surface. In addition, the evaluator recommended a keyboard with a separate 10-key pad and a lifting table. Plaintiff's work restrictions remained the same until her voluntary resignation.
Plaintiff testified at her deposition that she was given the ten minute stretch breaks and "everything else was being accommodated as reflected in [her doctor's] [*5]  note," including receiving assistance whenever she asked and being provided a hydraulic lifting table. Although all of Plaintiff's restrictions were initially accommodated, on approximately October 17, 2018, Szeto met with Plaintiff to discuss the fact that her production numbers were low. Plaintiff explained that her new keyboard was slowing her down. After the meeting, Szeto removed the new keyboard and replaced it with Plaintiff's old keyboard. Plaintiff testified at her deposition that she never expected Szeto to replace her keyboard based on her comment. However, Plaintiff also testified that she never asked Szeto or anyone else to return her new keyboard. In addition, Plaintiff testified that she was upset that Wells Fargo failed to account for her ten minute stretch breaks by modifying her production quotas.

D. Plaintiff's Resignation
On October 31, 2018, Plaintiff's assigned Workers' Compensation consultant, Nick Johnson ("Johnson"), in an email asked Plaintiff how she was feeling. In response, on November 3, 2018, Plaintiff asked whether her "claim [would] remain open until [she] heal[ed] completely . . . if [she] were to quit [her] job right now." Johnson confirmed that her [*6]  workers' compensation claim would remain open even if she quit.
On November 14, 2018, Plaintiff asked Wells Fargo's Human Resources Department whether she could take a personal leave of absence, and Plaintiff was told that only her manager could approve a personal leave of absence. Plaintiff also contacted Wells Fargo's Leave of Absence Department, and was informed that the Leave of Absence Department could only approve Plaintiff's leave of absence for a medical issue. Plaintiff called Szeto the same day and asked him about "possibly taking a personal leave to consider whether [she was] going to quit or not quit." In response, Szeto told Plaintiff that personal leaves had to be approved by the Site Manager, Victor Moreno ("Moreno"). Szeto also told Plaintiff that the approval process could take some time and that if she had multiple unapproved absences prior to Moreno's approval, she could receive a corrective action. After receiving this explanation, Plaintiff never contacted Moreno to ask for approval for a personal leave of absence. Instead, Plaintiff informed Szeto over the phone that she was quitting. In fact, although Plaintiff was scheduled to work that day, November 14, 2018, [*7]  she did not work her scheduled shift. Although Plaintiff resigned on November 14, 2018, Plaintiff testified that she had been contemplating quitting her job since October 2017 because she did not feel appreciated at work.
During Plaintiff's November 14, 2018 call with Wells Fargo's Human Resources Department, Plaintiff complained that her managers had created a hostile work environment. She did not provide any details other than stating that her managers had made the work environment hostile in an effort to force her to quit. Wells Fargo's Human Resources Department attempted to contact Plaintiff multiple times to discuss her complaint and find out why she resigned, but Plaintiff never responded to these requests because she had already hired an attorney. Despite Plaintiff's lack of cooperation, Wells Fargo conducted an investigation, interviewing the involved individuals (other than Plaintiff, who refused to be interviewed), including Szeto and Moreno, and concluded that the allegations were unsubstantiated.

E. Plaintiff's Alleged Mistreatment
Although Plaintiff refused to provide Wells Fargo any details regarding the purported hostile work environment or otherwise cooperate with Wells [*8]  Fargo's investigation of her claim, Plaintiff testified about her alleged mistreatment at her deposition. Specifically, Plaintiff testified that Szeto allegedly mistreated her by failing to say hello at a Wells Fargo picnic in October 2017 while Plaintiff was on maternity leave and asking her how her baby was doing.4 Plaintiff was also upset by the emails she received from Szeto and others where her production numbers were noted in red, indicating that she was not meeting her production quotas. However, Plaintiff acknowledged that these emails used employee numbers, rather than names, so that others viewing the emails would not know whose production numbers were in red. In addition, Plaintiff was upset when Szeto asked her sometime in 2018 if she would be interested in his help looking at different job options either at Wells Fargo or elsewhere so that she might find a position that would not continue to aggravate her back. Plaintiff also testified that Szeto mistreated her by removing her new keyboard after she only had two weeks to get used to it.
Plaintiff also testified that Operations Clerk Juan Melara ("Melara") mistreated her on October 31, 2018 when he brought her a bag full [*9]  of deposits, placed the bag next to her table, and told her to "[l]et us know when you're ready so we can help you pick up the bag" because, according to Plaintiff, Melara made this comment with an "attitude." In addition, Plaintiff testified that in July 2018, Melara mentioned that his one year old nephew weighed approximately 30 pounds and asked Plaintiff how much her son weighed. Plaintiff interpreted Melara's remark as questioning her back injury and work restrictions.
Finally, Plaintiff testified that Utility Clerk Hanh Nguyen5 ("Nguyen") provided "easier" work to some of the Asian employees. Plaintiff alleges that she complained about this unfair distribution of work to Szeto, who agreed that the Operations Clerks in the first row appeared to be getting "easier" work and that Plaintiff may be hidden, preventing the "easier" work from getting to her. To remedy this situation, Szeto moved Plaintiff closer to the first row. After moving her work station, Plaintiff testified that she began receiving "easier" work for a few days, but then the work distribution went back to "normal," with the Asian employees receiving "easier" work while she received more tedious work.6

F. Procedural History [*10] 
On June 27, 2019, Plaintiff filed her Complaint against Wells Fargo in Los Angeles Superior Court, alleging claims for: (1) Disability Discrimination in violation of Cal. Gov't Code § 12940; (2) Failure to Provide Reasonable Accommodations in violation of Cal. Gov't Code § 12940; (3) Failure to Engage in Good Faith Interactive Process in violation of Cal. Gov. Code § 12940; (4) Interference with Rights under the Family Medica Leave Act ("FMLA")/California Family Rights Act ("CFRA"); and (5) Constructive Discharge in Violation of Public Policy. In her Complaint, Plaintiff alleges that she "faced retaliation for her disability and seeking reasonable accommodations for her physical disability." Complaint, ¶ 13. On August 7, 2019, Wells Fargo removed this action to this Court, alleging subject matter jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1332(a).

II. Legal Standard
Summary judgment is proper where "the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). The moving party has the burden of demonstrating the absence of a genuine issue of fact for trial. See Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 256, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). Once the moving party meets its burden, a party opposing a properly made and supported motion for summary judgment may not rest upon mere denials [*11]  but must set out specific facts showing a genuine issue for trial. Id. at 250; Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c), (e); see also Taylor v. List, 880 F.2d 1040, 1045 (9th Cir. 1989) ("A summary judgment motion cannot be defeated by relying solely on conclusory allegations unsupported by factual data."). In particular, when the non-moving party bears the burden of proving an element essential to its case, that party must make a showing sufficient to establish a genuine issue of material fact with respect to the existence of that element or be subject to summary judgment. See Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). "An issue of fact is not enough to defeat summary judgment; there must be a genuine issue of material fact, a dispute capable of affecting the outcome of the case." American International Group, Inc. v. American International Bank, 926 F.2d 829, 833 (9th Cir. 1991) (Kozinski, dissenting).
An issue is genuine if evidence is produced that would allow a rational trier of fact to reach a verdict in favor of the non-moving party. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248. "This requires evidence, not speculation." Meade v. Cedarapids, Inc., 164 F.3d 1218, 1225 (9th Cir. 1999). The Court must assume the truth of direct evidence set forth by the opposing party. See Hanon v. Dataproducts Corp., 976 F.2d 497, 507 (9th Cir. 1992). However, where circumstantial evidence is presented, the Court may consider the plausibility and reasonableness of inferences arising therefrom. See Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249-50; TW Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Pacific Elec. Contractors Ass'n, 809 F.2d 626, 631-32 (9th Cir. 1987). Although the party opposing summary judgment is entitled to the benefit of all reasonable inferences, [*12]  "inferences cannot be drawn from thin air; they must be based on evidence which, if believed, would be sufficient to support a judgment for the nonmoving party." American International Group, 926 F.2d at 836-37. In that regard, "a mere 'scintilla' of evidence will not be sufficient to defeat a properly supported motion for summary judgment; rather, the nonmoving party must introduce some 'significant probative evidence tending to support the complaint.'" Summers v. Teichert & Son, Inc., 127 F.3d 1150, 1152 (9th Cir. 1997).

III. Discussion
The Court's Standing Order, filed August 16, 2019 (Docket No. 9), provides in relevant part: "Within two days of the deadline for filing the Reply, each party shall lodge a Proposed Statement of Decision, which shall contain a statement of the relevant facts and applicable law with citations to case law and the record." Standing Order, § 5(f). Plaintiff failed to timely file and still has not filed the required Proposed Statement of Decision.
Pursuant to Local Rule 7-12, "[t]he failure to file any required document, or the failure to file it within the deadline, may be deemed consent to the granting or denial of the motion . . . ." In addition, the Standing Order expressly provides that the "[f]ailure to lodge the Proposed Statement will result in the denial or granting of the motion." [*13]  Standing Order, § 5(f). Therefore, Wells Fargo's Motion is granted for Plaintiff's failure to file a Proposed Statement of Decision. Moreover, the Court has considered Wells Fargo's Motion on the merits and concludes that Wells Fargo is entitled to summary judgment for the reasons set forth below.

A. Wells Fargo is Entitled to Summary Judgment on Plaintiff's Fourth Cause of Action for Interference with the FMLA/CFRA.
In the fourth cause of action, Plaintiff alleges a claim for interference with the FMLA and the CFRA. Specifically, Plaintiff alleges that Wells Fargo refused to allow her to take a medical leave of absence in violation of the FMLA and the CFRA when she requested to do so on November 14, 2018. In its Motion, Wells Fargo argues that Plaintiff did not request a medical leave on November 14, 2018, only a personal leave of absence, which is not covered by the FMLA or the CFRA. In addition, Wells Fargo argues that Plaintiff had not worked the minimum 1,250 hours in the 12 months preceding her request for leave on November 14, 2018 and, thus, she was not eligible for leave under the FMLA and the CFRA. Plaintiff argues that she can sue for interference with the FMLA and the CFRA even if she does not [*14]  meet the FMLA eligibility requirements. Plaintiff also argues that she wanted to take leave because she was suffering from stress, and that stress related conditions can qualify for leave under the FMLA and the CFRA.
To state a claim for interference with a statutory right under the FMLA7, a plaintiff must establish that: (1) she was an eligible employee; (2) her employer was covered by FMLA; (3) she was entitled to take FMLA leave; (4) she gave proper notice of her intent to take leave; and (5) her employer denied her FMLA benefits to which she was entitled. Sanders v. City of Newport, 657 F.3d 772, 778 (9th Cir. 2011). Whether the employer acted in good faith is irrelevant to the inquiry. Id. at 1130 ("An employer who acts in good faith and without knowledge that its conduct violated the Act . . . is still liable for actual damages regardless of its intent"). In the Ninth Circuit, a plaintiff can prove her FMLA interference claim "as one might an ordinary statutory claim, by using either direct or circumstantial evidence, or both." Bachelder v. American West Airlines, 259 F.3d 1112, 1125 (9th Cir. 2001). However, the FMLA does not provide for a remedy "unless the employee has been prejudiced by the violation." Ragsdale v. Wolverine World Wide, Inc., 535 U.S. 81, 89, 122 S. Ct. 1155, 152 L. Ed. 2d 167 (2002) (holding that the FMLA's remedies are "tailored to the harm suffered"). Thus, "even if there is a technical violation [*15]  under [the] FMLA, an employee who does not suffer any harm and receives all leave requested is not entitled to relief." Crawford v. JP Morgan Chase NA, 983 F.Supp. 2d 1264, 1271 (W.D. Wash. 2013).
An eligible employee is an employee who: (1) has been employed by the employer for at least 12 months; (2) has been employed for at least 1,250 hours of service during the 12 month period immediately preceding the commencement of the leave; and (3) is employed at a worksite where 50 or more employees are employed by the employer within 75 miles of that worksite. 29 C.F.R. § 825.110(a). In addition, an eligible employee is entitled to twelve work weeks of FMLA leave for "a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform the functions of the position of such employee." 29 U.S.C. § 2612(a)(1)(D). A "serious health condition" under FMLA is "an illness, injury, impairment, or physical or mental condition" requiring either inpatient hospital care or continuing treatment by a healthcare provider. 29 U.S.C. § 2611(11). The DOL's regulations specify that to qualify as a "serious health condition," the illness must involve "inpatient care as defined in § 825.114, or continuing treatment by a health care provider as defined in § 825.115." 29 C.F.R. § 825.113(a). The burden is on the employee to establish that she had a serious health condition as defined by [*16]  the FMLA at the time leave was requested. Sims v. Alameda-Contra Costa Transit Dist., 2 F. Supp. 2d 1253, 1264 (N.D. Cal. 1998). Moreover, an employee must, "provide sufficient information for an employer to reasonably determine whether the FMLA may apply to the leave request." 29 C.F.R. § 825.303(b). An employee is not required to explicitly invoke FMLA's protections, but need "only state that leave is needed [for a qualifying reason]." Bachelder v. American West Airlines, 259 F.3d 1112, 1130 (9th Cir. 2001) (quoting Price v. City of Ft. Wayne, 246 F.3d 1022, 1026 (7th Cir. 1997)).
In this case, it is undisputed that Plaintiff had not worked 1,250 hours in the 12 months prior to her requested leave of absence.8 Therefore, Plaintiff is not an eligible employee who can maintain a claim for interference with the FMLA.9 In addition, in her conversations with Szeto, the Wells Fargo Human Resource Department, and the Wells Fargo Leave Department on November 14, 2018, Plaintiff did not request a medical leave of absence in accordance with the FMLA or the CFRA. Instead, Plaintiff stated only that she wanted to take a "personal leave" for "a few days" because she was "stressed out."10 Even though an employee may be eligible for leave under the FMLA or the CFRA for stress related conditions, Plaintiff has failed to establish that her condition on November 14, 2018 was a "serious health condition" or that she provided sufficient information [*17]  to Wells Fargo from which it could determine that the leave she was requesting qualified under the FMLA or the CFRA.
Accordingly, Wells Fargo is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's fourth cause of action for interference with the FMLA/CFRA and, thus, Wells Fargo's Motion is granted with respect to the fourth cause of action.

B. Wells Fargo is Entitled to Summary Judgment on Plaintiff's Fifth Cause of Action for Constructive Termination in Violation of Public Policy.
In the fifth cause of action, Plaintiff alleges that she was constructively discharged in violation of public policy. Specifically, Plaintiff alleges that she was compelled to resign due to the intolerable working conditions. In its Motion, Wells Fargo argues that Plaintiff simply resigned and was not constructively terminated because her working conditions were not objectively intolerable.
Constructive discharge occurs when an employer terminates employment by forcing the employee to resign, either by creating working conditions that are intolerable under an objective standard, or by failing to remedy objectively intolerable working conditions that actually are known to the employer. See Turner v. Anheuser-Busch, Inc., 7 Cal. 4th 1238, 1249-50, 32 Cal. Rptr. 2d 223, 876 P.2d 1022 (1994) (holding that "a constructive [*18]  discharge is legally regarded as a firing rather than a resignation"). "Intolerable working conditions" are defined as conditions that are either "unusually aggravating" or amount to a "continuous pattern of objectionable conduct." Id. at 1246-47 (holding that in order to prevail on a constructive discharge claim, a plaintiff must be able to demonstrate that "the adverse working conditions [were] so intolerable that any reasonable employee would resign rather than endure such conditions"). Thus, in order to prevail on a constructive termination claim:
an employee cannot simply "quit and sue," claiming he or she was constructively discharged. The conditions giving rise to the resignation must be sufficiently extraordinary and egregious to overcome the normal motivation of a competent, diligent, and reasonable employee to remain on the job to earn a livelihood and to serve his or her employer. The proper focus is on whether the resignation was coerced, not whether it was simply one rational option for the employee.
An employee may not be unreasonably sensitive to his [or her] working environment . . . Every job has its frustrations, challenges, and disappointments; these inhere in the nature of work. [*19]  An employee is protected from . . . unreasonably harsh conditions, in excess of those faced by his or her co-workers. He or she is not, however, guaranteed a working environment free of stress.
Id. at 1246 (holding that "single, trivial, or isolated acts of misconduct are insufficient to support a constructive discharge claim"). For example, in Turner, 7 Cal. 4th at 1247, the California Supreme Court affirmed summary judgment for the employer, holding that there was no constructive discharge of a plaintiff who: (1) observed illegal acts that he reported to management; (2) was reassigned to a different position and location in retaliation for that reporting; and (3) was given a low performance rating. The Court concluded that "even if Turner's miscellaneous charges of employer misconduct are considered together, no continuous pattern of harassment or aggravating conditions emerges." Id. at 1255.
In this case, the Court concludes that Plaintiff has failed to demonstrate that she was constructively discharged. Plaintiff first considered resigning from Wells Fargo in October 2017 - thirteen months prior to her resignation - because she "didn't feel appreciated" at Wells Fargo. However, "there is an 'outer limit' beyond which an employee [*20]  cannot remain on the job after intolerable conditions arise and still claim constructive discharge." Id. at 1254 ("The length of time the plaintiff remained on the job may be one relevant factor in determining the intolerability of employment conditions from the standpoint of a reasonable person"). In fact, the longer the employee remains on the job, the less likely a reasonable person would consider the work conditions intolerable. See, e.g., Mullins v. Rockwell Int'l Corp., 15 Cal. 4th 731, 740, 63 Cal. Rptr. 2d 636, 936 P.2d 1246 (1997) (holding that "the longer the employee delays . . . resignation, the more difficult it may be to prove" that work conditions were intolerable); Wagner v. Sanders Assoc., Inc., 638 F. Supp. 742, 745 (C.D. Cal. 1986) ("If an employee wishes to claim that an employer's act should be deemed a constructive discharge, he must 'put up or shut up.' If he wishes to claim that he had no choice but to leave, he must leave when the choice is posed, not after he has afforded himself the chance to avoid the unpleasant consequences of leaving [by obtaining another job]"); see also Vaughn v. Pool Offshore Co., 683 F.2d 922, 926 (5th Cir. 1982) (affirming the dismissal of a constructive discharge claim when the alleged misconduct occurred "several months before the employee resigned"). The Court concludes that the fact that Plaintiff waited more than a year to resign demonstrates that her work conditions [*21]  were not "intolerable."
In addition, it is undisputed that Plaintiff was never suspended, demoted, or had her pay reduced while she was employed by Wells Fargo. It is also undisputed that Plaintiff never received a corrective action during the entire time that Szeto was her manager (July 2016 until her resignation). In fact, it is undisputed that Plaintiff received favorable performance reviews for 2016 and 2017 and a 7.1 percent discretionary pay increase following her 2017 performance review. Moreover, in response to her 2017 performance review, Plaintiff wrote: "I'm very thankful and fortunate to work for Wells Fargo. I am also very happy to . . . have Michael Szeto as my manager." Furthermore, the "mistreatment" Plaintiff suffered - Szeto not saying hello and asking about her baby at a company picnic, Melara's comments to her with "attitude," and Nyugen not giving her "easy" work - does not rise to the level of what a reasonable employee would consider "intolerable" work conditions. See, e.g., St. Myers v. Dignity Health, 44 Cal. App. 5 h 301 (2019) (affirming the trial court's order granting summary judgment where the plaintiff "contend[ed] she was subjected to intolerable working conditions, a campaign of harassment in the form of [*22]  baseless investigations, false complaints whose sources were not investigated, a refusal to remedy safety issues, schedule manipulation that affected her pay and bonus compensation, and being forced to practice in unsafe conditions and below the standard of care"); Cloud v. Casey, 76 Cal. App. 4th 895, 904-05, 90 Cal. Rptr. 2d 757 (1999) (affirming dismissal of constructive discharge claim after the plaintiff resigned employment after being denied a promotion and was told by the chief financial officer that the company did not "see a woman" in the controller's position); Garamendi v. Golden Eagle Ins. Co., 128 Cal. App. 4th 452, 471, 27 Cal. Rptr. 3d 239 (2005) (holding that employees who claimed they were forced to resign after disclosing fraudulent business practices to their superiors failed to present sufficient evidence of intolerable working conditions to establish constructive discharge).
Accordingly, the Court concludes that Wells Fargo is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's fifth cause of action for constructive discharge in violation of public policy and, thus, Wells Fargo's Motion is granted with respect to the fifth cause of action.

C. Wells Fargo is Entitled to Summary Judgment on Plaintiff's First Cause of Action for Disability Discrimination.
In the first cause of action, Plaintiff alleges a claim for disability discrimination [*23]  in violation of California Government Code § 12940, California's Fair Employment and Housing Act ("FEHA"). Specifically, Plaintiff alleges that she was constructively discharged because of her disability. In its Motion, Wells Fargo argues that Plaintiff's disability discrimination claim fails because she did not suffer an adverse employment action.
Pursuant to FEHA, it is illegal "[f]or an employer, because of . . . physical disability, mental disability, medical condition . . . to discharge the person from employment . . . or to discriminate against the person in compensation or in terms, conditions, or privileges of employment." In evaluating discrimination claims brought pursuant to FEHA, courts apply the "three-stage burden shifting test established by the United States Supreme Court for trying claims of discrimination" brought under federal law. Guz v. Bechtel Nat'l, Inc., 24 Cal. 4th 317, 354, 100 Cal. Rptr. 2d 352, 8 P.3d 1089 (2000). "This so-called McDonnell Douglas test reflects the principle that direct evidence of intentional discrimination is rare, and that such claims must usually be proved circumstantially." Id.; see also McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973).
Under the McDonnell Douglas analysis, a plaintiff must initially establish a prima facie case of discrimination. Id. at 354. Generally, a plaintiff must provide evidence that: (1) she was a member of a protected class, [*24]  (2) she was qualified for the position she sought or was performing competently and according to the terms of her employment in the position she held; (3) she suffered an adverse employment action, such as termination, demotion or denial of an available job, and (4) some other circumstance suggests discriminatory motive.11 Id. at 355. Under the McDonnell Douglas framework, the requisite degree of proof necessary to establish a prima facie case . . . on summary judgment is minimal and does not even need to rise to the level of preponderance of the evidence. Chuang v. Univ. of California, Davis, 225 F.3d 1115, 1124 (9th Cir. 2000); see also Ibarbia v. Regents of Univ. of California, 191 Cal. App. 3d 1318, 1327-28, 237 Cal. Rptr. 92 (1987) (holding that to establish a prima facie case on summary judgment, a plaintiff must demonstrate "'actions taken by the employer from which one can infer, if such actions remain unexplained, that it is more likely than not that such actions were based on a [prohibited] discriminatory criterion") (internal citations omitted).
If a plaintiff succeeds in establishing a prima facie case, a presumption of discrimination arises, and the employer must then identify a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse action. Id; Reeves v. MV Transp., Inc., 186 Cal. App. 4th 666, 673, 111 Cal. Rptr. 3d 896 (2010). "If the employer sustains this burden, the presumption of discrimination disappears." Guz, 24 Cal. 4th at 356. "To avoid summary judgment, the employee [*25]  must then offer substantial evidence that the employer's stated nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse action was untrue or pre-textual, or evidence the employer acted with a discriminatory animus, or a combination of the two, such that a reasonable trier of fact could conclude the employer engaged in intentional discrimination." Reeves, 186 Cal. App. 4th at 673 (quotations and citations omitted). "[T]here must be evidence supporting a rational inference that intentional discrimination, on grounds prohibited by the statute, was the true cause of the employer's actions." Guz, 24 Cal. 4th at 361 (emphasis in original).
The standard for determining whether an employee has been subjected to an "adverse employment action" is whether an employment action materially affected "terms and conditions of employment," with that term being liberally construed in order to afford employees "appropriate protection against employment discrimination." Cal. Gov't Code §§ 12940(a) and (h); Yanowitz v. L'Oreal USA, Inc., 36 Cal.4th 1028, 1054, 32 Cal. Rptr. 3d 436, 116 P.3d 1123 (2005). California courts have held that termination, dissemination of a negative employment reference, and issuance of a negative performance evaluation all constitute adverse employment actions. Brooks v. City of San Mateo, 229 F.3d 917, 928-29 (9th Cir. 2000); see also Akers v. County of San Diego, 95 Cal. App.4th 1441, 1455, 116 Cal. Rptr. 2d 602 (2002) ("A change that is merely contrary to the employee's interests or not to the employee's liking is [*26]  insufficient"). In addition, the plaintiff's disability must have been a "substantial motivating factor" in the particular adverse employment decision. Harris v. City of Santa Monica, 56 Cal. 4th 203, 233, 152 Cal. Rptr. 3d 392, 294 P.3d 49 (2013); see also Thomas v. Department of Corrections, 77 Cal. App. 4th 507, 511, 91 Cal. Rptr. 2d 770 (2000) ("[W]orkplaces are rarely idyllic retreats, and the mere fact that an employee is displeased by an employer's act or omission does not elevate that act or omission to the level of a materially adverse employment action. If every minor change in working conditions or trivial action were a materially adverse action then any action that an irritable, chip-on-the-shoulder employee did not like would form the basis of a discrimination suit") (internal quotations omitted).
In this case, Plaintiff has failed to produce any evidence that she suffered an adverse employment action as a result of her disability. As discussed above, it is undisputed that Plaintiff was never suspended, demoted, or had her pay reduced while she was employed by Wells Fargo. It is also undisputed that Plaintiff never received a corrective action during the entire time that Szeto was her manager. In fact, it is undisputed that Plaintiff received favorable performance reviews for 2016 and 2017 and a 7.1 percent discretionary pay increase following her 2017 [*27]  performance review. In the absence of any proof that Plaintiff has suffered an adverse employment action, the Court concludes that Plaintiff cannot prevail on her claim for disability discrimination.
Accordingly, the Court concludes that Wells Fargo is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's first cause of action for disability discrimination and, thus, Wells Fargo's Motion is granted with respect to the first cause of action.

D. Wells Fargo is Entitled to Summary Judgment on Plaintiff's Second Cause of Action for Failure to Provide Reasonable Accommodations and Third Cause of Action for Failure to Engage in Good Faith Interactive Process.
In the second cause of action, Plaintiff alleges a claim for failure to provide reasonable accommodations. In the third cause of action, Plaintiff alleges a claim for failure to engage in good faith interactive process. Specifically, Plaintiff alleges that even though Wells Fargo was aware that she was disabled, it failed to reasonably accommodate her disability and failed to engage in a good faith interactive process to determine what accommodations she needed. In its Motion, Wells Fargo argues that Plaintiff's claims fail because Wells Fargo fully [*28]  accommodated her disability.
Under FEHA, an employer must "make reasonable accommodation for the known physical or mental disability" of an employee. Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(m)(1). The elements of a failure to accommodate claim are: (1) the plaintiff has a disability under FEHA; (2) the plaintiff is qualified to perform the essential functions of the position; and (3) the employer failed to reasonably accommodate the plaintiff's disability.12 Lui v. City & County of San Francisco, 211 Cal. App. 4th 962, 971, 150 Cal. Rptr. 3d 385 (2012) (quoting Scotch v. Art Inst. of Cal., 173 Cal. App. 4th 986, 1009-10, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d 338 (2009)). A reasonable accommodation is "a modification or adjustment to the workplace that enables the employee to perform the essential functions of the job held or desired." Nadaf-Rahrov v. Neiman Marcus Grp., Inc., 166 Cal. App. 4th 952, 974, 83 Cal. Rptr. 3d 190 (2008); see also Taylor v. Trees, Inc., 58 F.Supp.3d 1092, 1111 (E.D. Cal. 2014). However, a defendant may only be liable for failing to reasonably accommodate a plaintiff's disability if aware of the disability. See King v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 152 Cal. App. 4th 426, 443, 60 Cal. Rptr. 3d 359 (2007).
In addition, under FEHA, it is unlawful for an employer to "fail to engage in a timely, good faith, interactive process with the employee . . . to determine effective reasonable accommodations, if any, in response to a request for reasonable accommodation by an employee [with a disability]." Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(n). The duty to engage in the interactive process is triggered once an employer "becomes aware of the need to consider an accommodation." Scotch, 173 Cal. App. 4th at 1013. Once this duty is triggered, [*29]  FEHA requires that the employer engage in an informal process with the employee to attempt to identify a reasonable accommodation that would allow her to perform the job effectively. See Scotch, 173 Cal. App. 4th at 1013 (holding that "[r]itualized discussions are not necessary").
In this case, Wells Fargo fully accommodated Plaintiff's disability. After Plaintiff re-injured her back in approximately July 2018, Plaintiff's doctor placed her on the following work restrictions: (1) limited lift, push, and pull up to 15 pounds; and (2) one 10-minute stretch break for every 60 minutes of keyboarding and repetitive motion. During her deposition, Plaintiff testified that Wells Fargo provided her with the recommended 10-minute stretch breaks. Plaintiff also testified that Wells Fargo accommodated her 15 pound lifting limit by providing her with a hydraulic lifting table and offering assistance with any additional lifting. In addition, Plaintiff testified that Wells Fargo provided the ergonomics evaluation and the work supplies, such as a keyboard with a separate 10-key pad, that were recommended by the ergonomics evaluator. In fact, when asked during her deposition if "everything . . . [had been] accommodated as reflected [*30]  in [her doctor's] note," Plaintiff responded "yes."
In her Opposition, Plaintiff claims that Wells Fargo failed to fully accommodate her because Szeto replaced her new keyboard with her old one without giving her sufficient time to adjust to the new one.13 The Court disagrees. Szeto only removed the new keyboard after Plaintiff admitted she was struggling to adjust to it. Moreover, after Szeto removed the new keyboard, Plaintiff never told Szeto, or anyone else at Wells Fargo, that she preferred the new keyboard or that she wanted it returned to her work station. In addition, the keyboard was not required by Plaintiff's doctor, but was merely a recommendation of the ergonomics evaluator. Furthermore, although the ergonomics evaluator recommended the keyboard, he recommended it solely to help free up space on Plaintiff's work station rather than to alleviate any existing injury or disability: "She uses the 10 key pad frequently but rarely uses the rest of the keyboard and her large keyboard is currently taking up valuable space directly in front of her. Having a separate 10 key pad will allow her to still position this properly but will allow her to move the keyboard out of the way until [*31]  she may need it."
Plaintiff has also failed to demonstrate that Wells Fargo failed to accommodate her by not adjusting her production quotas or giving her certain types of courier bags that she perceived as "easy" to process. Plaintiff never requested or otherwise sought an adjustment of her production quotas and her doctor's note does not discuss production issues or work distribution. In addition, Plaintiff was never disciplined for her low production or anything else related to her job performance. Plaintiff has failed to demonstrate that Wells Fargo did not fully accommodate her disability and, in fact, admitted that Wells Fargo fully accommodated all her work restrictions. Accordingly, the Court concludes that Plaintiff cannot prevail on her claim for failure to accommodate.14 Moreover, because Wells Fargo fully accommodated her disability, Plaintiff's claim for failure to engage in good faith interactive process also fails. See, e.g., Hanson v. Lucky Stores, Inc., 74 Cal. App. 4th 215, 228, 87 Cal. Rptr. 2d 487 (1999) ("We see no reason why this employer should be subjected to liability for failing to engage in the interactive process where the employee was reasonably accommodated").
Accordingly, the Court concludes that Wells Fargo is entitled to summary judgment [*32]  on Plaintiff's second cause of action for failure to provide reasonable accommodations and third cause of action for failure to engage in good faith interactive process and, thus, Wells Fargo's Motion is granted with respect to the second and third causes of action.

IV. Conclusion
For all the foregoing reasons, Wells Fargo's Motion is GRANTED. The parties are ordered to meet and confer and agree on a joint proposed Judgment which is consistent with this Order. The parties shall lodge the joint proposed Judgment with the Court on or before March 30, 2020. In the unlikely event that counsel are unable to agree upon a joint proposed Judgment, the parties shall each submit separate versions of a proposed Judgment along with a Joint Statement setting forth their respective positions on or before March 30, 2020.
IT IS SO ORDERED.


End of Document

