Schoultz v. Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.
United States District Court for the Central District of California
January 29, 2015, Decided; January 29, 2015, Filed
EDCV 14-1466-JFW (KKx)

Reporter
2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 190424 *
Jennifer Schoultz -v- Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.
Subsequent History: Affirmed by Schoultz v. Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., 670 Fed. Appx. 646, 2016 U.S. App. LEXIS 20692 (9th Cir. Cal., Nov. 18, 2016)
Counsel:  [*1] For Jennifer Schoultz, Plaintiff: C Michael Alder, LEAD ATTORNEY, Marni Beth Folinsky, Alderlaw PC, Los Angeles, CA; Michelle Harris Iarusso, LEAD ATTORNEY, Law Offices of Michelle Iarusso, Tunjunga, CA.
For Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., a corporation, Defendant: Gregg A Fisch, Paul Berkowitz, Sheppard Mullin Richter and Hampton LLP, Los Angeles, CA.
Judges: HONORABLE JOHN F. WALTER, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: JOHN F. WALTER
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES -- GENERAL

PROCEEDINGS (IN CHAMBERS): ORDER GRANTING DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT OR, IN THE ALTERNATIVE, PARTIAL SUMMARY JUDGMENT [filed 12/10/2014; Docket No. 27]
On December 10, 2014, Defendant Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. ("Defendant" or "Wells Fargo") filed a Motion for Summary Judgment or, in the Alternative, Partial Summary Judgment ("Motion for Summary Judgment"). On January 12, 2015, Plaintiff Jennifer Schoultz ("Plaintiff") filed her Opposition. On January 20, 2015, Wells Fargo filed a Reply. Pursuant to Rule 78 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and Local Rule 7-15, the Court finds that this matter is appropriate for decision without oral argument. The hearing calendared for February 2, 2015 is hereby vacated and the matter taken off calendar. After considering the moving, opposing, and reply papers, and [*2]  the arguments therein, the Court rules as follows:

I. FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND1
On August 29, 2007, Plaintiff applied for employment with Wells Fargo as a "Collector 1," which was an entry-level position, and indicated that her "desired minimum pay" was $9.00 per hour. Plaintiff was offered that position at the rate of pay of $12.00 per hour and began working for Wells Fargo on October 1, 2007. In 2009, Plaintiff was promoted to the "Collector II" position, and held that position until her employment with Wells Fargo ended in 2011. At the time her employment ended, Plaintiff was earning approximately $13.25 per hour.
In April 2010, Plaintiff began a medical leave of absence for major depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder. After she exhausted the twelve weeks of protected leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act ("FMLA"), 29 U.S.C. § 2601, et seq, Plaintiff was granted a 10-month extension of her leave of absence. When that 10-month leave of absence expired, Plaintiff was placed on an approved 90-day "job search" leave of absence, pursuant to which she was provided an opportunity to find another position at Wells Fargo. Because Plaintiff was unable to secure another position at Wells [*3]  Fargo during that allowable time period, Plaintiff's employment with Wells Fargo was terminated in August 2011. Although she was terminated, Plaintiff was deemed eligible for rehire, and her eligibility was recorded in Wells Fargo's "PeopleSoft" system.
Plaintiff decided that she again wanted to work at Wells Fargo and, on March 23, 2013, submitted an application for a Collector 1 position via Wells Fargo's on-line electronic system.2 Although Plaintiff anticipated that the Collector 1 position would only pay approximately $12.00 per hour, Plaintiff stated in her application that her "desired minimum pay" was $18.00 per hour. In her employment history, she listed her most recent employment as an "Underwriter" for Randstad as well as her previous employment as a Collector II for Wells Fargo. According to Plaintiff, either in her application materials or in her candidate profile, she indicated that her previous employment with Wells Fargo ended because she had exhausted her FMLA leave.
Wells Fargo received more than 330 applications for the Collector 1 position. Because of the large number of applications, the assigned recruiters, Jackie Mitchell and Jennifer Ballard, conducted an initial [*4]  review of the applications and narrowed the candidate pool to a more manageable number of qualified candidates. As part of this initial review or screening, the recruiters considered the candidates' applications and accompanying resumes, and determined, if the candidate had been previously employed by Wells Fargo, whether the candidate was eligible for rehire. If the candidate met the basic qualifications for the Collector 1 position, the candidate was moved on to the "phone screen" phase of the hiring process, which was conducted by the assigned recruiter.
Ms. Mitchell was the recruiter responsible for reviewing Plaintiff's application. According to Ms. Mitchell, she only spends one to two minutes per application in the initial screening, and therefore does not specifically remember reviewing Plaintiff's application. However, based on her practice and because Plaintiff had previously worked for Wells Fargo, she states that she would have initially accessed Plaintiff's "PeopleSoft" records and confirmed that Plaintiff was eligible for rehire. She would have also considered the reasons for Plaintiff's termination if they had been set forth in Plaintiff's application or the relevant "PeopleSoft" [*5]  records. Thereafter, she would have conducted a further review of Plaintiff's application to determine if she met the basic qualifications for the position. In this case, because virtually all applicants would have met the basic qualifications for the Collector 1 position, Ms. Mitchell would also have "used salary" as one of the ways to further narrow the pool of candidates.
It is undisputed that Ms. Mitchell decided not to move Plaintiff's application to the next stage of the hiring process, i.e., the "phone screen." However, Ms. Mitchell believes that she decided not to "phone screen" Plaintiff because Plaintiff's "desired minimum pay" was $18.00 per hour, almost 40% above the pay rate offered for the Collector 1 position, and because she knew that underwriters (which was one of Plaintiff's prior listed positions) could earn as much as $60,000 per year, which was more than double the annual income of a Collector 1. According to Ms. Mitchell, based on her experience, a candidate like Plaintiff would not have been satisfied working in an entry-level position that paid only $13.00 per hour and she believed that "management would not want to interview her or hire her because it was expected [*6]  that someone like that would be constantly looking for other job opportunities instead of being focused on succeeding in the entry-level Collector 1 position." Revised Declaration of Jackie Mitchell at ¶ 17. Although Plaintiff contends that she indicated in her application materials or candidate profile that her previous employment with Wells Fargo ended because she had exhausted her FMLA leave, Ms. Mitchell states that she did not review that information, nor was that information part of Plaintiff's application. Ms. Mitchell states that, at the time she reviewed Plaintiff's application, she did not know that Plaintiff had taken a leave of absence or suffered from any type of disability during her prior employment with Wells Fargo and did not know the reasons for Plaintiff's separation of employment with Wells Fargo.3
On April 29, 2013, after Ms. Mitchell decided not to move Plaintiff's application forward in the hiring process, Ms. Mitchell sent Plaintiff a standard e-mail advising her that her application was declined.
On or about June 17, 2013, Plaintiff filed a Complaint of Discrimination against Wells Fargo with the Department of Fair Employment and Housing, and, on February 24, [*7]  2014, obtained a right-to-sue letter. On June 12, 2014, Plaintiff filed a Complaint against Wells Fargo alleging that Wells Fargo refused to re-hire her or even interview her for the Collector 1 position because it knew of her history of depression and because she had taken a leave of absence for that depression. Plaintiff alleges the following claims for relief: (1) retaliation in violation of California's Fair Employment and Housing Act ("FEHA") California Government Code § 12940(h); (2) disability discrimination in violation of FEHA, California Government Code § 12940(a); (3) failure to accommodate a perceived disability or perceived potential disability in violation of FEHA, California Government Code § 12940(m); (4) failure to engage in the interactive process in violation of FEHA, California Government Code § 12940(n); and (5) failure to take all reasonable steps necessary to prevent disability discrimination in violation of FEHA, California Government Code § 12940(k).

II. LEGAL STANDARD
Summary judgment is proper where "the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). The moving party has the burden of demonstrating the absence of a genuine issue of fact for trial. See Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 256, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). Once the moving party meets its burden, a party opposing a properly made and supported motion for summary [*8]  judgment may not rest upon mere denials but must set out specific facts showing a genuine issue for trial. Id. at 250; Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c), (e); see also Taylor v. List, 880 F.2d 1040, 1045 (9th Cir. 1989) ("A summary judgment motion cannot be defeated by relying solely on conclusory allegations unsupported by factual data."). In particular, when the non-moving party bears the burden of proving an element essential to its case, that party must make a showing sufficient to establish a genuine issue of material fact with respect to the existence of that element or be subject to summary judgment. See Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). "An issue of fact is not enough to defeat summary judgment; there must be a genuine issue of material fact, a dispute capable of affecting the outcome of the case." American International Group, Inc. v. American International Bank, 926 F.2d 829, 833 (9th Cir. 1991) (Kozinski, dissenting).
An issue is genuine if evidence is produced that would allow a rational trier of fact to reach a verdict in favor of the non-moving party. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248. "This requires evidence, not speculation." Meade v. Cedarapids, Inc., 164 F.3d 1218, 1225 (9th Cir. 1999). The Court must assume the truth of direct evidence set forth by the opposing party. See Hanon v. Dataproducts Corp., 976 F.2d 497, 507 (9th Cir. 1992). However, where circumstantial evidence is presented, the Court may consider the plausibility and reasonableness of inferences arising therefrom. See Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249-50; TW Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Pacific Elec. Contractors Ass'n, 809 F.2d 626, 631-32 (9th Cir. 1987). Although the party opposing summary judgment is entitled to [*9]  the benefit of all reasonable inferences, "inferences cannot be drawn from thin air; they must be based on evidence which, if believed, would be sufficient to support a judgment for the nonmoving party." American International Group, 926 F.2d at 836-37. In that regard, "a mere 'scintilla' of evidence will not be sufficient to defeat a properly supported motion for summary judgment; rather, the nonmoving party must introduce some 'significant probative evidence tending to support the complaint.'" Summers v. Teichert & Son, Inc., 127 F.3d 1150, 1152 (9th Cir. 1997).

III. DISCUSSION

A. Plaintiff's Claim for Disability Discrimination
In her Second Cause of Action for disability discrimination in violation of FEHA, Plaintiff claims that Wells Fargo refused to hire her or even interview her for the Collector 1 position because of a disability or perceived disability, i.e., her history of depression. The Court concludes that Plaintiff has failed to raise a genuine issue of material fact that she was discriminated against on the basis of a disability or perceived disability.
"California has adopted the three-stage burden shifting test established by the United States Supreme Court for trying claims of discrimination." Guz v. Bechtel Nat'l, Inc., 24 Cal. 4th 317, 354, 100 Cal. Rptr. 2d 352, 8 P.3d 1089 (2000). "This so-called McDonnell Douglas test reflects the principle that direct evidence of intentional [*10]  discrimination is rare, and that such claims must usually be proved circumstantially." Id.; see also McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973).
Under the McDonnell Douglas analysis, Plaintiff must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination. Guz, 24 Cal. 4th at 354. "Generally, the plaintiff must provide evidence that: (1) he was a member of a protected class, (2) he was qualified for the position he sought or was performing competently in the position he held; (3) he suffered an adverse employment action, such as termination, demotion or denial of an available job, and (4) some other circumstance suggests discriminatory motive." Id. at 355. If the plaintiff succeeds in establishing a prima facie case, a presumption of discrimination arises, and the employer must then identify a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse action. Id; Reeves v. MV Transportation, Inc., 186 Cal. App. 4th 666, 673, 111 Cal. Rptr. 3d 896 (2010). "If the employer sustains this burden, the presumption of discrimination disappears." Guz, 24 Cal.4th at 356. "To avoid summary judgment, the employee must then offer substantial evidence that the employer's stated nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse action was untrue or pretextual, or evidence the employer acted with a discriminatory animus, or a combination of the two, such that a reasonable trier of fact could conclude [*11]  the employer engaged in intentional discrimination." Reeves, 186 Cal. App. 4th at 673 (quotations and citations omitted). "[T]here must be evidence supporting a rational inference that intentional discrimination, on grounds prohibited by the statute, was the true cause of the employer's actions." Guz, 24 Cal. 4th at 361 (emphasis in original).
Even assuming Plaintiff has established a prima facie case of discrimination on the basis of a disability or perceived disability, the Court concludes that Wells Fargo has identified legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for declining to interview her for the Collector 1 position. Specifically, Ms. Mitchell, based on her experience, concluded that Plaintiff would not have been satisfied working as a Collector 1 and would have constantly been searching for other job opportunities because Plaintiff's "desired minimum pay" was $18.00 per hour, almost 40% above the rate paid for the Collector 1 position, and her most recent employment likely paid as much as $60,000 per year, more than double the income of a Collector 1. See Guz, 24 Cal. 4th at 361 (defining legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons as those that are "facially unrelated to prohibited bias, and which true, would thus preclude a finding of discrimination."). Accordingly, [*12]  the burden shifts back to Plaintiff to raise a genuine issue of material fact that Wells Fargo's reasons are pretextual.
Plaintiff argues that a genuine issue of fact exists as to pretext because: (1) Ms. Mitchell "phone screened" or interviewed other candidates who wanted to make, or were currently making, close to, or more than, $18.00 per hour; and (2) Ms. Mitchell's proffered reasons represent a departure from Wells Fargo's standard hiring procedures.
The Court concludes that Plaintiff has failed to raise a genuine issue of material fact that Wells Fargo's proffered non-discriminatory reasons for declining to interview or "phone screen" her are pretextual. Although Ms. Mitchell interviewed other candidates who wanted to make, or were currently making, close to, or more than $18.00 per hour, Plaintiff has failed to present any evidence that Ms. Mitchell actually interviewed any candidates who indicated on their applications that their "desired minimum pay" was $18.00 per hour or more and who were currently making double the salary of a Collector 1. Indeed, rather than presenting evidence of other applications reviewed by Ms. Mitchell, Plaintiff submitted notes of interviews that Ms. [*13]  Mitchell (and Ms. Ballard) conducted after the candidates had passed the initial screening process. Although these candidates stated in their phone interviews that they were currently earning, close to, or more than, $18.00 per hour, it is unknown what these candidates indicated on their applications as to their "desired minimum pay" or whether Ms. Mitchell was even aware of these candidates' current salaries at the time she initially reviewed their applications. More importantly, none of the candidates relied on by Plaintiff are comparable to Plaintiff. Of the nine candidates submitted to the Court, the majority were making under $18.00 per hour (well below an underwriter's salary), none stated that their desired minimum pay was $18.00 per hour, and every candidate stated that they would be open to $13.00 per hour. Furthermore, rather than supporting Plaintiff's theory of pretext, Ms. Mitchell's interview notes demonstrate that she was genuinely concerned with candidates' desired pay and current salaries. For example, with respect to one applicant who was earning $17.00 per hour and who stated that she would like to earn $15.00-17.00 per hour, Ms. Mitchell noted: "I have some concerns [*14]  about her motivation. This position pays less than what she was making and less than what she is looking for." Declaration of Michelle Iarusso at ¶ 2, Exhibit A-6. With respect to another applicant who was earning $25.00 per hour, Ms. Mitchell noted: "Past salary is almost twice as much as this position pays." Id. at ¶ 2, Exhibit A-3.
Plaintiff also claims that Ms. Mitchell's proffered reasons for declining to interview Plaintiff are pretextual because they represent a departure from Wells Fargo's standard hiring procedures. Specifically, she contends that Wells Fargo's standard "CLG Recruiting - Selection Procedure" does not contemplate considering a candidate's desired salary as a method of narrowing the applicant pool. However, it is undisputed that the "CLG Recruiting - Selection Procedure" relied on by Plaintiff was not in effect at the time Ms. Mitchell reviewed Plaintiff's application. Moreover, the only two Well Fargo employees whose testimony was presented to this Court each testified that they considered desired pay or salary in narrowing the applicant pool. See Deposition of Jackie Mitchell at 37:5-6 ("I do use salary as a way to narrow the pool quicker."); Deposition of [*15]  Rosa Isela Camacho at 15:16-17 ("Things that we wouldn't want to have would be a lot of job hopping and too much desired pay.").
For the foregoing reasons, the Court concludes that Plaintiff has failed to raise a genuine issue of material fact as to her claim for disability discrimination under FEHA, and Wells Fargo is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's Second Cause of Action.

B. Plaintiff's Claim for Retaliation
In her First Cause of Action for retaliation in violation of FEHA, Plaintiff claims that Wells Fargo refused to re-hire her or even interview her for the Collector 1 position in retaliation for her previous leave of absence for depression. Plaintiff's claim for retaliation fails for similar reasons as her claim for disability discrimination.
To establish a prima facie case of retaliation in violation of FEHA, a plaintiff must show that: (1) she engaged in protected activity; (2) she suffered a materially adverse action; and (3) there was a causal relationship between the two. See Yanowitz v. L'Oreal USA, Inc., 36 Cal. 4th 1028, 1042, 32 Cal. Rptr. 3d 436, 116 P.3d 1123 (2005). "Once an employee establishes a prima facie case, the employer is required to offer a legitimate, nonretaliatory reason for the adverse employment action." Id. If the employer satisfies this [*16]  burden, the burden shifts back to the plaintiff to demonstrate a genuine issue of material fact as to whether the reason advanced by the employer is a mere pretext for retaliation. Id.
As discussed, the Court concludes that Plaintiff has failed to raise a genuine issue of material fact that Wells Fargo's proffered reasons for declining to interview Plaintiff are pretextual. Accordingly, Wells Fargo is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's First Cause of Action for retaliation.

C. Plaintiff's Claim for Failure to Prevent Disability Discrimination
In her Fifth Cause of Action, Plaintiff alleges a claim for failure to prevent disability discrimination. Under FEHA, it is unlawful "[f]or an employer . . . to fail to take all reasonable steps necessary to prevent discrimination and harassment from occurring." Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(k). The California courts have held that this subsection describes a separate unlawful employment practice. Carter v. Cal. Dept. of Veterans Affairs, 38 Cal. 4th 914, 925 n. 4, 44 Cal. Rptr. 3d 223, 135 P.3d 637 (2006). Nevertheless, employers are not liable for failing to take necessary steps to prevent discrimination, "except where the [discriminatory] actions took place and were not prevented." Trujillo v. N. Cnty. Transit Dist., 63 Cal. App. 4th 280, 289, 73 Cal. Rptr. 2d 596 (1998).
In this case, because there is no viable claim for discrimination, Plaintiff's Fifth Cause of Action [*17]  for failure to prevent disability discrimination fails as a matter of law, and Wells Fargo is entitled to summary judgment on that claim.

D. Plaintiff's Claims for Failure to Accommodate and Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process
In her Third and Fourth Causes of Action, Plaintiff alleges that Wells Fargo failed to accommodate a perceived disability or perceived potential disability and failed to engage in the interactive process.
Under FEHA, it is unlawful for an employer to fail to reasonably accommodate the known physical or mental disability of an employee. Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(m). In addition, under FEHA, an employer is required to engage in a "timely, good faith interactive process . . . in response to a request for reasonable accommodation by an employee with a known physical or mental disability." Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(n).
It is undisputed that Plaintiff never advised anyone at Wells Fargo during the application process that she potentially needed an accommodation for a disability. In light of this undisputed fact and the Court's conclusion that Plaintiff has failed to raise a genuine issue of material fact that Wells Fargo refused to interview or hire her on the basis of a disability or perceived disability, the Court [*18]  concludes that Plaintiff's Third and Fourth Causes of Action fail as a matter of law and that Wells Fargo is entitled to summary judgment on those claims.

IV. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, Wells Fargo's Motion for Summary Judgment is GRANTED.
IT IS SO ORDERED.

JUDGMENT
The Court, having granted the Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment based on its determination that there was no genuine issue as to any material fact and that Defendant was entitled to judgment as a matter of law on all claims for relief alleged against it,
IT IS NOW, THEREFORE, HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED, that judgment is entered in this action as follows:
1. Plaintiff Jennifer Schoultz shall recover nothing from Defendant Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.;
2. Defendant Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. shall have judgment in its favor on Plaintiff Jennifer Schoultz's entire action; and
3. Defendant Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. shall recover from Plaintiff Jennifer Schoultz its costs of suit in the sum of $   .
Dated: January 29, 2015
/s/ John F. Walter
JOHN F. WALTER
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

