Scoggins v. Floyd Healthcare Mgmt.
United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Rome Division
August 30, 2016, Decided; August 30, 2016, Filed
CIVIL ACTION FILE NO. 4:14-CV-00274-HLM-WEJ

Reporter
2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 201771 *; 2016 WL 11544908
KIMBERLY J. SCOGGINS, Plaintiff, v. FLOYD HEALTHCARE MANAGEMENT INC., DR. KEVIN HARDWELL, KURT STUENKEL, DR. JOSEPH BIUSO, and DR. LEE BOULDIN, Defendants.
Prior History: Scoggins v. Floyd Healthcare Mgmt., 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 201663 (N.D. Ga., June 10, 2016)
Counsel:  [*1] For Kimberly J. Scoggins, Plaintiff: Brian J. Sutherland, Attorney General's Office, Seattle, WA USA; Edward D. Buckley, Rachel Berlin Benjamin, Buckley Beal, LLP, Atlanta, GA USA.
For Floyd Healthcare Management Inc., Kurt Stuenkel, Defendants: Jule W. Peek, Jr., LEAD ATTORNEY, McRae, Smith, Peek, Harman, & Monore, LLP -R.Ga, Rome, GA USA; Leslie Kali Eason, LEAD ATTORNEY, Gordon & Rees, Ernst & Young Building, Atlanta, GA USA; Robert T. Monroe, LEAD ATTORNEY, McRae, Smith, Peek, Harman & Monroe, LLP, Cedartown, GA USA; Chad Allan Shultz, Julia Christine Glasgow, Gordon Rees Scully Mansukhani, LLP, Atlanta, GA USA.
For Kevin Hardwell, Defendant: Michael James McNeill, LEAD ATTORNEY, The Minor Firm, Dalton, GA USA; William Francis Jourdain, The Minor Firm, P.C.-Dalton, Dalton, GA USA.
For Dr. Joseph Biuso, Defendant: Michael James McNeill, LEAD ATTORNEY, The Minor Firm, Dalton, GA USA; William Francis Jourdain, The Minor Firm, P.C.-Dalton, Dalton, GA USA.
For Steven L. Bouldin, Defendant: Brittany Dant Hepner, The Minor Firm, Dalton, GA USA; William Francis Jourdain, The Minor Firm, P.C.-Dalton, Dalton, GA USA.
Judges: Harold L. Murphy, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Harold L. Murphy
Opinion



ORDER
This is an [*2]  action in which Plaintiff Kimberly J. Scoggins ("Plaintiff") asserts claims under the Family and Medical Leave Act ("FMLA"), 29 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq., the Americans with Disabilities Act (the "ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12112 et seq.,1 and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 ("Title VII"), 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., as well as state law claims for negligence per se, violation of the statute creating Georgia's Prescription Drug Monitoring Program (the "GPDMP"), breach of contract/stubborn litigiousness, and invasion of privacy/wrongful disclosure. This case is before the Court on the Motions for Summary Judgment filed by (1) (a) Defendant Dr. Lee Bouldin ("Defendant Bouldin") [174], (b) Defendant Dr. Kevin Hardwell ("Defendant Hardwell") [175], and (c) Defendant Dr. Joseph Biuso ("Defendant Biuso") [176] (collectively, the "Defendant Doctors" or "DD"); (2) by Plaintiff [190]; and (3) by Defendants Floyd Healthcare Management, Inc. ("Defendant Floyd") and Kurt Stuenkel ("Defendant Stuenkel") [191] (collectively, the "Floyd Defendants" or "FD"), on the Final Report and Recommendation of United States Magistrate Judge Walter E. Johnson [258], on the Defendant Doctors' Objections to the Final Report and Recommendation [263], on the Floyd Defendants' Objections to [*3]  the Final Report and Recommendation [266], and on Plaintiff's Objections to the Final Report and Recommendation [267].

I. Standard of Review for a Report and Recommendation
28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1) requires that in reviewing a magistrate judge's report and recommendation, the district court "shall make a de novo determination of those portions of the report or specified proposed findings or recommendations to which objection is made." 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1). The Court therefore must conduct a de novo review if a party files "a proper, specific objection" to a factual finding contained in the report and recommendation. Macort v. Prem, Inc., 208 F. App'x 781, 784 (11th Cir. 2006); Jeffrey S. by Ernest S. v. State Bd. of Educ., 896 F.2d 507, 513 (11th Cir. 1990); United States v. Gaddy, 894 F.2d 1307, 1315 (11th Cir. 1990); LoConte v. Dugger, 847 F.2d 745, 750 (11th Cir. 1988). If no party files a timely objection to a factual finding in the report and recommendation, the Court reviews that finding for clear error. Macort, 208 F. App'x at 784. Legal conclusions, of course, are subject to de novo review even if no party specifically objects. United States v. Keel, 164 F. App'x 958, 961 (11th Cir. 2006); United States v. Warren, 687 F.2d 347, 347 (11th Cir. 1982).
As an initial matter, the Court is not impressed by Plaintiff's declaration that the page limitations of the Local Rules do not apply to her Objections. (PL's Objs. (Docket Entry No. 267) at 2 n.1.) To the extent that Plaintiff requests permission to exceed the page limitations (id.) the proper course of action is to seek and obtain permission to exceed the page limitations [*4]  before filing a document that exceeds the page limitations. The Court will exercise its discretion to consider the Objections as filed, but notes that it expects Plaintiff's counsel to comply with the Local Rules for all future filings.
Next, the Court rejects Plaintiff's contentions that Judge Johnson construed the evidence and drew inferences in favor of Defendants. (PL's Objs. at 5.) The Court has reviewed all of the evidence in the record, and finds that Judge Johnson properly evaluated that evidence and the inferences to be drawn from the evidence. Where possible, the Court addresses Plaintiff's numerous objections to Judge Johnson's statement of facts infra.2
Finally, the Court exercises its discretion to decline to consider evidence not presented to Judge Johnson. For instance, Plaintiff submitted her Third Declaration in support of her Objections. (Third Decl. of PI. (Docket Entry No. 267-1).) Plaintiff proffered no valid excuse for failing to submit the evidence contained in her Third Declaration before Judge Johnson, and the Court exercises its discretion to decline to consider that document.3

II. Procedural Background
On November 3, 2014, Plaintiff filed this lawsuit. (Docket Entry No. 1.) On March 18, 2015, [*5]  Plaintiff filed her First Amended Complaint. (Docket Entry No. 59.)
On March 12, 2015, Defendants Biuso and Hardwell filed a Motion to Dismiss under 28 U.S.C. § 1367(c). (Docket Entry No. 56.) On March 31, 2015, Defendant Stuenkel filed a Motion to Dismiss. (Docket Entry No. 62.) On April 3, 2015, Judge Johnson issued a Non-Final Report and Recommendation, in which he recommended that the Court deny the Motions to Dismiss. (Docket Entry No. 66.) On April 23, 2015, the Court adopted the Non-Final Report and Recommendation and denied the Motions to Dismiss. (Order of Apr. 23, 2015 (Docket Entry No. 85).)
On June 9, 2015, Plaintiff filed a Motion for Leave to File Second Amended Complaint. (Docket Entry No. 90.) On June 25, 2015, Judge Johnson granted that Motion (Order of June 25, 2015 (Docket Entry No. 102)), and filed Plaintiff's Second Amended Complaint (Docket Entry No. 103).
On March 14, 2016, Defendants Bouldin, Hardwell, and Biuso all filed separate Motions for Summary Judgment. (Docket Entry Nos. 174-76.) On that same day, Plaintiff filed her Motion for Summary Judgment. (Docket Entry No. 190.) Later that same day, the Floyd Defendants filed their Motion for Summary Judgment. (Docket Entry No. 191.) [*6] 
On June 10, 2016, Judge Johnson issued his Final Report and Recommendation. (1) the Court grant in part and deny in part Defendant Bouldin's Motion for Summary Judgment; (2) the Court grant Defendant Biuso's Motion for Summary Judgment; (3) the Court grant Defendant Hardwell's Motion for Summary Judgment; (4) the Court deny Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment; and (5) the Court grant summary judgment to Defendant Stuenkel but grant in part and deny in part Defendant Floyd's Motion for Summary Judgment. (See generally Final Report & Recommendation (Docket Entry No. 258).)
On July 14, 2016, the Defendant Doctors filed their Joint Motion for Leave to File Amended Answers and their Joint Motion for Leave to File Joint Second Motion for Summary Judgment. (Docket Entry Nos. 264-65.) The Court has issued a separate Order addressing those Motions.
The Parties all filed Objections to the Final Report and Recommendation. (Docket Entry No. 263 (Defendant Doctors' Objections), No. 266 (the Floyd Defendants' Objections), No. 267 (Plaintiff's Objections).) Plaintiff responded to the Defendant Doctors' Objections (Docket Entry No. 271), and the Defendant Doctors filed a reply in support of their [*7]  Objections (Docket Entry No. 273). Defendants responded to Plaintiff's Objections. (Docket Entry Nos. 268, 272.) The time period in which Plaintiff could file a reply in support of her Objections has expired, and the Court finds that this matter is ripe for resolution.

III. Factual Background
Plaintiff, as movant, filed a statement of undisputed material facts. (See PL's Substitute Statement of Undisputed Material Facts as to Which There is no Genuine Issue to be Tried ("PSMF") (Docket Entry No. 214-1 .)4 Both groups of Defendants submitted responses to that document. (See Def. Doctors' Joint Resp. to Pl.'s Statement of Material Facts Not in Dispute ("DDR-PSMF") (Docket Entry No. 217-1); Floyd Defs.' Resp. to Pl.'s Statement of Material Facts Not in Dispute ("FDR-PSMF") (Docket Entry No. 223-1).) As permitted by the Local Rules, the Defendant Doctors submitted a statement of additional facts which they contend are material and present a genuine issue for trial. (See Def. Doctors' Joint Statement of Additional Material Facts Not in Dispute ("DD-SAMF") [217-2].)5 Plaintiff filed a response to DD-SAMF. (See PL's Resp. to Def. Doctors' Statement of Additional Material Facts Not in Dispute [*8]  ("PR-DD-SAMF") (Docket Entry No. 241).)
Defendants Bouldin, Hardwell, and Biuso filed a joint statement of proposed undisputed facts in support of their individual Motions for Summary Judgment. (See Defendant Doctors' Joint Statement of Material Facts Not in Dispute ("DDSMF") (Docket Entry No. 197).) Plaintiff submitted a response to DDSMF. (See Pl.'s Resp. to Def. Doctors' Joint Statement of Material Facts Not in Dispute ("PR-DDSMF") (Docket Entry No. 210).) Plaintiff also submitted a statement of additional facts that she contends are material and present a genuine issue for trial. (See Pl.'s Statement of Additional Material Facts Presenting Genuine Issues for Trial in Resp. to Def. Doctors' Mots, for Summ. J. ("P-SAMF-DD") (Docket Entry No. 215).) Defendant Doctors filed a joint response to P-SAMF-DD. (See Def. Doctors' Joint Resp. to Pl.'s Statement of Additional Material Facts ("DDR-P-SAMF") (Docket Entry No. 243).)
The Floyd Defendants filed a joint statement of proposed undisputed facts ("FDSMF") in support of their own Motion for Summary Judgment. (See Statement of Material Facts in Supp. of Floyd Defs. Mot. for Summ. J. (Docket Entry No. 202).) Plaintiff submitted [*9]  a response to FDSMF. (See Pl.'s Resp. to Floyd Defs.' Statement of Material Facts ("PR-FDSMF") (Docket Entry No. 225).) Plaintiff also submitted a statement of additional facts that she contends are material and present a genuine issue for trial. (See PL's Statement of Additional Material Facts Presenting Genuine Issues for Trial in Resp. to [the Floyd Defs.'] Mot. for Summ. J. ("P-SAMF-FD") (Docket Entry No. 226).) The Floyd Defendants filed a response to P-SAMF-FD. (See Floyd Defs.' Joint Resp. to PL's Statement of Additional Material Facts ("FDR-P-SAMF") (Docket Entry No. 249).)
The Court finds that Judge Johnson properly evaluated the Parties' proposed undisputed material facts, and uses the same process for evaluating those submissions and for evaluating objections to proposed facts and denials of proposed facts. (Final Report & Recommendation at 5-7.)6 The Court also notes that it applauds and appreciates Judge Johnson's valiant efforts to keep the Final "Report and Recommendation . . . from rivaling the length of a Tolstoy novel." (Id. at 6.)7

A. The Parties
Beginning on April 1, 2012, Defendant Floyd employed Plaintiff as the Administrator and Chief Nursing Officer of the Polk Medical Center, [*10]  Inc. ("Polk"). (PSMF U 1; see also DDSMF ¶ 1; FDSMF ¶ 10.)8 Plaintiff handled all the day-to-day operations at Polk, including budgeting; supervising its directors; involvement in nursing policies and procedures; interviewing, hiring, counseling and terminating employees; implementing new policies or procedures; and serving as a liaison between Floyd and Polk. (FDSMF ¶¶ 11-13; see also PSMF ¶ 2.) Plaintiff, however, neither consulted with physicians regarding patient care nor gave direction to nurses regarding the same. (PSMF ¶ 4.)9
Defendant Floyd is the parent company of a healthcare system that includes the Floyd Medical Center, Polk, urgent care centers, and other clinical locations. (PSMF ¶ 11.) Defendant Floyd employs approximately 2,800 people. (Id. ¶ 12.)
Defendant Stuenkel serves as Defendant Floyd's President and Chief Executive Officer and as Polk's President, and, in those positions, his responsibilities include leadership, management, and administration of the Floyd healthcare system. (PSMF ¶ 10.) Defendant Stuenkel is the ultimate authority with respect to decisions regarding Defendant Floyd's executive team, including hiring and firing decisions. (FDSMF ¶ 18.) Defendant [*11]  Stuenkel supervised Plaintiff. (FDSMF ¶ 17; see also DDSMF ¶ 2.) Defendant Stuenkel is not a physician. (PSMF ¶ 131.)
Defendant Biuso is Defendant Floyd's Chief Medical Officer. (PSMF ¶ 7.) Defendant Biuso received a medical degree from the New York Medical College, and is board certified in the area of internal medicine, but not in psychiatry or addiction medicine. (Id. ¶ 8.) Defendant Biuso is a health care provider employed by Defendant Floyd, and is involved in patient care and treatment in order to ensure proper care and treatment. (P-SAMF-FD ¶ 8; P-SAMF-DD ¶ 8.)
Defendant Hardwell is employed by Defendant Floyd, serves as the director of the emergency rooms at Floyd Medical Center and at Polk, and also works as an emergency room physician. (PSMF ¶ 13, as modified per DDR-PSMF ¶ 13 and FDR-PSMF ¶ 13; see also P-SAMF-FD ¶ 9; P-SAMF-DD ¶ 9.) Defendant Hardwell's residency was in family practice, but his current position involves the practice of emergency medicine. (PSMF ¶ 14.) Defendant Hardwell reports to Defendant Biuso. (Id. ¶ 16.)10
Defendant Bouldin earned his degree in medicine in 2010, and is board certified in family medicine. (PSMF ¶ 9.) Defendant Boulding has been employed [*12]  by Defendant Floyd as an emergency room staff physician since July 2013, and he has at all times routinely worked shifts at both Floyd Medical Center and Polk. (DDSMF ¶ 11; see also P-SAMF-FD ¶ 10; P-SAMF-DD ¶ 10.)
The Defendant Doctors-Defendants Biuso, Hardwell, and Bouldin-are all licensed in the State of Georgia to practice medicine, and have been so licensed at all times relevant to this lawsuit. (DDSMF ¶ 53.)

B. Defendant Floyd's Alcohol/Drug Policy
Defendant Floyd strictly prohibits the abuse of drugs and alcohol by employees. The abuse of narcotics is a terminable offense. Defendant Floyd's policy ((Docket Entry No. 203-4) at 2-8)) allows for rehabilitation, in certain instances, in lieu of termination. In such cases, successful rehabilitation is a condition of employment. (FDSMF ¶ 6.) Plaintiff was aware of Defendant Floyd's policy against drug abuse. (Id. ¶ 7.) The only drugs that Plaintiff has taken since the beginning of her employment with Defendant Floyd were those for which she had a prescription. (PSMF ¶ 48.)

C. Defendant Floyd's FMLA Policy
Under Defendant Floyd's FMLA policy, an employee may be required to obtain a certification of a health care provider to support a claim [*13]  for FMLA leave within fifteen days after the beginning of the absence that the employee seeks to have treated as FMLA leave. (PSMF ¶ 123, as modified per objections asserted in DDR-PSMF ¶ 123 and FDR-PSMF ¶ 123.) Employees at Defendant Floyd can give notice of leave sought under the FMLA without the physician certification form. (PSMF ¶ 124.) Defendant Floyd has permitted employees to take FMLA leave and to submit their health care provider certifications even after fifteen days have passed. (Id. ¶ 125.)

D. Confidential Medical Information
Defendant Floyd has in place a number of policies governing the protection of confidential health information. (FDSMF ¶ 8.) Doctors and employees receive training concerning these policies. (Id. ¶ 9.)

E. Plaintiff's Employment Agreement
When her employment began at Floyd, Plaintiff executed an Employment Agreement dated February 2, 2012, with an effective date of April 1, 2012. (FDSMF ¶ 19.) Plaintiff agreed to be bound by the terms of the Employment Agreement, (Id. ¶ 20.) Section 5(e) of the Employment Agreement provides that Plaintiff's employment could be terminated by Defendant Floyd "for cause" in the event of any of the following:
(i) Any material breach of [*14]  this Employment Agreement which remains uncured fifteen (15) days after written notice of the breach is delivered to [Plaintiff].11
(ii) Conduct on [Plaintiff's] part which amounts to fraud, gross dishonesty, gross negligence or other such willful misconduct in the performance of duties.
. . .
(iv) [Plaintiff's] habitual intoxication from or addiction to alcohol, narcotics or other mind altering drugs, whether legal or illicit.
. . .
(vii) Insubordination by [Plaintiff], defined as the willful failure or refusal to obey instructions or directives from [Polk Medical Center, Inc.'s] President or its Board of Directors.
(FDSMF ¶ 21 & Section 5(e) of the Employment Agreement (Docket Entry No. 203-9 at 5); see also PSMF ¶ 204, as modified per DDR-PSMF ¶ 204 and FDR-PSMF ¶ 204.) As reflected above, addiction to narcotics, whether legal or illicit, was grounds for termination with cause. (FDSMF ¶ 39.)
If Plaintiff's employment was terminated with cause under the Employment Agreement, then she is not entitled to severance pay. If Plaintiff's employment was terminated without cause under the Employment Agreement, then she is entitled to receive twelve months of salary as severance pay, reduced by any compensation [*15]  received from other sources. (FDSMF ¶ 22; see also PSMF ¶¶ 202, 206, as modified per DDR-PSMF ¶ 206 and FDR-PSMF ¶ 206.)12

F. Plaintiff's Addiction
Plaintiff suffers from addiction. (PSMF ¶ 32; see also FDSMF ¶ 23.) Plaintiff, however, testified that her drug use did not adversely affect her job performance. (FDSMF ¶ 42.) Indeed, Plaintiff always received good performance reviews from Defendant Stuenkel, and was told that she did not exhibit any performance problems. (PSMF ¶ 209; see also id. ¶ 6, as modified per DDR-PSMF ¶ 6 and FDR-PSMF ¶ 6; PSMF ¶ 49.) Neither Defendant Stuenkel nor Defendants Bouldin or Hardwell ever observed Plaintiff to be impaired or intoxicated at work, and no one ever told them that they saw her in that condition. (PSMF ¶¶ 50, 211.)13 Plaintiff never admitted to Defendant Stuenkel that she had abused drugs while at work. (Id. ¶ 210.) Indeed, other than when Plaintiff asked doctors in the emergency room for Ambien because she depleted her supply by taking more than she should, Plaintiff never told anyone at Defendant Floyd that she had an addiction before the events giving rise to this litigation occurred. (FDSMF ¶ 41, as modified per PR-FDSMF ¶ 41.)
Plaintiff was [*16]  prescribed different opiate medications over the years, and she became addicted to those medications. (PSMF ¶ 34.) Plaintiff's addiction to sleeping pills began in 2009, while her addiction to opiate medications began in 2013. (Id. ¶ 35; see also FDSMF ¶¶ 24-26.)
The generic names "zolpidem" and "zolpidem tartrate," and the brand name "Ambien," all refer to the same drug, which is a prescription sleep aid. (DDSMF ¶ 3; see also PSMF ¶ 223.)14 Zolpidem is a drug to which a user can form an addiction, and to which plaintiff was addicted in March 2014. (DDSMF ¶ 4.)
The drugs hydrocodone, oxycodone, and OxyContin are prescription opiates and narcotics used to treat pain. (DDSMF ¶ 5.) Hydrocodone, oxycodone, and OxyContin are drugs to which a user can form an addiction, and to which Plaintiff was addicted in March 2014. (Id. ¶ 6.)15 Hydrocodone is an ingredient in the drugs "Tussionex," "Norco," "Lorcet," and "Hydromet." (Id. ¶ 7.) Oxycodone is an ingredient in the drugs "Endocet," "Percocet," and "OxyContin." (Id. ¶ 8.)
Plaintiff was a patient of Physician's Assistant ("PA") Jay Pottinger, and of his wife, Dr. Jill Pottinger, at the medical practice known as MediQuick. (DDSMF ¶ 9.) [*17]  On March 7, 2014, personnel at MediQuick queried the GPDMP database, and pulled a history of all prescriptions filled in Georgia by Plaintiff for a period of one year prior to that date. A true and correct copy of this database printout was then placed in Plaintiff's MediQuick patient records. (Id. ¶ 10.)16 (The most readable copy of the GPDMP printout retained by MediQuick is DD's Exhibit 7 (Docket Entry No. 198-6) at 2-5).)17 Plaintiff admits that her pharmacy records show that she had multiple prescriptions and that she had a problem with prescription medications. (FDSMF ¶ 51, as modified per PR-FDSMF ¶ 51; FDSMF ¶ 28, as modified per PR-FDSMF ¶ 28; DDSMF ¶ 21, as modified per PR-DDSMF ¶ 21.)
Plaintiff's GPDMP records reflect that she had obtained 646 pills, or a 646-days' supply, of zolpidem tartrate-that is, Ambien-in the preceding year, and that she had obtained over four times the recommended dosage in the preceding thirty days. (DDSMF ¶ 22.)18
Plaintiff's GPDMP records also reflect that she had obtained 440 pills, or a 126-days' supply, of drugs containing hydrocodone in the preceding year, as well as 1,303 pills, or a 326-days' supply, of drugs containing oxycodone in the preceding [*18]  year. (DDSMF ¶ 23.) In other words, in the preceding year, Plaintiff had obtained 1,743 pills, which was enough to last 452 days as prescribed. Plaintiff acknowledges that, after a doctor told her he would not write her a prescription for opiate medications, she went to another doctor because she was trying to find a way to continue taking the medication. (PSMF ¶ 44.)
Plaintiff's GPDMP records also reflect that in the preceding year she had obtained prescriptions from thirteen doctors: Jill Pottinger; Robert Lee Fletcher; Dewey Hammond; Steven P. Ziemer; Shereef Girgis; Dominic Shay Seymore; Frank L. Hampton; Rita S. Mezzatesta; Edward E. Meier; William Asbury; Jay M. Johnson; Robert H. Holcombe, Jr.; and George Edward Malcom, Jr. (DDSMF ¶ 24.)19
Plaintiff's GPDMP records also show that, in the preceding year, she had filled prescriptions at eight pharmacies scattered across Northwest Georgia: Avery Drugs (Rome); Armuchee Pharmacy; Wal-Mart Pharmacy No. 10-0727 (Cedartown); Rite Aid Pharmacy No. 11741 (Cedartown); Winslette Pharmacy (Rome); Scott's Pharmacy (Calhoun); Rite Aid Pharmacy No. 11755 (Rome); and Cline Pharmacy (Cave Spring). (DDSMF ¶ 25; see also FDSMF ¶ 29, proposing same [*19]  facts as DDSMF ¶¶ 22-25.)20 Plaintiff took the drugs prescribed to her, and she did not sell or discard them. (FDSMF ¶ 30, as modified per PR-FDSMF ¶ 30.)

G. Plaintiff Seeks Ambien from Defendant Bouldin
Defendant Bouldin initially met Plaintiff at Polk on July 8, 2013, which was shortly after Defendant Bouldin started working for Defendant Floyd. (FDSMF ¶ 54; see also PR-DDSMF ¶ 12.) About ten to fifteen minutes after they met, Plaintiff sought to speak privately to Defendant Bouldin and asked him to write her a prescription for Ambien. (FDSMF ¶ 55; see also PSMF ¶ 36, as modified per date provided in DDR-PSMF ¶ 36 and FDR-PSMF ¶ 36; DDSMF ¶ 12.)21 Plaintiff told Defendant Bouldin that she was out of her sleep aid, and that she had not been able to see her primary care doctor, Frank Hampton, M.D. (FDSMF ¶ 56.)22 Plaintiff did not tell Defendant Bouldin that she was taking any opiates or other medications of that kind. (PSMF ¶ 38.) Defendant Bouldin wrote the prescription, which Plaintiff filled that same day. (DDSMF ¶ 16; see also FDSMF ¶ 57.)23
Plaintiff asked Defendant Bouldin for a prescription for Ambien because she knew that he was a medical doctor, licensed by the State [*20]  of Georgia to write prescriptions for controlled substances, and in so asking Defendant Bouldin, she relied upon his professional qualifications as a licensed medical doctor. (DDSMF ¶ 13.) By asking Defendant Bouldin for a prescription, Plaintiff established a doctor-patient relationship with him. (Id. ¶ 14; see also P-SAMF-DD ¶ 7; P-SAMF-FD ¶ 7.)24

H. Plaintiff Seeks Ambien from Defendant Bouldin a Second Time
On Thursday evening, March 6, 2014, Plaintiff left Defendant Bouldin a voice mail message on his personal cell phone for the purpose of obtaining a second prescription for Ambien. (DDSMF ¶ 17; see also FDSMF ¶ 60; PSMF ¶ 39; Dep. of Dr. Lee Bouldin (Docket Entry No. 181) at 91, 99-100.) Defendant Bouldin considered the call odd because he had not given Plaintiff his personal cell phone number. (FDSMF ¶ 61.) Defendant Bouldin did not return Plaintiff's call. (Bouldin Dep. at 92, 100.)
The next day, Friday, March 7, when Defendant Bouldin was working the night shift, Plaintiff telephoned Polk's Emergency Room and her call was transferred to him. (Bouldin Dep. at 92, 100-01.) Plaintiff asked Defendant Bouldin if he had received her voice mail message from the previous day, stated that [*21]  she was out of Ambien, and asked if he could fill it again. (Id. at 101; see also FDSMF ¶ 64.) Defendant Bouldin became even more concerned about Plaintiff's behavior because the timing of her calls indicated that she knew his schedule and when he would be on call. (FDSMF ¶ 65.) Defendant Bouldin testified that he told Plaintiff that he had spoken to Defendant Hardwell, and, as a general rule, "we were not going to be filling those medicines." (Bouldin Dep. at 101; see also FDSMF ¶ 66; PSMF ¶¶ 40-41 .)25 Plaintiff replied that it was fine, and that she did not want to get Defendant Bouldin into trouble. (FDSMF ¶ 67.)

I. Defendant Bouldin Checks the GPDMP Database
Following Plaintiff's second request for Ambien, Defendant Bouldin became concerned that Plaintiff had exhibited signs of potential substance abuse. (DDSMF ¶ 19.) Acting on that concern, Defendant Bouldin accessed the GPDMP database and obtained a printout of Plaintiff's prescription drug history. (Id. ¶ 20; see also PSMF ¶ 51; FDSMF ¶ 68.)26 After examining that history, Defendant Bouldin concluded that Plaintiff had what he considered drug-seeking behavior, and that Plaintiff was either taking more pills than she was supposed to or selling [*22]  or sharing the pills. (Bouldin Dep. at 103-104; see also FDSMF ¶ 70.) Defendant Bouldin determined that Plaintiff was more likely than not suffering from substance abuse disorder. (Bouldin Dep. at 107; see also PSMF ¶ 53; DDSMF ¶ 26; FDSMF ¶ 71.)27 The Parties agree that Defendant Bouldin was capable of diagnosing a patient such as Plaintiff with suffering from substance abuse disorder. (PSMF ¶ 24.) Defendants contend that Defendant Bouldin felt a moral and ethical obligation to help Plaintiff. (FDSMF ¶¶ 73-74.)

J. Defendant Bouldin Meets with Defendant Hardwell about Plaintiff
Defendant Bouldin testified that after he got off work at 6:00 a.m. on Saturday, March 8, 2014, he drove over to Floyd Hospital with the GPDMP printout to meet with Defendant Hardwell. (Bouldin Dep. at 108; see also PSMF ¶ 6328; FDSMF 72.) Defendant Bouldin wanted to speak with Defendant Hardwell about Plaintiff and her patient care because "it was a very sensitive matter" given "who [Plaintiff] was from Floyd's organizational standpoint." (PSMF ¶ 69.) Further, Defendant Bouldin knew that Defendant Hardwell had dealt with similar situations in the past and could help figure out how best to handle this one. (FDSMF [*23]  ¶ 75.)
Defendant Bouldin testified that he found Defendant Hardwell in the emergency room and said, "I need to speak with you on - about a patient. I said, I've got a - I think I have a big problem, and I'm not quite sure of the direction to go about taking care of it." (Bouldin Dep. at 109.) The Parties dispute whether Defendant Bouldin was seeking a consult with Defendant Hardwell in this meeting. (Compare PSMF ¶ 66, with DDR-PSMF ¶ 66.)29 In any event, Defendants Bouldin and Hardwell went to a nearby room, Defendant Bouldin told Defendant Hardwell about his interaction with Plaintiff, and Defendant Hardwell looked at the GPDMP printout. (Bouldin Dep. at 109-110; see also DDSMF ¶ 27; P-SAMF-DD ¶ 6; P-SAMF-FD ¶ 6.) Defendant Hardwell testified that he told Defendant Bouldin: "I agree that she's got a problem, and we've got to get her some help." (Dep. of Dr. Kevin Hardwell (Docket Entry No. 185) at 119; see also DDSMF ¶ 28; FDSMF ¶ 77.) Defendant Bouldin left the GPDMP printout with Defendant Hardwell, who said he would take care of the issue that day. (Hardwell Dep. at 119.) Defendant Hardwell's only assessment or evaluation of Plaintiff was his review of the printout of her prescription [*24]  drug history from the GPDMP database and what Defendant Bouldin told him. (PSMF ¶ 74.)
Defendant Bouldin had no further involvement relevant to this case. (DDSMF 29, as modified per PR-DDSMF ¶ 29.) Plaintiff, however, contends that she never expressed her consent to any release of her prescription drug history. (PSMF ¶ 143.)30

K. Defendant Hardwell Goes to Defendant Biuso About Plaintiff
On March 7 or 8, 2014, Defendant Hardwell went to Defendant Biuso and told him that Plaintiff had asked for medications from multiple doctors in the emergency room, that Defendant Bouldin had come to him with his concerns about Plaintiff, that Defendant Bouldin had obtained a printout of Plaintiff's prescription drug history from the GPDMP database, that he had that printout with him, and that they needed to get Plaintiff some help. (DDSMF ¶ 30, as modified per record cited; see also PSMF ¶ 85.)31 During that conversation, Defendant Hardwell showed Defendant Biuso the GPDMP printout. (PSMF ¶ 86.) Defendant Biuso reviewed the printout and agreed with Defendant Hardwell's conclusion that Plaintiff was exhibiting drug-seeking behavior and had a problem with prescription medications. (DDSMF ¶ 31.) Defendant Biuso [*25]  testified, "[I]t was obvious to any clinician that there was a serious addiction problem here." (Dep. of Dr. Joseph Biuso (Docket Entry No. 180) at 111; see also PSMF ¶ 91, stating that at the time Plaintiff asked for prescription medications, she suffered from the medical condition of addiction.)32

K. Defendant Biuso Goes to Attorney Monk and Defendant Stuenkel About Plaintiff
After learning about Plaintiff's problem from Defendant Hardwell, Defendant Biuso contacted Defendant Floyd's then-General Counsel, Wade Monk, who advised Defendant Biuso to go see Defendant Stuenkel, and stated that the three of them would then get together on the telephone and talk about a plan to get help for Plaintiff. (Biuso Dep. at 124.)33
Defendant Biuso then went to see Defendant Stuenkel. (FDSMF ¶ 84.)34 Defendant Biuso explained to Defendant Stuenkel what had transpired regarding Plaintiff, including: Plaintiff's interaction with Defendant Bouldin; Defendant Bouldin's alarm at Plaintiff's request for a prescription; Defendant Bouldin's access of the GPDMP database; Defendant Bouldin's opinion that the database showed Plaintiff was possibly addicted; Defendant Bouldin's consultation with Defendant Hardwell; [*26]  Defendant Hardwell's review of the GPDMP printout: Defendant Hardwell's consultation with Defendant Biuso; and that in the judgment of all three doctors-Defendants Bouldin, Hardwell, and Biuso--Plaintiff had an addiction problem. (FDSMF ¶ 86, as modified per record cited; see also DDSMF ¶ 33, as modified per record cited.) Without Plaintiff's consent, Defendant Biuso told Defendnat Stuenkel that the printout of Plaintiff's prescription drug history from the GPDMP database presented a pattern of narcotic drug abuse. (PSMF ¶ 101.)35
Defendants Biuso and Stuenkel then telephoned Attorney Monk. (FDSMF ¶ 87.)36 Arising out of this conversation, Defendants Biuso and Stuenkel devised a treatment plan for Plaintiff. Under this plan, Defendants Biuso and Stuenkel would meet with Plaintiff, and if Plaintiff admitted that she had an addiction problem and would cooperate to seek help for her condition, then Defendant Floyd would send Plaintiff to Ridgeview for treatment. (Id. ¶ 88, as modified per PR-FDSMF ¶ 88; see also DDSMF ¶ 34; PSMF ¶ 105, as modified per FDR-PSMF ¶ 105 and DDR-PSMF ¶ 105.)37 As discussed below, Defendants Biuso and Stuenkel elected to use Defendant Hardwell to set up this meeting. [*27] 

M. Defendant Hardwell Meets with Plaintiff
Defendant Biuso called Defendant Hardwell and told him that they needed to get Plaintiff some help. He asked Defendant Hardwell to meet with her, encourage her to come talk with them, and said that they would have something arranged. (FDSMF ¶ 89.) As requested, Defendant Hardwell met with Plaintiff on Friday, March 14, 2014, asked her if she had sought Ambien from any of Defendant Floyd's doctors, and Plaintiff admitted that she had. According to Plaintiff, Defendant Hardwell then responded, "We've got to go see [Defendant] Biuso and [Defendant Stuenkel], and I need to take you over there." (PSMF ¶ 109, modified per record cited.) Defendant Hardwell recalls he told Plaintiff that Defendant Bouldin had concerns about Plaintiff's health, that the records that Defendant Bouldin pulled showed Plaintiff had an addiction problem, that they needed to go meet with administration, and that administration was going to get her some help. (FDSMF ¶¶ 90-91, as modified per record cited.)
During her interaction with Defendant Hardwell, Plaintiff became apologetic, tearful, and very upset. (FDSMF ¶ 92.) Defendant Hardwell recalls Plaintiff stating that she was [*28]  willing to talk to Defendant Biuso to get some help. (Id. ¶ 93.) Defendant Hardwell and Plaintiff then walked over to the administrative boardroom together. (Id. ¶ 94; see also PSMF ¶ 110.)

N. The Boardroom Meeting on March 14, 2014
Once at the administration building, Plaintiff and Defendant Hardwell met with Defendant Biuso in the boardroom. (FDSMF ¶ 95.) Defendant Hardwell waited for a minute and then left. (Id. ¶ 96.) Defendant Hardwell had no further involvement related to this case. (DDSMF ¶ 36.)
There is a dispute over whether Plaintiff's GPDMP printout was in the boardroom. Plaintiff recalls that Defendant Hardwell gave Defendant Biuso a folder containing that printout. (See PR-FDSMF ¶ 96; see also PSMF ¶ 111.) Defendants deny that Defendant Hardwell did so. (FDR-PSMF ¶ 111; DDR-PSMF ¶ 111; see also FDSMF ¶¶ 111-12.) Plaintiff testified that Defendant Biuso had the printout in front of him during the meeting and referred to it, naming drugs prescribed to her and the doctors who wrote the prescriptions. (PSMF ¶ 113.) According to Plaintiff, she sat about four feet from the printout and could see small print arranged in columns. (Id. ¶ 114.) Defendants assert that the printout was [*29]  not in the room. (FDR-PSMF ¶¶ 113-14; DDR-PSMF ¶¶ 113-14.)38
After Defendant Hardwell left, Defendant Biuso went to get Defendant Stuenkel, who then joined Defendant Biuso and Plaintiff in the boardroom. (PSMF ¶ 112.) The Floyd Defendants assert that Plaintiff expressly consented to Defendant Stuenkel joining the conversation to determine how best to move forward, and Plaintiff provided this consent before Defendant Biuso called Defendant Stuenkel to come join them. (FDSMF ¶ 98.) Plaintiff, however, denies that she gave any such consent. (PR-FDSMF ¶ 98.)
According to Plaintiff, Defendant Biuso began the meeting by accusing her of having a serious drug problem, telling her about his son's drug problem, and stating that she had no choice except to go to treatment. (PSMF ¶ 115.) Plaintiff was emotional in the meeting, admitted that she had a problem with drugs, and stated that she would take, for example, seven or eight Ambien in a twenty-four hour period. (FDSMF ¶ 9739 see also FDSMF ¶ 99, as modified per PR-FDSMF ¶ 99, and PSMF ¶ 116, where Plaintiff states she was distraught and hysterical in this meeting and admitted to drug dependency.)40 Plaintiff admitted to Defendants Biuso and Stuenkel [*30]  that she had a problem, and stated that she would undergo treatment. (PSMF ¶¶ 47, 118.) Plaintiff asked Defendants Biuso and Stuenkel if she had done anything wrong or had any job performance issues, and they responded that she had not done anything wrong, but that she obviously had a problem, referring to the list of prescription drugs. (Id. ¶ 117, as modified per record cited.)
At the end of the boardroom meeting, Plaintiff was told that she needed to go directly to Ridgeview that day, and that she could not go get her belongings by herself. (PSMF ¶ 136.) Defendant Stuenkel told Plaintiff that it was a requirement of her employment that she go to Ridgeview for its inpatient drug treatment program, and that if she did not go, her employment would be terminated. (Id. 138, 176; see also FDSMF ¶ 102, as modified per PR-FDSMF ¶ 102.)41 Plaintiff became upset and stated that she wanted to enter the Floyd Behavioral Health outpatient program instead of Ridgeview. (PSMF ¶¶ 128, 178.)42 Defendant Stuenkel, however, gave Plaintiff no choice concerning treatment programs. (Id. ¶ 139.) Defendant Stuenkel told Plaintiff that she was required to get treatment and accept the plan devised for her in order to keep [*31]  her job. (Id. ¶ 177.) Plaintiff asked to delay her admission to Ridgeview due to a family event, but Defendants Stuenkel and Biuso insisted that she go immediately. (FDSMF ¶ 101; see also PSMF ¶¶ 119, 127.)
Defendant Floyd contends that Plaintiff agreed to go to Ridgeview as a condition of her employment, and that she expressed no desire to pursue any alternative. (FDSMF ¶ 103, as modified per record cited; FDSMF ¶ 110.) Although Plaintiff responds that she agreed to go to Ridgeview on the day of the boardroom meeting, she contends that she did not agree to participate in its longer outpatient residential program, and asserts that she never needed inpatient treatment. (PR-DSMF 103, 110; see also PSMF ¶ 153.)
Defendant Floyd further contends that Plaintiff agreed in that meeting to sign a release, or a "consent," so that Defendants Biuso and Stuenkel could monitor her progress, and that Plaintiff's signing a release was part and parcel of her agreement to complete treatment at Ridgeview. (FDSMF ¶¶ 106-07; see also PSMF ¶ 137; PR-FDSMF ¶ 107, asserting that from Defendant Floyd's view, it was a condition of continued employment for Plaintiff to sign that release.) Plaintiff [*32]  responds that she was never asked, and never agreed, to sign a release authorizing disclosure of information to Defendant Floyd personnel, either in the boardroom or at any other time. (PR-DSMF ¶ 106.)
According to Defendant Floyd, the purpose of that release was to facilitate a conversation with Plaintiff and the Ridgeview Program Director while Defendant Floyd was sponsoring Plaintiff's treatment, so that Defendant Floyd could determine how Plaintiff would integrate back into its organization after treatment. (FDSMF ¶ 108.)43
Defendant Floyd adds that, by seeking a release, it was not seeking access to Plaintiff's medical records, the individual entries contained in those records, or the prescription treatment. (FDSMF ¶ 109.) Instead, Defendant Floyd sought Plaintiff's signature on a release to be able to communicate with Ridgeview personnel to determine what the next steps would be in its relationship with Plaintiff by learning about the length of the inpatient program, what the outpatient program might look like, and what the timeline for these programs might be. (Stuenkel Dep. at 136, cited in PR-FDSMF ¶ 109.)44
During the boardroom meeting, Plaintiff said that she was worried about [*33]  her job and about being fired, and stated that she wanted to return to work after treatment. (PSMF ¶ 126.) Plaintiff contends that Defendant Stuenkel replied that she had six months of sick time, that she could go out on FMLA leave, and that she could return to work after she took leave to take treatment for her substance abuse disorder, (Id. ¶¶ 120-21; see also FDSMF ¶ 105, summarizing Defendant Biuso's testimony that Defendant Stuenkel told Plaintiff that she could return to work after she took leave for treatment for substance abuse.)45 Defendant Stuenkel denies that he told Plaintiff that she had six months of sick time and that she could go out on FMLA leave. (FDR-PSMF ¶¶ 120-21.) Plaintiff never received any FMLA-related paperwork. (PSMF ¶ 135.)

O. Plaintiff Goes to Ridgeview
After the meeting in the boardroom, Plaintiff went that same day-that is, Friday, March 14, 2014-and enrolled in substance abuse treatment at Ridgeview. (DDSMF ¶ 39.) While there, Plaintiff learned that the program had two components: inpatient treatment, which lasted anywhere from three to seven days, followed by an outpatient residential program, which could last up to eight weeks, and that she would be required [*34]  to stay overnight in apartments on the Ridgeview campus during the outpatient residential program. (FDSMF ¶ 119, as modified per record cited.)
Plaintiff described her first day of treatment at Ridgeview, Saturday, March 15, as one of the worst days of her life. (Scoggins Dep. at 152.) Plaintiff almost left Ridgeview that day, thinking she was going to be fired anyway. (FDSMF ¶ 121.) Plaintiff, however, decided, "I'm going to do this." (Scoggins Dep. at 152.) As Plaintiff underwent treatment, she learned from Chip Abernathy and other Ridgeview personnel that she would be discharged from the inpatient program and moved to the outpatient residential program located on the same campus. (PSMF ¶ 146.)
Mr. Abernathy and Plaintiff's treating physician, Dr. Lynn, told Plaintiff that they wanted her to participate in Ridgeview's residential outpatient treatment program. When Plaintiff asked Dr. Lynn if there were other outpatient treatment options, he replied in the affirmative and provided her with a list of such programs. (PSMF ¶¶ 149-50.) Plaintiff did not want to leave Ridgeview against medical advice, and she wanted to participate in an outpatient treatment program; however, Dr. Lynn said [*35]  that Plaintiff had to stay a minimum of two weeks in residential outpatient treatment if she remained at Ridgeview. (Id. ¶ 148.)46 Dr. Lynn also asked Plaintiff if she would sign a consent form to allow him to talk to Defendant Biuso, but Plaintiff refused to sign the form. (IcL ¶ 162.)
On Monday, March 17, 2014, Plaintiff left Ridgeview. (PSMF ¶ 144.) Plaintiff arrived home at approximately 5:00 p.m. on that day, unpacked her bags, and spent time with her family. (Id. ¶ 155; see also Scoggins Dep. at 164.) Plaintiff was in Ridgeview's inpatient program for less than three days, and she did not enroll in its outpatient residential program. (FDSMF ¶ 120.) Plaintiff asserts that she completed Ridgeview's inpatient treatment program (Scoggins Dep. at 76), and contends that she did not request a discharge, but rather had been told by all the doctors at Ridgeview that she would go home after four days. (PSMF ¶ 145.)
Plaintiff's Discharge Summary from Ridgeview states, in relevant part:
The patient was admitted to Ridgeview Recovering Professionals Addiction Program [on 03/14/14] under the services of Dr. Steven Lynn. . . . She requested AMA discharge. . . . She refused the Ridgeview Recovering [*36]  Professionals Program and insisted on an outpatient referral. . . . On 3/17, the patient was discharged. 
AMA. . . .
PROGNOSIS: Guarded secondary to the patient being discharged 
against medical advice
(FD Ex. T (Docket Entry No. 203-19) at 3-4.)
AMA stands for "against medical advice." Someone at Ridgeview struck through two "AMA" designations in the above-quoted excerpt. The words "against medical advice" in the prognosis section were also struck through by hand and the word "administratively" inserted in their place. The date of the change was listed as December 2, 2014. After the change, the prognosis reads: "Guarded secondary to the patient being discharged administratively." (FD Ex. T at 4.) The Court agrees with Judge Johnson that, "[g]iven the similarities between Dr. Lynn's signature above his signature line and the initials following that handwritten strike through, it appears that Dr. Lynn changed the discharge from AMA to administrative." (Final Report & Recommendation at 37.)
Defendants assert that Plaintiff was discharged from Ridgeview against medical advice, and that, after the litigation began in November 2014, Plaintiff called Dr. Lynn and asked him to remove the AMA designation [*37]  from the Discharge Summary. (FDSMF ¶¶ 122-24.) Plaintiff responds that she received an administrative discharge before she left Ridgeview, and that she never requested to be discharged from Ridgeview's inpatient treatment program, but simply requested to go to an outpatient program that did not involve staying overnight. (PSMF ¶¶ 151-52; see also PR-FDSMF ¶ 122.)47 Plaintiff adds that she does not know when she requested removal of the AMA designation, but that she requested at the time she left Ridgeview not to be discharged AMA because she was going to outpatient treatment. (PR-FDSMF ¶ 123.)
Plaintiff testified that it was her understanding that Defendant Stuenkel wanted her to stay at Ridgeview for its outpatient residential program. (Scoggins Dep. at 139.) As previously discussed, Plaintiff did not want to do so. When Plaintiff left Ridgeview, she did not inform Defendant Stuenkel or Defendant Biuso that she had done so. (FDSMF ¶ 125.)48

P. Plaintiff's Activities After Leaving Ridgeview
On Plaintiff's first full day at home, Tuesday, March 18, 2014, she conducted research on the Internet concerning outpatient treatment options, and telephoned some of those options. (PSMF ¶ 156.) On Wednesday, [*38]  Plaintiff made an appointment for the upcoming Friday at Floyd Behavioral Health, and then went to the lake to relax. (Scoggins Dep. at 163, 165; see also FDSMF ¶ 126.)49 Plaintiff returned home from the lake on Thursday. (Scoggins Dep. at 165-66.) Plaintiff did not telephone Defendant Stuenkel on Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday, because she knew that he would be upset that she had left Ridgeview. (Id. at 166; see also FDSMF ¶¶ 127-28.)
On Friday, March 21, 2014, Plaintiff went to Floyd Behavioral Health seeking admission to its outpatient addiction treatment program. (PSMF ¶ 157.)50 After the assessment was completed, Plaintiff received the treatment schedule, which was 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m., Monday through Thursday, with fewer hours on Friday, and which was set to begin on Monday, March 24. (Id. ¶ 159; see also Scoggins Dep. at 171.) Upon Dr. Meyer's review of the assessment, Dr. Meyer determined that Plaintiff should undergo intensive outpatient treatment. (P-SAMF-FD ¶¶ 17-18.)

Q. Defendant Biuso Contacts Ridgeview and Defendant Stuenkel's Memorandum
Meanwhile, approximately a day or so after Plaintiff went to Ridgeview, Defendant Biuso telephoned Ridgeview and asked about Plaintiff; [*39]  he was told that Plaintiff had not signed a consent to release her medical information. (PSMF ¶ 163; see also FDSMF ¶¶ 130-31.)
On Monday, March 17, 2014, Matthew Gorman51 drafted a memorandum for Defendant Stuenkel directed to Floyd's Executive Leadership Team, which explained that Plaintiff "has taken a medical leave of absence from her position as administrator and chief nursing officer of Floyd Polk Medical Center," and that everyone was "wishing her a full and prompt recovery." (PSMF ¶ 237; see also id. ¶¶ 161, 232.) More than fifty people received the memorandum. (PSMF ¶ 238; see also FDSMF ¶ 117.)
Approximately four days after Plaintiff went to Ridgeview, or on Tuesday, March 18, Defendant Biuso telephoned Ridgeview a second time, and was told that Plaintiff could sign a release if she were there, which Defendant Biusco took to mean that Plaintiff had left. (PSMF ¶ 164; see also DDSMF ¶ 41; FDSMF ¶¶ 132-33.) R. Defendant Stuenkel Terminates Plaintiff's Employment
On or about Friday, March 21, 2014, Defendant Biuso told Defendant Stuenkel that someone at Ridgeview said that Plaintiff was no longer there. (PSMF ¶ 165; see also DDSMF ¶ 42; FDSMF ¶ 134.) Upon hearing that Plaintiff was [*40]  no longer at Ridgeview, Defendant Stuenkel was upset, wanted to know where Plaintiff was, and wanted to talk to Plaintiff. (PSMF ¶ 166.) Defendant Stuenkel was upset because Plaintiff had left treatment, and treatment was a condition of her employment. (Id. ¶ 167; see also FDSMF ¶ 135.) Defendant Stuenkel also wanted updates about Plaintiff's treatment so the next steps in Defendant Floyd's relationship with Plaintiff could be determined, but that was not possible because Plaintiff would not allow Defendants Stuenkel and Biuso to converse with Ridgeview personnel. (PSMF ¶ 168.)
After Defendant Biuso told Defendant Stuenkel that Plaintiff was no longer at Ridgeview and had not signed a release of her medical information to them, Defendant Stuenkel called Plaintiff on March 21, 2014, and left a voicemail message in which he said, among other things: "We have been in contact with the program inquiring about the consent that you needed to sign. I understand you have not signed the consent, and we also understand you're no longer a patient. So we need to talk about what happens next." (PSMF ¶ 169; see also DDSMF ¶ 43; FDSMF ¶¶ 136-37.) When Defendant Stuenkel left the message for Plaintiff, [*41]  he did not yet know that he would terminate her employment. (PSMF ¶ 171.) Stated differently, he made the decision to terminate her employment during the telephone call discussed below. (FDSMF ¶ 143.)
About two hours after Defendant Stuenkel left that message, Plaintiff returned his call; Defendant Stuenkel went into Defendant Biuso's office to take the call; and Defendant Stuenkel told Plaintiff that, by leaving the Ridgeview program, she had disobeyed his directive. (PSMF ¶ 170; see also DDSMF ¶ 43; FDSMF ¶¶ 138-39.) Defendant Stuenkel also told Plaintiff that she did not provide authorization for him to talk to her medical providers. (PSMF ¶ 172.) Defendant Stuenkel reiterated that their agreement and the condition of Plaintiff's employment was that Plaintiff complete the inpatient program at Ridgeview. (FDSMF ¶ 141.)
After Plaintiff told Defendant Stuenkel that she was no longer at Ridgeview, that she did not need to be, and that she was enrolled in the Floyd Behavioral Health outpatient program, Defendant Stuenkel told Plaintiff that he had lost trust in her and fired her. (PSMF ¶¶ 173-74, 181-82; see also DDSMF ¶ 43; FDSMF ¶¶ 129, 140, 142.) Defendant Stuenkel did not decide to [*42]  fire Plaintiff until Plaintiff told him that she was no longer at Ridgeview and had applied to the outpatient treatment program at Floyd Behavioral Health. (PSMF ¶ 183.) The decision to terminate Plaintiff was made solely by Defendant Stuenkel. (DDSMF ¶ 144; see also PSMF ¶¶ 184, 188.)52
Defendant Stuenkel terminated Plaintiff's employment in part because it was unacceptable to him that she had left Ridgeview, and "she didn't follow through on the agreed-upon plan that she agreed to" of going to treatment there. (PSMF ¶ 189, as modified per FDR-PSMF ¶ 189; see also PSMF ¶ 175.) Defendant Stuenkel's other reasons included the fact that Plaintiff was absent for several days without informing him where she was. (Stuenkel Dep. at 72; see also PSMF ¶ 217, as modified per record cited, to reflect Defendant Stuenkel's testimony that Plaintiff's insubordination began by not communicating with Defendant Floyd while at Ridgeview, and then continued with several days of absence with no communication.) Defendant Stuenkel believed that those actions constituted insubordination and grounds for termination under the Employment Agreement. (FDSMF ¶ 144.)53
When Defendant Stuenkel terminated Plaintiff, she [*43]  raised the question of being on FMLA leave. (PSMF ¶ 190.) Later that day, Defendant Stuenkel sent an email to Floyd's Director of Human Resources, Beth Bradford,54 which stated as follows:
I told [Plaintiff] she is terminated. She raised the FMLA issue and I told her she failed to communicate and follow our direction in her treatment plan so our relationship is terminated. So, no leave. I told her termination. We can make it without cause I suppose.
(Id. ¶ 191; see also FDSMF ¶ 152; Pl.'s Ex. 47 (Docket Entry No. 192-17).)55
Although Defendant Stuenkel believed that Plaintiff's termination was with cause, he decided as an accommodation to offer her three months' salary and view her termination as without cause, but if she did not accept that offer, then the termination would be with cause. (PSMF ¶ 212, as modified per FDR-PSMF ¶ 212; see also FDSMF ¶ 153.) Defendant Floyd contends that it terminated Plaintiff "with cause" under Section 5(e) of the Employment Agreement. (PSMF ¶ 203.)

S. Post-Termination Events
On Monday, March 24, 2014, Plaintiff went to Floyd Behavioral Health for approximately two hours. (Scoggins Dep. at 170.) Plaintiff never returned to Floyd Behavioral Health after this one [*44]  visit. (Id. at 250.) Thus, the only treatment that Plaintiff has received for her drug addiction occurred during her few days at Ridgeview. (FDSMF ¶ 37.) Plaintiff, however, participates in a twelve-step support group program. (PSMF ¶ 160.)56
Also on March 24, Plaintiff met with Ms. Bradford. (FDSMF ¶ 155.) Ms. Bradford told Plaintiff that Defendant Stuenkel had terminated Plaintiff with cause under the Employment Agreement. (Id. ¶ 156.) Ms. Bradford offered Plaintiff a severance agreement with a payout of three months' salary, but Plaintiff did not sign it. (Id. ¶ 157.)57 According to Plaintiff, Ms. Bradford told her that Defendant Stuenkel offered Plaintiff three months' pay because that was the length of time that Plaintiff might have been on FMLA leave. (PSMF ¶ 193.) Plaintiff told Ms. Bradford that she had gone to Ridgeview and then tried to attend Floyd Behavioral Health's outpatient treatment program. (Id. ¶ 158.) Also on March 24, Defendant Stuenkel sent an email to numerous individuals at Defendant Floyd, informing them that Plaintiff would "not be returning from her medical leave." (FDSMF ¶ 146; see also FD Ex. U [203-20], at 2.)58
When the local newspaper published a story about this [*45]  litigation,59 Defendant Stuenkel responded that Defendant Floyd does not comment on pending litigation. Given that publicity, Defendant Stuenkel also informed approximately 150 employees at a Defendant Floyd leadership meeting that what they had read in the newspaper was Plaintiff's side of the story and that Defendant Floyd would vigorously defend itself. Defendant Stuenkel also gave a general recounting of the facts regarding Plaintiff as they occurred to the Polk Medical Center, Inc., to the Cedartown-Polk County Hospital Authority, to Defendant Floyd's management board, and to Defendant Floyd's senior executive team. (PSMF ¶ 239, as modified per record cited; see also FDSMF ¶ 118.)60
Following Plaintiff's termination from Floyd, she sought work as a registered nurse. (FDSMF ¶ 161, as modified per record cited.) Plaintiff currently works part-time for $35 per hour with benefits. (FDSMF ¶ 159; see also P-SAMF-FD ¶ 16.)61

T. Defendant Floyd's Treatment of Other Addicted Employees
Defendant Stuenkel has knowledge of three male employees whom Defendant Floyd sent to inpatient treatment for addiction. (PSMF ¶ 195; see also FDSMF ¶ 167.) Defendant Floyd used the Ridgeview program for those [*46]  employees' treatment. (FDSMF ¶ 164.) Facts related to these three male employees are as follows.62
In approximately 2006, a department level manager who reported to Defendant Stuenkel was exhibiting characteristics of addiction, including frequent absences. Defendant Floyd's then-Chief Medical Officer, Dr. Dee Russell, and Defendant Stuenkel met with this individual, who admitted to alcoholism. Defendant Stuenkel and Dr. Russell told this manager that he was required to seek inpatient treatment or else be terminated. The individual agreed to go to treatment, which Defendant Floyd arranged, completed the program, and came back after care, but he ultimately resigned and relapsed into alcoholism after leaving Defendant Floyd's employment. (FDSMF ¶ 167a, as modified per Stuenkel Dep. at 113-18.)
The second instance occurred in approximately 2011, when a physician was exhibiting signs of addiction--alcoholism. Dr. Russell interviewed the doctor, who admitted that he had an addiction problem.63 Defendant Floyd required the doctor to attend an inpatient treatment program. The doctor successfully completed treatment and came back to work. Ultimately, after the doctor exhibited behavior suggesting [*47]  that he was not in recovery, he resigned in lieu of termination. (FDSMF ¶ 167b, as modified per Stuenkel Dep. at 120-25; see also PSMF ¶ 200.)
The third instance occurred in approximately 2012 or 2013 with an employee physician who exhibited signs of addiction to prescription medications. In an intervention meeting with Dr. Russell, or possibly Defendant Biuso, the physician was required to attend inpatient treatment or be terminated.64 The employee completed the treatment successfully, is still employed with Defendant Floyd, and is doing well. (FDSMF ¶ 167c, as modified per Stuenkel Dep. at 125-29; see also PSMF ¶ 201.)
Defendant Stuenkel testified that, when faced with impaired employees, Defendant Floyd seeks to help those employees by obtaining their agreement to go into an inpatient program and be assessed, and then to start a dialogue about what happens next. (Stuenkel Dep. at 119-20; see also PSMF ¶ 186.) Defendant Floyd has obtained those agreements by informing the employees that, if they did not agree to inpatient treatment, then they would be fired. (Stuenkel Dep. at 120.)65
According to Defendant Stuenkel, in the past there had been an agreement with the individual to get into [*48]  a program, get assessed, and come up with a plan via communication back and forth with the individual and the treatment center. (FDSMF ¶ 165.) Defendant Stuenkel believed that this procedure was in the employee's best interest because it got the employee help. Plaintiff was the first employee who had failed to communicate with Defendant Stuenkel during treatment. (Id. ¶ 166.)

IV. Summary Judgment Standard
The Court applies the same summary judgment standard as set forth in the Final Report and Recommendation. (Final Report & Recommendation at 50-52.)

V. Discussion
Plaintiff's claims for FMLA interference (Count I), FMLA retaliation (Count II), ADA discrimination (Count III), ADA failure to accommodate (Count IV), ADA retaliation (Count V), ADA prohibited examinations, inquiries, and unlawful disclosures of confidential medical information (Count VI), Title VII sex discrimination (Count VII), and breach of contract/stubborn litigiousness (Count X) are asserted only against Defendant Floyd. (Second Am. Compl. (Docket Entry No. 103) ¶¶ 89-142, 157-61.) Plaintiff's claims for negligence per se (Count VIII), violation of the statute creating the GPDMP (Count IX), and invasion of privacy/wrongful [*49]  disclosure (Count XI) are asserted against all Defendants. (Id. ¶¶ 143-56, 162-64.) The Court follows Judge Johnson's practice of first addressing Plaintiff's federal claims against Defendant Floyd, and then discussing Plaintiff's state law claims.

A. Plaintiff's Federal Claims Against Defendant Floyd

1. Plaintiff's ADA Claims
Plaintiff alleges that Defendant Floyd violated the ADA by terminating her because it "regarded" her as disabled (Count III); by failing to grant reasonable accommodation for her disability (Count IV); by retaliating against her for exercising her rights (Count V); and by engaging in prohibited examinations and inquiries and unlawful disclosures of confidential medical information (Count VI).

a. Counts III and IV
Judge Johnson provided an accurate and thorough description of the law governing ADA claims in general. (Final Report & Recommendation at 54.) Further, the Court finds that Judge Johnson correctly concluded that both of the ADA claims set forth in Counts III and IV failed because "the ADA expressly excludes from the class of qualified individuals protected by the statute any employee 'who is currently engaging in the illegal use of drugs, when the covered [*50]  entity acts on the basis of such use.'" (Final Report & Recommendation at 55 (quoting 42 U.S.C. § 12114(a).) The Court also agrees with Judge Johnson's determination that this exclusion also applies to the illegal misuse of prescription drugs, (Id. at 55-57.) Moreover, Judge Johnson properly concluded that no genuine dispute remained as to whether Plaintiff was misusing illegal prescription drugs. (Id. at 57-66.) Judge Johnson's thorough analysis of the relevant law and the evidence in the record, including Plaintiff's GPDMP printout and history of obtaining prescriptions supports this determination. Indeed, Plaintiff could not have obtained so many Ambien pills or opiate and narcotic medications if she had not engaged in misrepresentation, deception, or subterfuge to the prescribing physicians. (Id. at 64-65.) The Court agrees with Judge Johnson that:
No reasonable juror could come to any other conclusion but that [Plaintiff] engaged in doctor shopping, and that she did not inform the physicians to whom she was making requests for controlled substances that she was concurrently receiving the same drugs from other doctors. Although [P]laintiff may have been "in denial" about her condition (see PL's Br. [228] 15 & 16 n.4), that does not change [*51]  the record evidence, which shows conclusively that [Plaintiff] was concealing her misuse of prescription drugs from various doctors in order to obtain more. Her non-disclosure violated both the CSA (21 U.S.C. § 843(a)(3)) and Georgia law (O.C.G.A. § 16-13-43(a)(6)). Given the large number of drugs and doctors, there was no supervision by a licensed health care professional.
(Id. at 65.) To the extent that Plaintiff argues in her Objections that Judge Johnson "erroneously construed evidence" against her by "incorrectly finding that she misrepresented and deceived doctors concerning her addiction in order to illegally acquire drugs," contending that "[t]he evidence shows that she lacked the capacity for this criminal scienter because . . . she was not aware that she suffered from addiction or substance use disorder," the Court overrules the objection. (Pl.'s Objs. at 9, 24-26.) The Court also rejects Plaintiff's contention that Judge Johnson "erroneously focused on irrelevant and immaterial details of [her] prescription drug history and the places she filled her prescriptions," and that Judge Johnson "badly misconstrued against [Plaintiff] the evidence relating to her prescriptions and what she said to [Defendant] Bouldin when she first asked [*52]  him to write her a prescription for Ambien." (Id. at 10-11, 24-26.) Further, the Court overrules Plaintiff's objections contending that Judge Johnson "misunderstood" and "misconstrued" her GPDMP records. (Id. at 12-13, 24-26.)
Thus, as a matter, of law, Plaintiff was not a qualified individual for purposes of the ADA. (Final Report & Recommendation at 65.) Judge Johnson therefore correctly recommended that the Court grant Defendant Floyd's Motion for Summary Judgment as to Plaintiff's ADA claims in Counts III and IV. The Court adopts this portion of the Final Report and Recommendation, overrules Plaintiff's corresponding Objections, denies Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment as to those claims, and grants Defendant Floyd's Motion for Summary Judgment as to those claims.

b. Counts V and VI
In Count V, Plaintiff asserts an ADA retaliation claim. In Count VI, Plaintiff claims that Defendant Floyd violated the ADA by engaging in prohibited examinations and unlawful disclosures of confidential medical information.

i. The ADA Retaliation Claims (Count V)
Judge Johnson correctly noted that his determination "that [P]laintiff was not a qualified individual due to her current illegal drug use is not dispositive of her retaliation [*53]  claim." (Final Report & Recommendation at 66.) Judge Johnson properly analyzed the law and the evidence to determine that Plaintiff failed to establish a prima facie case of ADA retaliation with respect to her request for outpatient drug treatment at Floyd Behavioral Health instead of inpatient treatment at Ridgeview. (Id. at 66-70.) Specifically, Judge Johnson correctly found:
The existing substantive law holds that employers like [Defendant] Floyd need not provide reasonable accommodation to employees like [Plaintiff] who are currently engaged in the illegal use of drugs. See Salley v. Circuit City Stores, Inc., 160 F.3d 977, 981 (3d Cir. 1998) ("Congress has decided to treat drug and alcohol addiction differently from other disabilities by ensuring that employers do not have to go through the accommodation process in these cases."); Den Hartoq v. Wasatch Acad., 129 F.3d 1076, 1086 (10th Cir. 1997) ("[E]mployers need not make any reasonable accommodations for employees who are illegal drug users and alcoholics."); Quinones v. Univ, of P.R., No. CIV. 14-1331 JAG, 2015 WL 631327, at *5 (D.P.R. Feb. 13, 2015) ("[I]t is clear from both the text of the ADA and its legislative history that Congress intended to treat drug addiction differently from other impairments and disabilities by allowing employers not to go through the reasonable [*54]  accommodation process and, instead, terminate their employees on the basis of their drug use[.]"); E.E.O.C. v. Grane Healthcare Co., 2 F. Supp. 3d 667, 702 (W.D. Pa. 2014) (ADA does not require covered employers to reasonably accommodate individuals whose shortcomings are attributable to ongoing drug and alcohol addiction); and Veltri v. Thompson Consumer Elecs., Local No. 178, No. 3:CV-02-0645, 2004 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 31710, 2004 WL 1490522, at *5 (M.D. Pa. May 18, 2004) ("Her alleged disability due to chemical dependency was not subject to accommodation.").
Because [P]laintiff had no right to reasonable accommodation given her current illegal use of drugs, she could not have had a good faith, objectively reasonable belief that she was entitled to it. Thus, her request for accommodation does not constitute statutorily protected activity and her opposition clause claim fails.
(Id. at 70.) To the extent that Plaintiff argues otherwise in her Objections, the Court overrules the objections. (PL's Objs. at 27-30.) The Court therefore adopts this portion of the Final Report and Recommendation, overrules Plaintiff's corresponding Objections, denies Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment as to this retaliation claim, and grants Defendant Floyd's Motion for Summary Judgment as to this retaliation claim.

ii. Refusal to Sign a Release
As an initial matter, the Court finds that Judge [*55]  Johnson correctly evaluated the evidence in the record concerning Plaintiff's refusal to sign a release. (Final Report & Recommendation at 70-72.) The Court agrees with Judge Johnson's determination that "it is undisputed that the release [P]laintiff refused to sign would have allowed her healthcare providers at Ridgeview to discuss their treatment of her for drug addiction with [Defendant] Floyd personnel." (Id. at 72.) To the extent that Plaintiff argues otherwise in her Objections, the Court overrules the objection. (PL's Objs. at 30-33.) Under those circumstances, Judge Johnson correctly concluded that the issue for the Court to determine "is whether [P]laintiff's refusal to sign that release constituted statutorily protected activity." (Final Report & Recommendation at 72.)66 The Court overrules Plaintiff's Objections to this portion of the Final Report and Recommendation.
Judge Johnson accurately summarized the relevant portions of the ADA and related authority, including the Enforcement Guidance issued by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (the "EEOC"). (Final Report & Recommendation at 72-75.) Judge Johnson also correctly determined that:
The undisputed facts show that [Defendant] Floyd sent [P]laintiff [*56]  to Ridgeview for treatment for her drug addiction. Ridgeview alone conducted the inpatient drug abuse treatment and determined what occurred there. There is no evidence that Floyd, in the words of the ADA, "require[d] a medical examination of plaintiff." See 42 U.S.C. § 12112(d)(4)(A). Therefore, this prohibition against medical examinations contained in the statute does not apply here.
(Id. at 75.) To the extent that Plaintiff argues otherwise in her Objections, the Court overrules the objection. (Pl.'s Objs. at 30-33.)
Judge Johnson also properly evaluated the law concerning disability-related inquiries under the ADA and the EEOC's Enforcement Guidance. (Final Report & Recommendation at 75-78.) The Court agrees with Judge Johnson that:
The evidence related to this claim shows that [Defendant] Floyd did not make any disability-related inquiries of [Plaintiff]. Instead, [Defendant] Floyd wanted her to sign a release so that it could ask questions of her doctors at Ridgeview. In this scenario, the third example in the above-quoted list of potentially unlawful disability-related inquiries (i.e., "asking an employee's . . . doctor. . . about an employee's disability") may apply. If [Defendant] Floyd sought the release so [*57]  that it could ask Ridgeview personnel about any disability plaintiff may have had, then that may have been unlawful. However, "Questions that are not likely to elicit information about a disability are not disability-related inquiries and, therefore, are not prohibited under the ADA." See EEOC's Enforcement Guidance, 2000 EEOPUB LEXIS 7668, 2000 WL 33407181, at *3 (emphasis in original).
The Court must view the inquiries that [Defendant] Floyd wanted to make of [P]laintiff's doctors at Ridgeview against the backdrop of what occurred here. Plaintiff was at Ridgeview because [Defendant] Floyd sent her there for treatment for addiction to prescription drugs. As already ruled, [Plaintiff] was currently engaged in the illegal use of drugs. It is acceptable for an employer to ask "an employee about his/her current illegal use of drugs." EEOC's Enforcement Guidance, 2000 EEOPUB LEXIS 7668, 2000 WL 33407181, at *3. In a footnote following that quoted language, the EEOC opines: "An individual who currently uses drugs illegally is not protected under the ADA; therefore, questions about current illegal drug use are not disability-related inquiries." 2000 EEOPUB LEXIS 7668, [WL] at *17 n.27 (citing 42 U.S.C. § 12114(a) and 29 C.F.R. § 1630.3(a)). If it was permissible to make inquiries of [P]laintiff about her current illegal drug use, then it would be permissible to make inquiries of her doctor about her current illegal drug [*58]  use.
The record shows that, had [P]laintiff signed the release, [Defendant] Floyd's inquiries of the doctors at Ridgeview would not have elicited information about a disability. Instead, [Defendant] Stuenkel wanted the release in order to obtain information about [P]laintiff's treatment for drug abuse by Dr. Lynn at Ridgeview so he could determine what the next steps in [Defendant] Floyd's relationship with [Plaintiff] might be. (PR-FDSMF ¶ 108.) He wanted details like the length of the inpatient program, what the outpatient program might look like, and what the timeline for these programs might be. (FDSMF ¶ 109.) Although some of [Plaintiff's] medical information might have been disclosed in those inquiries, the focus of the inquiries would have been on how [P]laintiff was progressing in her treatment for current illegal drug use and when she could return to work.
With regard to the first prima facie element of a retaliation claim, Plaintiff's refusal of [Defendant] Floyd's request that she sign a release constitutes statutorily protected activity only if she had a good faith, objectively reasonable belief that [Defendant] Floyd was not allowed to make inquiries of her doctor about [*59]  her current illegal drug use. As with the other opposition clause retaliation claim discussed above, the objective reasonableness of [P]laintiff's belief must be measured against existing substantive law. Because the existing substantive law allows [Defendant] Floyd to make inquires of the doctor treating an employee for current illegal drug use, [P]laintiff's refusal to sign the release was not statutorily protected activity and her opposition clause claim fails.
(Id. at 76-78.) To the extent that Plaintiff argues otherwise in her Objections, the Court overrules the objection. (PL's Objs. at 30-33.)
In sum, Plaintiff's ADA retaliation claim relating to her refusal to sign a release fails. The Court therefore adopts this portion of the Final Report and Recommendation, overrules Plaintiff's corresponding objections, denies Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment as to that claim,67 and grants Defendant Floyd's Motion for Summary Judgment as to that claim.

c. ADA Prohibited Examinations or Unlawful Disclosures Claim
Plaintiff alleges in Count II that Defendant Floyd violated the ADA by: (1) engaging in prohibited examinations and inquiries; and (2) making unlawful disclosures of confidential medical information. Judge Johnson [*60]  properly analyzed the first contention, and correctly found that "[Defendant] Floyd cannot be liable for requiring a medical examination since there is no evidence that it required one from [P]laintiff." (Final Report & Recommendation at 79.) Likewise, the Court agrees with Judge Johnson that Defendant Floyd "did not make any disability-related inquiries of either [Plaintiff] or her doctor," and that, with respect to Plaintiff's contention that Defendants Stuenkel and Biuso demained that she sign a release, "simply making the demand creates no liability, because only a medical examination or a disability-related inquiry violates the statute." (Id.) To the extent that Plaintiff argues otherwise in her Objections, the Court rejects those arguments. (PL's Objs. at 34-35.)
Further, Plaintiff's claim for unlawful disclosure of confidential medical information also fails. As an initial matter, "there is no evidence that [Defendant] Stuenkel disclosed [P]laintiff's prescription drug history or medical condition to a group of over 150 people," as Plaintiff contends. (Final Report & Recommendation at 80 n.71.) Judge Johnson accurately summarized and discussed the relevant law concerning this claim (id. at 80-82), and correctly [*61]  determined that:
The statutory provisions cited by [P]laintiff have no application here, because there is no evidence that [Defendant] Floyd obtained [P]laintiff's prescription drug history or information about her medical condition (1) as part of an employee health program available to employees at a work site or (2) when making inquiries into her ability to perform job-related functions. If such information was not obtained in either manner, then there is no obligation under the ADA to maintain that information on separate forms and in separate medical files and to treat it as a confidential medical record.
(Id. at 82.) This claim therefore fails as a matter of law, and nothing in Plaintiff's Objections warrants a different conclusion. (PL's Objs. at 35-36.) The Court adopts this portion of the Final Report and Recommendation, overrules Plaintiff's corresponding objections, denies Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment on her claim based on alleged unlawful disclosures of confidential medical information, and grants Defendant Floyd's Motion for Summary Judgment as to that claim.

2. Plaintiff's FMLA Claims (Counts I and II)

a. FMLA Interference
Judge Johnson correctly summarized the law generally governing FMLA [*62]  claims, as well as the law relevant to FMLA interference claims. (Final Report & Recommendation at 83-84.) Judge Johnson properly found that, for purposes of Plaintiff's FMLA interference claim, Plaintiff failed to establish a serious medical condition based on "continuing treatment" under 29 C.F.R. § 825.115. (Id. at 84-88.) Specifically, the Court agrees with Judge Johnson that Plaintiff failed to create a genuine dispute as to whether she had a period of incapacity of more than three consecutive, full calendar days. (Id. at 87-88.)68
Judge Johnson, however, correctly noted that "[P]laintiff could still proceed under 29 U.S.C. § 2611 (11 )(A)." (Final Report & Recommendation at 88.) Judge Johnson accurately summarized the relevant law concerning this issue, (Id. at 88-91.) The Court agrees with Judge Johnson that:
In the unusual situation presented here, [P]laintiff satisfies 29 U.S.C. § 2611(11)(A) because her inpatient care shows that she had a serious health condition, and she satisfies 29 U.S.C. § 2612(a)(1)(D) because, during the inpatient treatment that [Defendant] Floyd believed was necessary, [Plaintiff] had to be absent from work and was unable to perform the essential functions of the position during that absence. Accordingly, she was entitled to FMLA leave under 29 U.S.C. § 2612(a)(1). However, [Defendant] Floyd [*63]  denied FMLA leave to her, which gives her an interference claim.
(Id. at 91 (citations and footnote omitted).)69 The Court, however, cannot grant summary judgment in Plaintiff's favor on this claim, given the factual disputes as to whether Defendant Floyd would have discharged Plaintiff even if she had not been on FMLA leave, (Id. at 92.)70 The Court also cannot grant summary judgment in Defendant Floyd's favor on this issue, because a factual dispute remains concerning Defendant Floyd's demands and what was required of Plaintiff. (Id. at 92-96.) As Judge Johnson noted:
Although it is undisputed that [Defendant] Floyd made [P]laintiff's completion of inpatient treatment at Ridgeview a condition of continued employment, [Defendant] Stuenkel admitted that he did not tell [P]laintiff how long she had to stay at Ridgeview; instead, the length of her inpatient treatment and the length of her outpatient treatment were decisions to be made between plaintiff and the doctors there. Plaintiff asserts that she completed inpatient treatment; that Dr. Lynn gave her a list of acceptable outpatient treatment centers; that he gave her an administrative discharge; and she was set to begin outpatient treatment, one week after she left [*64]  Ridgeview, at a place (Floyd Behavioral Health) that was closer to her home and less expensive.
(Id. at 95.) Further, as Judge Johnson also pointed out, Defendant Floyd did not claim that it fired Plaintiff for violating Defendant Floyd's drug-free workplace policy. (Id.)71 Under those circumstances, "there are disputed issues of material fact over whether [Defendant] Floyd would have discharged [P]laintiff even if she had not been on FMLA leave." (Id. at 96.) The Court agrees with Judge Johnson that "[t]he finder of fact must determine whether [P]laintiff was insubordinate, failed to communicate, and/or failed to complete the agreed treatment plan (whatever its terms were)." (Id. (footnote omitted).)
For the reasons discussed above, genuine disputes remain as to Plaintiff's FMLA interference claim.72 The Court therefore adopts this portion of the Final Report and Recommendation, denies Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment as to this claim, and denies Defendant Floyd's Motion for Summary Judgment as to that claim.

b. FMLA Retaliation
Judge Johnson correctly analyzed the law governing FMLA retaliation claims. (Final Report & Recommendation at 96-97.) The Court agrees with Judge Johnson that a factual dispute [*65]  remains as to whether a causal connection existed between Plaintiff's protected activity and her termination. Defendant Floyd contends that Defendant Stuenkel did not consider the FMLA when he terminated Plaintiff, that he was unfamiliar with that statute, and that he understood "all of those things would be worked out by human resources after [Plaintiff] received the care she needed on an immediate basis." (FD's Br. (Docket Entry No. 201) at 25; FD's Br. (Docket Entry No. 223) at 4.) The Court, however, agrees with Judge Johnson that
there is a fact dispute over whether [Defendant] Stuenkel considered the FMLA when he terminated [P]laintiff. Indeed, his email to Ms. Bradford shows that the FMLA came up during the conversation in which he terminated plaintiff. While Mr. Stuenkel may have been ignorant of the FMLA's requirements, that is no excuse for allegedly violating it.
(Final Report & Recommendation at 97-98.) Under those circumstances, Plaintiff has established a prima facie FMLA retaliation claim, (Id.) Given that Defendant Floyd articulated legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons for Plaintiff's discharge and that Plaintiff raised a genuine dispute as to whether those reasons [*66]  were pretextual, the Court cannot grant summary judgment for either Plaintiff or Defendant Floyd on this claim. (Id.) To the extent that Plaintiff argues otherwise in her Objections, the Court rejects this argument. (Pl.'s Objs. at 60-61.)
In sum, the Court finds that genuine disputes remain as to Plaintiff's FMLA retaliation claim. The Court therefore adopts this portion of the Final Report and Recommendation, overrules Plaintiff's corresponding Objections, denies Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment as to this claim, and denies Defendant Floyd's Motion for Summary Judgment as to that claim.

3. Plaintiff's Title VII Claim (Count VII)
Judge Johnson accurately set forth the law governing Title VII claims. (Final Report & Recommendation at 99-101.) The Court agrees with Judge Johnson that Plaintiff failed to establish a prima facie case of discrimination based on gender. (Id. at 101.) Under those circumstances, summary judgment against Plaintiff is proper on this claim. (Id. at 101-02.) The Court therefore adopts this portion of the Final Report and Recommendation, denies Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment on her Title VII claim, and grants Defendant Floyd's Motion for Summary Judgment on that claim.73

4. Defendant Floyd's Affirmative Defenses to Damages

a. After-Acquired Evidence
Judge Johnson correctly set forth the law governing Defendant Floyd's after-acquired evidence affirmative defense. (Final Report & Recommendation at 102-06.)74 As Judge Johnson noted:
The undisputed facts show that [Plaintiff] admitted to [Defendant] Floyd that she had an addiction to prescription drugs during the March 2014 boardroom meeting. [Plaintiff's] September 2015 deposition confirmed what [Defendant] Floyd already knew (although it did learn more about when the addiction began and its extent). In other words, evidence of [P]laintiff's drug addiction was not acquired after her termination and during discovery.
Under those circumstances, Defendant Floyd is not entitled to summary judgment on its after-acquired evidence affirmative defense. (Id. at 106.) The Court therefore adopts this portion of the Final Report and Recommendation, and denies Defendant Floyd's Motion for Summary Judgment as to this defense.

b. Failure to Mitigate
Judge Johnson also accurately summarized the law governing failure to mitigate damages. (Final Report & Recommendation at 106-108.) Judge Johnson correctly found that mitigation [*68]  of damages presents a jury issue in this case. (Id. at 107-08.) The Court therefore adopts this portion of the Final Report and Recommendation, and denies Defendant Floyd's Motion for Summary Judgment as to this defense.

B. State Law Claims
Plaintiff asserts state law claims against all Defendants for negligence per se (Count VIII), violation of the statute creating the GPDMP (Count IX), and invasion of privacy/wrongful disclosure (Count XI). Plaintiff asserts a state law claim against only Defendant Floyd for breach of contract/stubborn litigiousness (Count X). The Court addresses those claims in turn.

1. Negligence Per Se Against All Defendants (Count VIII)
Judge Johnson thoroughly and correctly analyzed the law relating to Plaintiff's negligence per se claim based on alleged violations of HIPAA's regulations. (Final Report & Recommendation at 108-113.) The Court agrees with Judge Johnson that Plaintiff's negligence per se claim fails as a matter of law, because HIPAA does not provide a civil remedy and, under Georgia law, a plaintiff may not pursue a negligence per se claim under O.C.G.A. § 51-1-6 if the statute or regulation that supposedly gives rise to the legal duty does not provide a civil remedy. (Id. at 113.) The Court [*69]  therefore adopts this portion of the Final Report and Recommendation, denies Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment as to her negligence per se claim, and grants Defendants' Motions for Summary Judgment as to that claim.

2. Violation of GPDMP (Count IX)
Judge Johnson correctly set forth the history of the GPDMP, its provisions, and its requirements. (Final Report & Recommendation at 114-117.) Judge Johnson correctly construed the GPDMP's provisions (id. at 117-119), and he properly concluded that Dr. Bouldin violated the GPDMP by providing the printout of Plaintiff's prescription drug history that Defendant Bouldin received to Defendant Hardwell (id. at 120). The Court, however, agrees with Judge Johnson that summary judgment in Plaintiff's favor on that claim is inappropriate, as jury disputes exist concerning Defendant Bouldin's related affirmative defenses, including consent, voluntary health care provider immunity, and unclean hands. (Id. at 120-126.)75 The Court adopts this portion of the Final Report and Recommendation, overrules Plaintiff's corresponding Objections, denies Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment as to her GPDMP claim, and denies Defendant Bouldin's and Defendant Floyd's respective Motions as to that [*70]  claim.
Judge Johnson, however, correctly interpreted O.C.G.A. § 16-13-60(e) as precluding GPDMP claims against Defendants Hardwell, Biuso, and Stuenkel, as those Defendants did not receive electronic database prescription drug medication from the agency. (Final Report & Recommendation at 126.) To the extent that Plaintiff argues otherwise in her Objections, the Court overrules the Objections. (Pl.'s Objs. at 43-48.)76 The Court therefore adopts this portion of the Final Report and Recommendation, overrules Plaintiff's corresponding Objections, denies Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment concerning those claims, and grants the Motions for Summary Judgment filed by Defendants Hardwell, Biuso, and Stuenkel as to those claims.
In their Objections, the Defendant Doctors argue that amendments to O.C.G.A. § 16-13-63 that became effective on July 1, 2016, apply to this case and bar Plaintiff's claims under the GPDMP. (Def. Doctors' Objs. (Docket Entry No. 263) at 2-12.) The Floyd Defendants join in that Objection. (Floyd Defs.' Objs. (Docket Entry No. 266) at 1.) For the reasons set forth in the Court's Order addressing the Defendant Doctors' Joint Motion for Leave to File Amended Answers and Joint Motion for Leave to File Joint [*71]  Second Motion for Summary Judgment, the Court finds that those amendments do not apply retroactively. The Court therefore overrules this portion of Defendant Doctors' Objections and the Floyd Defendants' Objections.
In their Objections, the Defendant Doctors also complain that Judge Johnson erred as a matter of law in not adopting the Defendant Doctors' absurdity arguments relating to the GPDMP. (Def. Doctors' Objs. at 13-15.) The Floyd Defendants appear to join in that Objection. (Floyd Defs.' Objs. at 1.) The Court cannot agree with Defendants that applying the GPDMP literally, as Judge Johnson interpreted and applied it in his Final Report and Recommendation, would lead to absurd results. Indeed, the Court finds that applying the GPDMP literally would not, as the Defendant Doctors argue, lead to absurd results. The Court therefore overrules this portion of the Doctor Defendants' Objections and this portion of the Floyd Defendants' Objections.
Finally, the Court cannot conclude, as the Defendant Doctors urge, that the various questions concerning this claim are appropriate for certification to the Georgia Supreme Court at this stage of the proceedings. (Def. Doctors' Resp. Pl.'s Objs.) Instead, certifying those questions [*72]  now would only serve to delay the resolution of this action, and would no doubt lead to piecemeal appeals rather than streamlining the proceedings. The Court therefore denies the Defendant Doctors' requests to certify questions concerning Plaintiff's GPDMP claim to the Georgia Supreme Court.

c. Invasion of Privacy
Judge Johnson accurately set forth the law governing invasion of privacy claims under Georgia law. (Final Report & Recommendation at 126-36.) The Court agrees with Judge Johnson that Plaintiff asserts only two invasion of privacy claims in her Amended Complaint: (1) intrusion upon seclusion; and (2) public disclosure of embarrassing facts.77 (Id. at 127.)

i. Intrusion Upon Seclusion
Judge Johnson correctly found that no genuine dispute remained as to Plaintiff's invasion of privacy claim based on intrusion upon seclusion, as "the undisputed material facts here fail to show any conduct by [D]efendants that is akin to surveillance, a physical trespass upon [Plaintiff's] property, or a physical touching of her person." (Final Report & Recommendation at 129.) To the extent that Plaintiff argues otherwise in her Objections, the Court overrules the Objections. (Pl.'s Objs. at 53-55.) The Court [*73]  therefore adopts this portion of the Final Report and Recommendation, overrules Plaintiff's corresponding Objections, denies Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment on her invasion of privacy claim based on an intrusion upon seclusion, and grants Defendants' various Motions for Summary Judgment as to those claims.

ii. Public Disclosure
Judge Johnson also correctly found that Plaintiff failed to establish an invasion of privacy claim based on public disclosure of embarrassing facts. (Final Report & Recommendation at 130-36.) As Judge Johnson noted:
[E]ven if each individual [D]efendant's disclosure of [P]laintiff's protected health information was wrongful, their communications were private and not to the public. [Defendant] Bouldin told only [Defendant] Hardwell. [Defendant] Hardwell told only [Defendant] Biuso. [Defendant] Biuso told only [Defendant] Stuenkel and [Defendant] Floyd's in-house counsel, Mr. Monk. Without a public disclosure, there is no invasion of privacy claim.
Although [Defendant] Stuenkel disclosed information about [P]laintiff to a larger number of people within the [Defendant] Floyd community, there was no disclosure of embarrassing private facts to the public. As [*74]  already discussed, on March 17, 2014, [Defendant] Stuenkel sent an email to [Defendant] Floyd's Executive Leadership Team (about 50 people) attaching a memorandum drafted by Mr. Gorman which stated that [Plaintiff] had taken a medical leave of absence from her position as administrator and chief nursing officer of Floyd Polk Medical Center, and wished her a full and prompt recovery. On March 24, [Defendant] Stuenkel sent an email to certain [Defendant] Floyd personnel informing them that [Plaintiff] would not be returning from medical leave. Initially informing co-workers that someone has taken a medical leave of absence and then updating them that the person is not returning to work is not disclosing embarrassing private facts to the public.
[Defendant] Stuenkel also gave a general recounting of facts regarding [Plaintiff] as they occurred to Polk Medical Center, Inc., to the Cedartown-Polk County Hospital Authority, to [Defendant] Floyd's management board, and to [Defendant] Floyd's senior executive team. Plaintiff has not submitted any evidence about what [Defendant] Stuenkel said about her in each of those conversations. Assuming, however, that such conversations disclosed embarrassing [*75]  private facts, i.e., that [Plaintiff] had entered a drug addiction treatment program, the recipients were not members of the public, but ones who had a "need to know" about what was going on with one of Floyd's top administrators.
Finally, in response to a local newspaper story about this lawsuit, [Defendant] Stuenkel stated only that [Defendant] Floyd does not comment on pending litigation. He also informed about 150 employees at a [Defendant] Floyd leadership meeting that what they had read in the newspaper was [P]laintiff's side of the story and that [Defendant] Floyd would vigorously defend itself. On neither of these occasions did [Defendant] Stuenkel disclose embarrassing private facts about [Plaintiff] to the public. Instead, it was [P]laintiff who made embarrassing disclosures of private facts to the public when she filed this lawsuit and the local newspaper published her allegations.
(Id. at 133-35 (citations omitted).) To the extent that Plaintiff argues otherwise in her Objections, the Court rejects this argument. (Pl.'s Objs. at 53-55.) In particular, the Court rejects Plaintiff's contentions that Judge Johnson wrongly construed the evidence against her (id. at 53-54), and Plaintiff's argument that [*76]  Defendant Stuenkel informed individuals who did not have a "need to know" the information of the situation (id. at 54-55).
In sum, no genuine dispute remains as to Plaintiff's invasion of privacy claim based the alleged public disclosure of embarrassing private facts. The Court therefore adopts this portion of the Final Report and Recommendation, overrules Plaintiff's corresponding Objections, denies Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment as to this claim, and grants Defendants' respective Motions as to the claim.

4. Breach of Contract/Stubborn Litigiousness (Count X)
Judge Johnson correctly found that genuine disputes preclude summary judgment in either Plaintiff's favor or in Defendant Floyd's favor with respect to Plaintiff's breach of contract claim and her claim for attorney's fees and expenses of litigation under O.C.G.A. § 13-6-11. (Final Report & Recommendation at 136-37.) To the extent that Plaintiff argues in her Objections that Judge Johnson erred by refusing to grant summary judgment in her favor on her breach of contract claims, the Court rejects this argument. (Pl.'s Objs. at 61-62.) The Court adopts this portion of the Final Report and Recommendation, overrules Plaintiff's corresponding Objections, [*77]  denies Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment as to this claim, and denies Defendant Floyd's Motion for Summary Judgment as to this claim.

V. Conclusion
ACCORDINGLY, the Court ADOPTS the Final Report and Recommendation of United States Magistrate Judge Walter E. Johnson [258], OVERRULES the Defendant Doctors' Objections to the Final Report and Recommendation [263], OVERRULES the Floyd Defendants' Objections to the Final Report and Recommendation [266], and OVERRULES Plaintiff's Objections to the Final Report and Recommendation [267]. The Court GRANTS IN PART AND DENIES IN PART Defendant Bouldin's Motion for Summary Judgment [174], GRANTS Defendant Hardwell's Motion for Summary Judgment [175], GRANTS Defendant Biuso's Motion for Summary Judgment [176], DENIES Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment [190], and GRANTS IN PART AND DENIES IN PART Defendants Floyd and Stuenkel's Motion for Summary Judgment [191]. The Court DISMISSES all of Plaintiff's claims against Defendants Hardwell, Biuso, and Stuenkel. The Court DENIES Defendant Bouldin's Motion for Summary Judgment [174] solely as to Plaintiff's claim that Defendant Bouldin violated her rights under the statute creating the GPDMP (Count [*78]  IX), but GRANTS the Motion in all other respects.
The Court DENIES Defendants Floyd and Stuenkel's Motion for Summary Judgment as to Plaintiff's FMLA interference claim asserted against Defendant Floyd (Count I), as to Plaintiff's FMLA retaliation claim against Defendant Floyd (Count II), as to Plaintiff's GPDMP claim against Defendant Floyd based on a theory of respondeat superior (Count IX), and as to Plaintiff's breach of contract/stubborn litigiousness claim against Defendant Floyd (Count X). The Court GRANTS the Motion in all other respects.
The following claims remain for trial: (1) Plaintiff's FMLA interference claim against Defendant Floyd (Count I); (2) Plaintiff's FMLA retaliation claim against Defendant Floyd (Count II); (3) Plaintiff's GPDMP claim against Defendant Bouldin and her corresponding respondeat superior claim against Defendant Floyd (Count IX); and (4) Plaintiff's breach of contract/stubborn litigiousness claim against Defendant Floyd (Count X). The Court ORDERS Plaintiff, Defendant Bouldin, and Defendant Floyd to submit their proposed consolidated pretrial order to the Court WITHIN THIRTY (30) DAYS. Unless directed by the Court to be filed earlier, all Motions [*79]  in Limine and Requests to Charge are due BY NO LATER THAN FOURTEEN (14) CALENDAR DAYS BEFORE the trial of this case is first scheduled to begin. Absent a showing of good cause, the Court will not consider untimely-filed Motions in Limine.
For the benefit of the remaining Parties and their counsel, the Court observes that this case is one that could benefit from referral to a United States Magistrate Judge for mediation proceedings. A trial of this case is likely to be lengthy, expensive, and--if the Parties' filings to date are any indication-extremely contentious and likely to consume a significant amount of the Court's (and the Parties') time and resources. The history of this litigation indicates that the Parties were not inclined to pursue settlement negotiations before proceeding to the summary judgment stage. The Parties, however, may be more inclined to pursue mediation-and more likely to reach a settlement now that the Court has resolved the Parties' various summary judgment motions. At a minimum, an experienced mediator, such as Judge Johnson or another of the Court's very able United States Magistrate Judges, may be able to help the Parties narrow the issues for trial via [*80]  mediation. The Court encourages the Parties and their counsel to consider pursuing mediation, and to notify the Court if they wish the Court to refer this matter to a United States Magistrate Judge to conduct a mediation proceeding.
IT IS SO ORDERED, this the 30th day of August, 2016.
/s/ Harold L. Murphy
United States District Judge


End of Document

