Singleton v. Public Health Trust of Miami-Dade Cnty.
United States District Court for the Southern District of Florida, Miami Division
April 21, 2017, Decided; April 21, 2017, Entered on Docket
CASE NO. 16-20984-CIV-KING

Reporter
2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 61979 *
DR. FRANK I. SINGLETON, Plaintiff, vs. THE PUBLIC HEALTH TRUST OF MIAMI-DADE COUNTY (JACKSON MEMORAL HOSPITAL), Defendant.
Subsequent History: Affirmed by Singleton v. Public Health Trust, 2018 U.S. App. LEXIS 2757 (11th Cir. Fla., Feb. 2, 2018)
Prior History: Singleton v. Pub. Health Trust, 203 F. Supp. 3d 1181, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 97815 (S.D. Fla., July 27, 2016)
Counsel:  [*1] For Dr. Frank I Singleton, Plaintiff: Arthur Thomas Schofield, West Palm Beach, FL.
For The Public Health Trust of Miami-Dade County, Defendant: Leona Nicole McFarlane, LEAD ATTORNEY, Miami-Dade County Attorney's Office, Miami, FL.
For .
Judges: JAMES LAWRENCE KING, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: JAMES LAWRENCE KING
Opinion



ORDER GRANTING DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
THIS MATTER comes before the Court upon Defendant THE PUBLIC HEALTH TRUST OF MIAMI-DADE COUNTY'S Motion for Summary Judgment and Incorporated Memorandum of Law (DE 26), filed February 12, 2017. The Court has additionally considered Plaintiff DR. FRANK I. SINGLETON's Response (DE 34), filed March 8, 2017, and Defendant's Reply thereto (DE 39), filed March 15, 2017. Upon review of the record and careful consideration, the Court finds that Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment should be granted.

BACKGROUND
This is an employment discrimination case arising under Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act. During the relevant time period, beginning in 2007, the first position Plaintiff held at Defendant Hospital was at the Oncology Clinic as an attending physician. At some point in 2008, a new policy was initiated which required all [*2]  doctors to see a minimum of 12 patients per day. Plaintiff struggled to keep up with the required patient volume, and in April 2009, Plaintiff received a Disciplinary Action Report (DAR). In response to the DAR, Plaintiff advised his supervisor, Dr. Thresia Gambon, that he believed his low productivity was due to his having attention deficit disorder (ADD). DE 25-1 at 60. In the meantime, Plaintiff was placed on a performance improvement plan. However, Plaintiff's low productivity continued, and he was issued a second DAR in October 2009, resulting in a three day suspension. Id. at 57. On November 19, 2009, neuropsychiatrist Dr. Doug Johnson Greene issued a report confirming that Plaintiff was diagnosed with ADD, and set forth a list of recommended accommodations. DE 35-2 at 16. On January 20, 2010, a list these recommended accommodations was sent to Plaintiff's union attorney. A meeting with the Employee Assistance Program followed in February 2010, where Plaintiff's supervisor, Dr. Lenworth Anglin, agreed to shadow Plaintiff for a few days to determine how to proceed with accommodation. DE 25-1 at 70. Based on Dr. Greene's recommendations and Dr. Anglin's observations, several accommodations [*3]  were put in place, including (1) Plaintiff was assigned additional support staff (2) Plaintiff was told he could complete his documentation at the end of the day, after patients had left, to avoid keeping patients after hours, (3) Plaintiff's computer was checked by IT staff in response to Plaintiff's concern that his computer was running slowly, (4) Plaintiff was granted permission to develop a special patient form to facilitate organization, (5) Plaintiff was told he could mount boxes on the wall for forms if needed, (6) a printer was placed in Plaintiff's room, and (7) several clinic patients were rescheduled. DE 35-2 at 8. However, despite Defendant Hospital's efforts to accommodate Plaintiff, Plaintiff still could not meet the minimum number of patients per day. DE 25-1 at 73.
On April 14, 2010, Plaintiff was notified that his position at the clinic was being terminated due to budget cuts. Pursuant to the union's Collecting Bargaining Agreement, Plaintiff was eligible to be "bumped" or transferred to another position based upon his seniority. DE 25-1 at 136. As a result, Plaintiff, along with several nurses, were bumped to positions in the Primary Care Department of Jefferson Reaves, [*4]  another facility run by Defendant Hospital. Id.
Upon beginning his new job at the Primary Care Department, Plaintiff was told that he must see a minimum of 16 patients per day. Plaintiff notified his new supervisor, Dr. Michael Sheehan, of his disability and of the accommodations previously implemented for him at the Oncology Clinic. DE 25-2 at 39. Meanwhile, Plaintiff continued to struggle with the patient requirements, which at some point increased from 16 to 20 patients per day. The particular accommodations that Plaintiff requested were never implemented. However, other doctors (who were subject to the same patient volume) were required to cover patients for Plaintiff. In addition, nursing overtime was generated as a result of nurses staying late to assist Plaintiff. On May 17, 2010, Plaintiff was issued his third DAR for failure to meet productivity demands. DE 25-1 at 87. The DAR indicated that Plaintiff was seeing as little as 4 and at most 13 patients per day and that the additional assistance from other doctors and nurses was no longer sustainable for the department. Id. at 233.
On June 11, 2010, Plaintiff filed his first charge with the EEOC, alleging that his requested accommodations [*5]  had not been met, that he had been transferred to Primary Care because of his disability, and that he continued to receive discipline due to his disability. On July 5, 2010, Plaintiff met with Acting Director of Ambulatory Care Karen Esposito, his union attorney Monica Rodriquez, and Dr. Sheehan to discuss his disciplinary issues. Id. at 89. Thereafter, Plaintiff was on military leave through August 2, 2010. Upon his return, Plaintiff was notified that Dr. Esposito had recommended his termination, and that he was being put on paid administrative leave. Id. at 94.
Despite Dr. Esposito's recommendation, Plaintiff was not terminated. Instead, on August 17, 2010, Chief Medical Officer Michael Butler agreed to review Plaintiff's medical charts to reach his own determination as to the allegations of Plaintiff's incompetency. On October 25, 2010, after reviewing Plaintiff's employment history, Dr. Butler offered Plaintiff the temporary position of physician advisor with the Department of Quality and Patient Safety, a position with similar pay that required Plaintiff to "float" to different departments to ensure efficiency on every floor. Id. at 98-102. As a physician advisor, Plaintiff was no longer subject to a demand [*6]  to meet a minimum number of patients per day, as the nature of the job was more administratively oriented. Plaintiff therefore performed his work satisfactorily and without incident. However, on May 26, 2011, Plaintiff was notified that his position as physician advisor was being terminated as a result of a 20% reduction in force. Id. at 115. Roughly 500 employees were affected by this 20% reduction in 2011. DE 25-4 at 11.
On October 24, 2011, Plaintiff filed his second charge with the EEOC, alleging his administrative leave, transfer to the Quality and Patient Safety Department, and eventual termination were retaliatory acts resulting from his initial EEOC charge. DE 1 at 18-19. After receiving a Notice of Right to Sue from the EEOC, Plaintiff filed a complaint in this Court on March 17, 2016. Defendant thereafter filed the instant Motion for Summary Judgment on February 12, 2017. A Response and Reply were timely filed, making this matter ripe for this Court's review.

LEGAL STANDARD
"Summary judgment is appropriate where the pleadings and supporting materials establish that there is no genuine issue as to any material fat and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986) [*7] ; Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). Summary judgment "is properly regarded not as a disfavored procedural shortcut, but rather as an integral part of the Federal Rules as a whole, which are designed to secure the just, speedy[,] and inexpensive determination of every action." Pace v. Capobianco, 283 F.3d 1275, 1284 (11th Cir. 2002). Summary judgment is appropriate unless there is a genuine issue of fact for trial. Agee v. Potter, 216 Fed. Appx. 837, 840 (11th Cir. 2007). "For factual issues to be considered genuine, they must have a real basis in the record." Mize v. Jefferson City Bd. of Educ., 93 F.3d 739, 742 (11th Cir. 1996). In opposing a motion for summary judgment, the nonmoving party "must show specific facts to support that there is a genuine dispute." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). The nonmoving party may not rely on the pleadings, but rather must demonstrate a genuine issue for trial through affidavits, depositions, interrogatory answers, and admissions. Celotex, 477 U.S. at 323-24. The existence of a "mere scintilla" of evidence in support of the nonmoving party's position is insufficient; there must be evidence on which the finder of fact could reasonably find for that party. Nat'l Cas. Co. v. Pickens, 582 F. App'x 839, 840-41 (11th Cir. 2014) (quoting Walker v. Darby, 911 F.2d 1573, 1577 (11th Cir. 1990)).

DISCUSSION
In its Motion for Summary Judgment, Defendant primarily contends that Plaintiff cannot assert a prima facie case for discrimination or retaliation. Plaintiff responds that there are still issues of fact that remain as to both claims. The Court will address each claim in turn.

1. Discrimination Claim
To establish a prima facie case of employment discrimination under the ADA, a plaintiff must demonstrate that (1) he has a disability,1 (2) he is a qualified individual, and (3) the defendant unlawfully discriminated against him because of his disability. D'Angelo v. ConAgra Foods, Inc., 422 F.3d 1220, 1226 (11th Cir. 2005). The ADA defines a qualified individual as one who can, either with or without reasonable accommodations, perform the essential functions his job. 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). "Essential functions are the fundamental job duties of a position that an individual with a disability is actually required to perform." Earl v. Mervyns, Inc., 207 F.3d 1361, 1365 (11th Cir. 2000). To determine what functions of a job are essential, the ADA provides that "consideration shall be given to the employer's judgment." 42 U.S.C. § 12111 (8). Further, "[a] job function also may be essential if there are a limited number of employees among whom performance of the job can be distributed." Earl v. Mervyns, Inc., 207 F.3d 1361, 1365 (11th Cir. 2000) (citing Holbrook v. City of Alpharetta, 112 F.3d 1522, 1526 (11th Cir. 1997)). "Whether a function is essential is evaluated on a case-by-case [*8]  basis." D'Angelo, 422 F.3d at 1230.
Defendant contends that the minimum number of patients to be seen was an essential function of Plaintiff's initial job at the Oncology Clinic and subsequent job in the Primary Care Department. Defendant further argues that Plaintiff's failure to meet the minimum number of patients, despite reasonable accommodations, precludes him from being a qualified individual under the ADA. Plaintiff does not dispute that he could not keep up with the minimum number of patients, but responds that this was not an essential function, but rather, a mere goal of productivity.
The Court has reviewed the record carefully and finds that it is undisputed that the minimum number of patients was an essential function of Plaintiff's positions as a physician at the Oncology Clinic and the Primary Care Department. To begin with, there is ample evidence in the record to show that the hospital was experiencing severe financial difficulty at the time in question, which made employee productivity especially critical. In light of the hospital's looming financial issues, all doctors in Plaintiff's departments were relied upon to meet the same minimum number of patients. Plaintiff's supervisor, Dr. Sheehan, [*9]  testified that meeting patient demand was an essential function for doctors in Plaintiff's position and that Plaintiff's failure to meet productivity requirements was not sustainable for the department. Dr. Esposito likewise testified that the demand for patient volume was required to keep the clinic open during hard financial times. Indeed, even Plaintiff testified that the hospital's financial problems and 20% reduction in force was common knowledge. The importance of having each doctor meet productivity requirements is further evinced by evidence that the staff was "overworked" and that other doctors were required to cover Plaintiff's patients when he could not meet demands. Accordingly, the minimum number of patients was undisputedly an essential function for physicians in these financially struggling departments. The Court therefore turns to whether Plaintiff was a qualified individual under the ADA who could perform the essential functions of his jobs.
As to Plaintiff's first position at the Oncology Clinic, it is undisputed that he could not meet the 12 patient per day minimum, even with reasonable accommodations in place. As discussed, Defendant Hospital had a supervisor shadow [*10]  Plaintiff to determine the best way to help Plaintiff. As a result, additional staff was assigned to assist Plaintiff with administrative tasks. Further, Plaintiff was granted permission to modify his office area to facilitate productivity. However, notwithstanding the Hospital's implementation of these accommodations, Plaintiff could not perform the essential function of seeing the minimum number of patients. Accordingly, with respect to his position as an attending physician at the Oncology Clinic, Plaintiff was not a qualified individual under the ADA. It therefore follows that the termination of Plaintiff's position at the Oncology Clinic was not a discriminatory act.2
The Court next turns to whether Plaintiff was a qualified individual under the ADA in his subsequent position as an internal medicine specialist in the Primary Care Department. Like the Oncology Clinic, the Primary Care Department required physicians to see a minimum number of patients per day. However, the Primary Care Department demanded a greater number of patients, initially requiring doctors to see 16 patients per day and eventually increasing the requirement to 20 patients. Plaintiff nonetheless alleges that [*11]  if Defendant would have accommodated Plaintiff at the Primary Care Department as it had at the Oncology Clinic, Plaintiff could have performed the essential functions of his job. Plaintiff further alleges that Defendant failed to engage in an interactive process to ensure that Plaintiff was reasonably accommodated.
It is true that "[a]n employer must provide reasonable accommodations for employees with known disabilities unless such accommodations would result in undue hardship to the employer." Earl, 207 F.3d at 1365 (citations omitted). Further, "the regulations state that an employer may in some circumstances need to 'initiate an informal, interactive process' with a disabled employee to determine the appropriate reasonable accommodation." Frazier-White v. Gee, 818 F. 3d 1249, 1257 (11th Cir. 2016) (citing 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2 (o)(3)). However, "an employer is not required to accommodate an employee in any manner in which that employee desires." Earl, 207 F.3d at 1367. "Nor does the ADA require an employer to eliminate an essential function of an employee's job or reallocate job duties to change the essential functions of a job." Williams v. Revco Disc. Drug Centers, Inc., 552 F. App'x 919, 922 (11th Cir. 2014) (citing Lucas v. W. W. Grainger, Inc., 257 F.3d 1249, 1260 (11th Cir. 2001)).
Here, although Plaintiff's specific requests were not implemented at the Primary Care Department, the Hospital sought to accommodate Plaintiff's low productivity by having other [*12]  doctors cover his patients and allowing nurses to work overtime to assist him. When these practices were no longer sustainable and caused undue hardship to the department, Plaintiff was accommodated again by being transferred to a position that did not require him to meet a minimum number of patients. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2 (o)(2)(iii)(ADA regulation providing that reassignment to a vacant position is a form of accommodation). The record therefore demonstrates that Defendant Hospital went to great efforts to accommodate Plaintiff's disability, but Plaintiff could not perform the essential functions of his job.
Moreover, under the undisputed facts, Plaintiff cannot demonstrate that his accommodation requests to the Primary Care Department were reasonable. A requested accommodation is only reasonable "if it allows the employee to perform the essential functions of the job." Earl, 207 F.3d at 1365 (citations omitted). If Plaintiff could not meet a 12 patient minimum with the requested accommodations at his previous department, it logically follows that he could not meet a higher volume of 16-20 patients with those same accommodations. Therefore, regardless of whether Plaintiff's specifically requested accommodations had been implemented [*13]  at the Primary Care Department, Plaintiff still could not establish that he could perform the essential function of meeting the minimum number of patients.
Finally, the Court turns to Plaintiff's third and final position with Defendant Hospital as a physician advisor in the Quality and Patient Safety Department. Unlike Plaintiff's first two positions at the Oncology Clinic and the Primary Care Department, the physician advisor position did not require Plaintiff to see a minimum number of patients. In fact, the record demonstrates that Plaintiff neither needed nor requested any accommodations for this position, and performed his work satisfactorily. Accordingly, as to his time as a physician advisor, Plaintiff was a qualified individual under the ADA because (1) he has a qualifying disability and (2) he could perform the essential functions of his job. However, the record demonstrates that Plaintiff fails to satisfy the third factor of a prima facie discrimination claim, that is, a showing that Defendant unlawfully discriminated against him because of his disability. Indeed, there is no evidence whatsoever that the hospital took discriminatory action against Plaintiff. To the contrary, [*14]  the evidence shows that Plaintiff performed his duties without incident or reprimand, and that his ultimate termination was due to a severe 20% reduction in force that the Hospital was undergoing at the time.
In the context of a reduction in force, a Plaintiff alleging that his termination was discriminatory must make a prima facie showing that (1) he was in a protected group and was terminated, (2) he was qualified for another position at the time of discharge, and (3) there is "circumstantial or direct evidence by which a factfinder might reasonably conclude that the employer intended to discriminate ... in reaching the decision not to place him in that other position." de la Cruz v. Children's Trust of Miami-Dade Cty., 843 F. Supp. 2d 1273, 1280 (Judge King S.D. Fla. 2012) (citing Mitchell v. Worldwide Underwriters Ins. Co., 967 F.2d 565, 567-68 (11th Cir.1992)). In de la Cruz,3 the undersigned ultimately found that the plaintiff failed to assert a prima facie case of discrimination in the reduction in force context because he could not demonstrate that he was qualified for an existing, open position at the time of discharge. Id. at 1280.
Likewise, in the instant case, Plaintiff has not attempted to offer any evidence that there was an open position at the hospital that he was qualified to perform. Instead, Plaintiff merely insists that he should have been allowed to [*15]  remain in his initial position at the Oncology Clinic, without offering any evidence that his former position still existed. To wit, when Defense Counsel asked Plaintiff whether Defendant Hospital had assigned someone to fill his former position at the Oncology Clinic, Plaintiff answered "Not that I know of." DE 25-1 at 80. Without evidence that Plaintiff was qualified for an open position at the time he was terminated, Plaintiff has failed to establish a prima facie discrimination claim in the context of a reduction in force.
Accordingly, after careful review of the uncontested facts, the Court finds that Plaintiff's discrimination claims are without merit.

2. Retaliation Claim
The ADA prohibits retaliation against an individual who has opposed an unlawful practice or has filed a charge under the ADA. 42 U.S.C. § 12203(a). A Plaintiff asserting a retaliation claim must show that (1) Plaintiff engaged in a statutorily protected expression, such as requesting reasonable accommodations or filing an EEOC charge (2) Plaintiff suffered an adverse employment action, and (3) there was a causal link between the two. Frazier-White v. Gee, 818 F.3d 1249, 1258 (11th Cir. 2016). In determining whether termination of a position during a reduction in force is legitimate or pretextual, [*16]  a plaintiff must show more than mere speculation as to the Defendant's decision making process. See de la Cruz, 843 F. Supp. 2d at 1281-82.
Plaintiff asserts that his transfers and ultimate termination were issued because of his disability. Plaintiff's assertions, however, are belied by the record. As discussed at length in the previous section of this Order, the record shows that the Hospital attempted to accommodate Plaintiff in each of his departments. Plaintiff's retaliation claim is further belied by the undisputed fact that the Hospital had expressed satisfaction with Plaintiff's performance in his final position as a physician advisor. Therefore, beyond Plaintiff's conclusory assertions, there is no evidence in the record to show Plaintiff was terminated because of his disability. Instead, the record reflects that the Hospital was undergoing significant layoffs during the relevant time period. Plaintiff himself testified that the reduction in force was common knowledge to hospital employees and that other employees in his department were bumped to other departments due to budget cuts. This testimony was corroborated by several witnesses who testified as to Defendant Hospital's financial difficulties at the time. [*17]  For instance, Director of Employee Relations Roberto Campos-Marquetti testified that in 2010, roughly 300 employees were terminated, and in 2011, roughly 500 were terminated. DE 25-4 at 11. Ted Vana, a member of the Hospital Reasonable Accommodation Committee, similarly testified that he recalled financially related layoffs during that time. DE 25-5 at 20. The Acting Director of Ambulatory Care, Dr. Esposito, also testified as to the hospital's poor financial situation. DE 25-3. Indeed, the factual record overwhelmingly indicates that Plaintiff was one of many employees who were unfortunately affected by this 20% reduction in force at the Defendant Hospital.
Accordingly, without evidence that there was a causal link between Plaintiff's disability and Plaintiff's termination, Plaintiff cannot prevail on a retaliation claim.

CONCLUSION
Accordingly, it is ORDERED, ADJUDGED, and DECREED that Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment (DE 26) be, and the same is, hereby GRANTED. By separate Order, the Court shall enter Final Judgment on behalf of Defendant and against Plaintiff.
DONE AND ORDERED in Chambers at the James Lawrence King Federal Justice Building and United States Courthouse, in Miami, [*18]  Miami-Dade County, Florida, this 21st day of April 2017.
/s/ James Lawrence King
JAMES LAWRENCE KING
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE
SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF FLORIDA

FINAL JUDGMENT
Pursuant to Rule 58(a) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, and in accordance with the reasoning set forth in the Court's April 21, 2017, Order Granting Motion for Summary Judgment, it is hereby ORDERED, ADJUDGED, and DECREED that FINAL JUDGMENT is entered in favor of Defendant THE PUBLIC HEALTH TRUST OF MIAMI-DADE COUNTY and against Plaintiff DR. FRANK I. SINGLETON; Plaintiff shall recover nothing; this action is DISMISSED; all pending motions are DENIED AS MOOT; and the Clerk shall CLOSE this case.
DONE AND ORDERED in Chambers at the James Lawrence King Federal Justice Building and United States Courthouse, Miami, Florida, this 21st day of April, 2017.
/s/ James Lawrence King
JAMES LAWRENCE KING
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE
SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF FLORIDA


End of Document

