Smith v. Walmart Assocs.
United States District Court for the Western District of Oklahoma
April 8, 2021, Decided; April 8, 2021, Filed
Case No. CIV-19-662-J

Reporter
2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 261634 *; 2021 WL 9556464
PATRICIA DEANNE SMITH, Plaintiff, v. WALMART ASSOCIATES, INC., Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Patricia Deanne Smith, Plaintiff: Barrett T Bowers, Barrett T Bowers PLLC, Oklahoma City, OK; Jonathan M Irwin, Ward & Glass LLP, Norman, OK.
For Wal-Mart Associates Inc, Defendant: Alyssa N Lankford, Paige H Good, Joshua W Solberg, LEAD ATTORNEYS, McAfee & Taft-OKC, Oklahoma City, OK.
Judges: BERNARD M. JONES, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: BERNARD M. JONES
Opinion



ORDER
Plaintiff filed suit in Oklahoma County District Court alleging, in relevant part, (1) disability discrimination and retaliation under the American with Disabilities Act (ADA); (2) failure to accommodate a disability under the ADA; (3) interference with the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA); and (4) retaliation based on a FMLA request [Doc. No. 1-1].1 Defendant removed the action to this Court and has now moved for summary judgment (Def.'s Mot.) [Doc. No. 68]. Plaintiff has responded (Pl.'s Resp.) [Doc. No. 78] and Defendant has replied [Doc. No. 79].2
For the reasons discussed below, Defendant's motion is DENIED IN PART and GRANTED IN PART.

I. Standard of Review
Summary judgment is appropriate "if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a); see also Hooks v. Atoki, 983 F.3d 1193, 1205 (10th Cir. 2020). Under such a review, the [*2]  Court "'construe[s] the factual record and the reasonable inferences therefrom in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party.'" Alfaro-Huitron v. Cervantes Agribusiness, 982 F.3d 1242, 1249 (10th Cir. 2020).

II. Findings of Fact
The parties disagree on numerous material facts and the Court finds no value in identifying each dispute individually. Thus, to the extent a fact is not listed below, the Court has either deemed it immaterial to the arguments presented herein or it is genuinely disputed.
The Court finds no genuine dispute as to these material facts:
• Plaintiff worked as a Regional Talent Specialist for Walmart from 2006 until March 16, 2017.
• From 2006-2010, and 2012-2013, Plaintiff received either an "[O]n [T]arget" or "Solid Performer" rating on her year-end evaluation. Pl.'s Resp., Ex. 1 at 20-21.
• On Plaintiff's 2011 evaluation,3 she was given an overall rating of Solid Performer with notes to improve communication and organizational skills, including the timely filing of various reports. See Def.'s Mot., Ex. 2.
• Once in 2011 and once in 2013, Plaintiff received a formal coaching4 for credit card late payments (2011) and inadequate organization and communication (2013). See id., Ex. 3.
• On or around January 31, 2014, Plaintiff was given an overall [*3]  evaluation of Development Needed with notes to improve communication and organizational skills, including the timely filing of various reports. Nevertheless, out of twelve categories, Plaintiff was ranked as a Solid Performer in six areas. See id., Ex. 5.
• On or around January 31, 2015, Plaintiff was given an overall evaluation of Solid Performer with notes to improve communication and organizational skills, including the timely filing of various reports. See id., Ex. 7.
• On or around January 31, 2016, Plaintiff was given an overall evaluation of Development Needed with notes to improve communication and organizational skills, including the timely filing of various reports. Nevertheless, out of twelve categories, Plaintiff was ranked as a Solid Performer in six areas. See id., Ex. 13.
• On October 28, 2016, Plaintiff sustained a head injury at her home and reported the incident to her supervisor, Iqbal Atcha, on October 31, 2016. See Pl.'s Resp., Ex. 3 at 9-10; see also Def.'s Mot., Ex. 16.
• On January 3, 2017, Mr. Atcha emailed Lacy Smith, a Sr. Human Resources Manager, with concerns that "since October" Plaintiff had missed numerous deadlines and he had received customer complaints [*4]  about missed deadlines and lack of communication. Def.'s Mot., Ex. 30.
• On January 30, 2017, Mr. Atcha again emailed Lacy Smith to report that Plaintiff was complaining about memory loss and confusion for the last three months due to her head injury. See id., Ex. 33.
• On the same day, Lacy Smith responded that Walmart would "probably need to go down the route for a formal accommodation through the ADA" and inquired as to any accommodations Plaintiff was seeking. Id.
• Lacy Smith does not recall whether she thereafter had any communication with Plaintiff, Mr. Atcha, or any other Walmart employee regarding Plaintiff's probable need for formal accommodations. See Pl.'s Resp., Ex. 2 at 7-9.
• On or around January 31, 2017, Plaintiff was given an overall evaluation of Development Needed with notes to improve communication and organizational skills, including the timely filing of various reports. Plaintiff ranked as a Solid Performer in only one category. See Def.'s Mot., Ex. 23.
• On February 6, 2017, Plaintiff received a formal coaching regarding the same concerns Mr. Atcha raised in his January 3, 2017 email to Lacy Smith. See id., Ex. 25.
• On March 16, 2017, Defendant removed Plaintiff [*5]  from her position.

III. Analysis

A. Plaintiff's ADA Disability Discrimination Claim
The ADA prohibits discrimination based on disability in "job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). Where, as here, there is no direct evidence of discrimination, the Court applies the burden-shifting analysis from McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). See Tesone v. Empire Mktg. Strategies, 942 F.3d 979, 995 (10th Cir. 2019). "First, the plaintiff must make out a prima facie case of discrimination[.]" Id. This requires showing the plaintiff "'(1) is a disabled person as defined by the ADA; (2) is qualified, with or without reasonable accommodation, to perform the essential functions of the job held or desired; and (3) suffered discrimination by an employer or prospective employer because of that disability.'" Id. (citation omitted). Then the "'burden shifts to the defendant to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions.'" Id. (same). Finally, if "'the defendant proffers such a reason, the burden then shifts back to the plaintiff to show that the defendant's stated reasons are merely 'pretextual.'" Id. (same).
Defendant first argues that [*6]  the undisputed facts demonstrate Plaintiff was not terminated because of her disability. See Def.'s Mot. at 20-21.5 In particular, Defendant points to evidence that (1) "Plaintiff had struggled in her role for years and received multiple coachings on performance issues, such as communication, organization and customer service" and (2) Rich Rothman, the Director to Talent Acquisition & Professional Relations, who initiated Plaintiff's termination, did not know about her disability when he recommended her removal. Id. at 21 (brackets and internal quotation marks omitted). But there is also evidence that (1) despite being critiqued for communication and organization issues, Plaintiff was also regularly found to have met expectations or excelled in numerous areas, see supra at 2-3, and (2) Mr. Rothman first stated that he did not know about Plaintiff's head injury until her "displacement conversation" in March 2017 but then averred that Mr. Atcha had discussed Plaintiff's injury with him in 2016. Def.'s Mot., Ex. 43 at 76-77; Pl.'s Resp., Ex. 1 at 78-79.
Additionally, Plaintiff points out that despite being critiqued on her organization and communication for years, there is no evidence [*7]  Defendant considered termination until March 2017, only four weeks after Lacy Smith acknowledged an ADA accommodation would likely be necessary. The "temporal proximity" between Plaintiff's termination and discussions of ADA accommodation "contributes to an inference that Plaintiff's position was eliminated because of [her] disability." Butler v. City of Prairie Vill., Kan., 172 F.3d 736, 749 (10th Cir. 1999). Accordingly, the Court believes Plaintiff has stated a prima facie case for discrimination under the ADA.
Defendant next argues Plaintiff's poor evaluations and numerous coachings are legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions. See Def.'s Mot. at 22-23. But in response, Plaintiff claims these reasons are pretextual. For example, there is evidence that Plaintiff was only evaluated as Development Needed twice before her disability onset and in both instances, she was still rated as a Solid Performer in at least half the categories. Supra at 2-3. Additionally, Plaintiff claims that the reasons she was given for her termination were either (1) based on post-injury (and without accommodation) incidents, (2) factually inaccurate, or (3) were improperly relied upon under Defendant's own policies because the coachings had been cancelled. See Pl.'s [*8]  Resp. at 17-18, 22 (citing evidence in support). Construing this evidence in a light most favorable to Plaintiff, the Court concludes she has alleged sufficient facts to establish genuine issues of material fact on whether the termination was pretextual. As such, the Court DENIES Defendant's motion for summary judgment on Plaintiff's ADA discrimination claim.

B. Plaintiff's ADA Accommodation Claim
The ADA further requires accommodations "to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability" unless the employer shows that "the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of [its] business." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). To succeed, a plaintiff must first establish a prima facie case by showing that "(1) she is disabled; (2) she is otherwise qualified; and (3) she requested a plausibly reasonable accommodation." Punt v. Kelly Servs., 862 F.3d 1040, 1050 (10th Cir. 2017) (internal quotation marks omitted). Once a request is made, an employee must "engage in good faith" "in an interactive process to determine her limitations and consider whether the accommodations she requested, or perhaps others that might come to light during this interactive process," would enable a plaintiff to continue to work. Aubrey v. Koppes, 975 F.3d 995, 1007 (10th Cir. 2020). Finally, [*9]  a plaintiff must also establish that her employer refused to accommodate her disability. See id. at 1005.
Defendant argues there is undisputed evidence that Plaintiff only sought minimal accommodations directly following her injury and that it granted the accommodations. See Def.'s Mot. at 26. To arrive at this conclusion, Defendant asks the Court to rely only on Plaintiff's March 2018 deposition, taken during a worker's compensation case, and to reject Plaintiff's January 2021 deposition testimony as a "sham" attempt to create a genuine issue of material fact. See id. at 26-28. The Court declines to do so.
In March 2018, in her worker's compensation case, Plaintiff averred that she told her supervisor she had a concussion. See id., Ex. 17 at 2. Plaintiff was then asked if she told him she was "having trouble with your job or anything" and she responded:
I don't remember. I know I told him that I felt like, you know, certain things that I needed him to work with me. I initially told him that I needed to take some time off. I had asked immediately after the convention if I could turn in a report late because I was having such a thick brain, I mean, to try to pull the information[] and it hurt to [*10]  think. And he told me, no, I needed to do the report. But then he did let me take off a couple of days at the end of the first week after my concussion, kind of comp. time from being at the convention on Saturday and Sunday.
Id.
In her January 2021 deposition, Plaintiff averred that her supervisor granted an extension for one report but refused to grant an extension on a second report. See Pl.'s Resp., Ex. 3 at 11-12. She discussed that phone conversation, which occurred just days after her head injury, and then was questioned whether she asked her supervisor "for anything else in that phone conversation." Id., Ex. 3 at 12. She answered "[n]ot that she could recall." Id. Then later in her deposition, Plaintiff explained that her doctor "felt like I should work half-days" and she "talked to Iqbal about it." Id., Ex. 3 at 13. More specifically, she stated:
I talked to Iqbal, one, about having - first of all, my doctor said, "Just try to take four days off in a row." So I talked to Iqbal about that. Then later my doctor said maybe possibly just working half-days because I was still having so many issues due to the head injury. So I discussed that with Iqbal as well.
Id. Then when asked whether [*11]  her email to Mr. Atcha (reporting than an imagining scan was normal) was her last communication on the issue, she averred:
I would say that this email states that - that my MRI neuroimaging was normal, which meant that I didn't have a hemorrhage, and he says that's great. I - as - we had discussions numerous times about that I was having issues. We had discussions about my working half-days. We had discussions about my needing four days off in a row. Iqbal was very well aware that I was having some issues due to the concussion.
Id., Ex. 3 at 14. At the deposition, Plaintiff could not recall the specific dates she had the latter conversations. See id.
Defendant argues these two depositions are in conflict and, as it relates specifically to whether Plaintiff requested additional accommodations, the January 2021 deposition "is nothing more than an attempt to create a sham fact issue." Def.'s Mot. at 28-29. Defendant is correct that the Court may "disregard a contrary affidavit . . . when it 'constitutes an attempt to create a sham fact issue.'" Burns v. Bd. of Cty. Comm'rs of Jackson Cty., 330 F.3d 1275, 1282 (10th Cir. 2003) (citation omitted). But the Court sees no conflict here. That is, in her first deposition, Plaintiff was discussing her initial post-injury conversations [*12]  with her supervisor. In the second deposition, Plaintiff repeated similar testimony about those early conversations but then when asked, discussed further conversations she had with the supervisor based on her physician's opinions. The Court will not disregard this testimony, and it clearly disputes Defendant's theory that Plaintiff failed to ask for accommodations. See supra at 7; see also Def.'s Mot., Ex. 40 (Plaintiff's email sent after her termination discussing her frustration that her supervisor did not work with her to find accommodations).
Defendant also points to evidence that (1) when Plaintiff complained of memory issues and deadline concerns, Plaintiff's supervisor "provided her with best practices on how to meet . . . deadlines" and (2) Plaintiff admitted in an email that she did not request a leave of absence. Def.'s Mot. at 28. To Defendant, the latter proves Plaintiff never requested to work half-days. See id. But a reasonable juror could conclude that Plaintiff did not understand working half-days fell under the definition of a leave of absence. And, the evidence fails to establish as a matter of law that Defendant reasonably accommodated Plaintiff's disability when [*13]  the supervisor simply "shared with her how to create calendar appointments in Outlook to help remind her when assignments are due." Def.'s Mot., Ex. 33 (email from Plaintiff's supervisor stating that Plaintiff was seeking accommodations and reporting that in response to her concern about report deadlines he instructed her in how to create calendar appointments).
In sum, the Court finds Plaintiff has provided sufficient evidence to establish a failure to accommodate claim under the ADA and so the Court also DENIES summary judgment on this claim.

C. Plaintiff's FMLA Interference Claim
To establish a claim of FMLA interference, a plaintiff must show "(1) that she was entitled to FMLA leave, (2) that some adverse action by the employer interfered with her right to take FMLA leave, and (3) that the employer's action was related to the exercise or attempted exercise of her FMLA rights." Dalpiaz v. Carbon Cty., Utah, 760 F.3d 1126, 1132 (10th Cir. 2014) (citation and internal quotations omitted). For the second element, "'the employee must show that she was prevented from taking the full 12 weeks of leave . . ., denied reinstatement following leave, or denied initial permission to take leave.'" Id. (citation and internal brackets omitted). If a plaintiff establishes [*14]  these factors, "the employer then bears the burden of demonstrating that the adverse decision was not 'related to the exercise or attempted exercise of the employee's FMLA rights.'" Id. (citation omitted).
Defendant first argues that the undisputed evidence shows Plaintiff never sought FMLA leave, pointing to Plaintiff's email wherein she stated:
Looking back now - I thought I was making the best decision not taking a LOA [(leave of absence)]. I did take 4 days off and said that I could take mental breaks. My dr thought I should work half days. Looking back I should have taken LOA.
Def.'s Mot., Ex. 40. But Plaintiff has provided evidence that she did request to work half-days, see supra at 7, and explained that she did not understand she could request intermittent leave of absences or half-day absences under the FMLA. See Pl.'s Resp., Ex. 3 at 28. In other words, a reasonable juror could interpret her email as referring to her decision not to seek a full-time leave of absence. Construing the evidence in her favor, the Court finds it does not prove she failed to seek FMLA leave. See Winne v. City of Lakewood, Colo., 436 F. App'x 840, 842 (10th Cir. 2011) (noting that "intermittent leave" is defined as "FMLA leave taken in separate blocks of time due to a single [*15]  qualifying reason," "and may include leave of periods from an hour or more to several weeks").
Additionally, Defendant argues that Plaintiff's termination did not interfere with taking FMLA leave. But Plaintiff has presented sufficient evidence that her supervisor did not consider her initial request to take half-days off. See supra at 7. This would constitute interference with FMLA leave. See id. at 9.
Finally, Defendant argues that Plaintiff's termination would have occurred regardless based on her "poor performance that spanned many years, including both before and after her alleged concussion in October 2016." Def.'s Mot. at 34. But the Court has already found that too many genuine facts are in dispute to find, as a matter of law, that Defendant's grounds for terminating Plaintiff were not pretextual. See supra at 5-6. Accordingly, Defendant's motion for summary judgment is DENIED on this claim.

D. Plaintiff's ADA and FMLA Retaliation Claims
Initially, Plaintiff alleged retaliation under both the ADA and FMLA. See supra at 1. However, in her response to the motion for summary judgment, Plaintiff conceded both claims. See Pl.'s Resp. at 5. Accordingly, Defendant's motion for summary [*16]  judgment is GRANTED as to each claim.

IV. Conclusion
Based on the foregoing, Defendant's motion for summary judgment is DENIED as to Plaintiff's claims for ADA discrimination, failure to accommodate a disability under the ADA, and FMLA interference. Conversely, Defendant's motion for summary judgment is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's ADA and FMLA retaliation claims.
IT IS SO ORDERED this 8th day of April, 2021.
/s/ Bernard M. Jones
BERNARD M. JONES
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

