Steinhilber v. Yanfeng US Auto. Interiors I, LLC
United States District Court for the District of South Carolina, Greenville Division
May 11, 2020, Decided; May 11, 2020, Filed
Civil Action No. 6:18-cv-2966-TMC-KFM

Reporter
2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 198727 *
Dillon Steinhilber, Plaintiff, vs. Yanfeng US Automotive Interiors I, LLC, Defendant.
Subsequent History: Adopted by, Objection overruled by, Summary judgment granted by, Motion denied by, As moot Steinhilber v. Yanfeng US Auto. Interiors Sys. I, LLC, 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 151492 (D.S.C., Aug. 21, 2020)
Counsel:  [*1] For Yanfeng US Automotive Interiors Systems I LLC, Defendant: William Stevens Brown, LEAD ATTORNEY, Nelson Mullins Riley and Scarborough, Greenville, SC; Katie Elizabeth Towery, LEAD ATTORNEY, Nelson Mullins Riley and Scarborough (G), Greenville, SC.
For Dillon Steinhilber, Plaintiff: James Lewis Cromer, LEAD ATTORNEY, Cromer Babb Porter and Hicks, Columbia, SC; Julius Wistar Babb IV, LEAD ATTORNEY, Cromer Babb Porter and Hicks, Columbia, SC.
Judges: Kevin F. McDonald, United States Magistrate Judge.
Opinion by: Kevin F. McDonald
Opinion



REPORT OF MAGISTRATE JUDGE
This matter is before the court on the defendant's motion for summary judgment (doc. 44). Pursuant to the provisions of Title 28, United States Code, Section 636(b)(1)(A), and Local Civil Rule 73.02(B)(2)(g) (D.S.C.), all pretrial matters in employment discrimination cases are referred to a United States Magistrate Judge for consideration.
The plaintiff filed this action in state court on October 1, 2018, alleging claims under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, and the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") against his former employer, Yanfeng US Automotive Interiors I, LLC (doc. 1-1). The action was removed by the defendant to this court on November 2, 2018, based on federal question jurisdiction (doc. 1).

FACTS [*2]  PRESENTED
The plaintiff is a transgender male (doc. 1-1, compl. ¶ 9). The plaintiff's transition from female to male included years of hormone therapy, counseling, surgery, and other steps in the process (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 94, 149-51). The plaintiff previously worked for Faurecia as a production supervisor on the door panel line in their manufacturing plant in Fountain Inn, South Carolina (doc. 1-1, compl. ¶ 9). Upon hiring at Faurecia, the plaintiff was still legally a female with the name of "Jamie Steinhilber" (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 89-90). While the plaintiff began identifying as male earlier during this transition process, after beginning employment with Faurecia, he legally changed his name and gender in or around March 2016 (id. 86, 89-90, 149-51). The plaintiff changed his name to "Dillon Jamie Steinhilber" (id. 5). While at Faurecia, the plaintiff reported to the company that he had no "physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities" (doc. 44-1).
On or about July 1, 2016, the defendant acquired Faurecia's Fountain Inn plant (doc. 1-1, compl. ¶ 10; doc. 13, answer ¶ 10). The plaintiff continued to work as a production supervisor in the same plant but as an employee [*3]  of the defendant. He was directly supervised by Production Manager Jeremy Hill (doc. 50-2, Hill dep. 18; doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 50). Around August 2016, the plaintiff was transferred from the day shift to the night shift where he continued to report to Hill (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 41-42). In his new employee paperwork with the defendant, which is dated May 4, 2016, the plaintiff identified as "Dillon J. Steinhilber," a male, and he indicated that he did not have any disabilities for which he needed accommodation (docs. 44-2, 44-3).
Hill suggested that the plaintiff get tested for attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder ("ADHD"), because he felt the plaintiff had some issues at work, including getting upset when someone interrupted him, inattentiveness, and being easily distracted (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 102-05, 146-47, 155). The plaintiff's counselor referred him to Dr. Marc Harari, a licensed clinical psychologist, for evaluation of possible ADHD (id. 95). The plaintiff was tested on July 14, 2016, and, in a report issued July 15, 2016, Dr. Harari noted that the plaintiff endorsed moderate ADHD symptoms but concluded that the plaintiff did not have ADHD and suggested the symptoms were related to [*4]  other issues (id. 112, 157). The plaintiff informed Hill that he had undergone testing and that he did not have ADHD but instead had something else and was going to have further testing (id. 157).
On September 15, 2016, the plaintiff met with Dr. Michelle Peterson, a licensed clinical psychologist in the same practice as Dr. Harari, for testing to evaluate a possible diagnosis for autism spectrum disorder ("ASD") (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 113-16). Dr. Peterson issued a report on September 22, 2016, finding that the plaintiff had moderate ADHD symptoms and diagnosing the plaintiff with ASD; Dr. Peterson recommended that the plaintiff undergo further testing to better evaluate his ASD (id. 123-26, 138). The plaintiff continued to update Hill regarding the testing and informed Hill of his ASD diagnosis in September 2016 after the report from Dr. Peterson (id. 158-59).
In or about October 2016, the defendant's human resources department began investigating the plaintiff after a temporary employee who had been terminated from employment reported that "she was terminated because she had not . . . yielded to [the plaintiff's] advances" (doc. 44-4, Gorie dep. 46; doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 158). The plaintiff testified that he was told by a temporary [*5]  employee that he was being investigated. The plaintiff went to Human Resource Manager Joe Shubert and asked why he was being investigated, and Shubert told the plaintiff not to worry it if he did not do anything wrong (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 56-58, 175-77). The plaintiff told Shubert that he felt humiliated and that he was being harassed because he was followed to the restroom and people were making comments (id.). He testified that he "did not give [Shubert] specifics about what statements were said" (id.). The plaintiff testified that the person who followed him to the restroom was a female group lead on the day shift who did so to see whether he would use the men's or the women's restroom (id. 69-71). According to the plaintiff, Shubert "didn't acknowledge [his complaints]" (id. 71).1 Shubert testified that the plaintiff never complained to him about being harassed because of his transgender status (doc. 50-3, Shubert dep. 21).
The plaintiff's counselor, Palmyra Powell at Life in Balance Counseling Center, wrote a letter to Shubert that is dated October 18, 2016, and stated as fol lows:
I am writing a letter on behalf of Dillon Steinhilber. I have been seeing Mr. Steinhilber for the last four years [*6]  for individual counseling. Recently, Mr. Steinhilber was recently diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder by psychologist Dr. Michelle Peterson. Due to Mr. Steinhilber's disability, he may have difficulty with social interactions and staying focused on task. Mr. Steinhilber works best in a structured environment with supportive feedback.
Please do not hesitate to call should you have questions or concerns.
(Doc. 44-10; see doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 93-95) ). The plaintiff testified that he placed the letter on Shubert's desk on or about October 19, 2016, in front of another human resources representative, Lisa Harrison (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 97, 146, 170). In his deposition, Shubert acknowledged that he received the letter from the plaintiff and that he "reviewed it with him and asked if there was anything further," but he testified that he did not recall anything else about it (doc. 50-3, Shubert dep. 17-19, 35). He did not recall the plaintiff making any request for accommodations, other than the letter (id.). The plaintiff testified that no one at the defendant discussed with him ways to provide a structured environment or supportive feedback in response to this letter (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. [*7]  170-71).
As a result of the investigation by the human resources department, the plaintiff was issued a final written warning dated November 2, 2016, for "[v]iolation of No Harassment Policy" (doc. 44-7). The defendant's No Harassment Policy stated in pertinent part:
Yanfeng Global Automotive Interiors is committed to providing a workplace free of sexual harassment based on race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, disability, sexual orientation, . . . or any other characteristics protected from discrimination by law. Yanfeng Global Automotive Interiors disapproves of and will not tolerate harassment of its employees. All employees should be aware of the following: 1. Sexual harassment is strictly prohibited. Sexual harassment includes unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, unwelcome or offensive touching, verbal conduct such as sexual jokes or suggestive or obscene comments, written or graphic materials, ... as well as any other conduct of a sexual nature, whether written, verbal or physical. . . .
(Doc. 44-15). The plaintiff acknowledged this policy on May 4 and November 8, 2016 (id.).
The final written warning stated that, during the investigation, the discharged [*8]  temporary employee "brought to our attention that [the plaintiff] made an inappropriate comment related to her body, specifically her rear-end" (doc. 44-7). The warning further stated that the complaint was substantiated by another employee (id.). In addition, the warning stated that the investigation uncovered that the plaintiff had "made other employees feel uncomfortable with conversations and actions related to [his] gender transition," including giving details regarding his surgery and remaining surgery, discussing costs associated with the transition process, raising his shirt to reveal scarring, and giving details about romantic relationships (id.).
On November 3, 2016, Hill and Senior Human Resources Manager Jasmine Gorie met with the plaintiff to inform him of the final written warning, which included a two-day suspension (doc. 44-7; doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 54-55). The plaintiff testified that, during the meeting, he told Gorie and Hill that he did not understand why he was being disciplined, and he told Hill and Gorie that they should have talked to him first to get his side of the story before making a decision (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 58, 60, 64-65). The plaintiff also testified [*9]  that he discussed having difficulties on the job, that he was tested for ADHD upon Hill's advice, and that he had been diagnosed with adult autism (id. 59). The plaintiff testified that Gorie told him that she would need a diagnosis, and the plaintiff told her that he "had a letter of disability on file" (id. 59-61). Gorie told the plaintiff that she did not have any knowledge of such letter and would need a diagnosis, but she would look for the letter and call the number provided by his counselor (id. 58-61, 160-61). The plaintiff testified that he suggested accommodations such as putting him "in accounting or someplace that dealt with numbers," because he needed "to be in an area that doesn't have such large groups of people" (id. 61-62). The plaintiff testified that the defendant never asked him for additional medical documentation, and the defendant had no additional discussions with him regarding possible accommodations (id. 161-63).
Gorie testified that she understood from the conversation on November 3rd that the plaintiff was undergoing testing at that time, and she told the plaintiff that she needed a confirmation of the diagnosis once the testing was done and that the plaintiff should follow up directly with her (doc. 50-4, [*10]  Gorie dep. 81-82, 92-96). According to Gorie, the plaintiff told her that his doctor would be willing to provide a letter and would be willing to speak to her, and she reinforced that she needed a diagnosis from a medical professional "to start the interactive process" (id. 82-83). Gorie testified that when the plaintiff returned from suspension, he talked to her and told her that his physician thought he might work best in a quiet environment away from people and mentioned accounting or IT, but she never looked into this further (id. 83-84). She further testified that she never received any confirmation of a diagnosis and that, prior to her deposition, she had never seen the letter from the plaintiff's counselor that is quoted above (id. 79, 93).
The defendant submitted Gorie's notes from the November 3rd meeting as an exhibit to the motion for summary judgment (doc. 44-9). In that document, Gorie noted that the plaintiff stated he had "brought in a letter to Lisa & Joe," and she told the plaintiff that she did not have the letter and asked if it "spelled out what conditions he was explaining." The plaintiff responded that the letter did not do so as he was just beginning testing, and he offered his counselor's [*11]  telephone number so that Gorie could speak with the counselor. Gorie noted that she told the plaintiff that she would need confirmation following a medical diagnosis and that, once the testing was over, the plaintiff should follow up directly with her. Gorie further noted that she reiterated to the plaintiff that she could not accommodate a condition that allowed the plaintiff to disrespect employees or violate the No Harassment Policy, and the plaintiff stated that he understood (id.). The plaintiff argues in his response to the motion for summary judgment that Gorie's notes "were created" or "manipulated after the fact" (doc. 50 at 6 n.2). Specifically, while the submitted document consists of two pages, the plaintiff testified that Gorie only brought two sheets of paper to the November 3rd meeting, and she gave the plaintiff one sheet and wrote on the back of the other sheet (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 55-56, 60-61, 161).
The plaintiff acknowledged in his deposition that he did make the comment regarding a female employee's rear end that was referenced in the final written warning2 ; however, he testified that he did not intend it in any sexual way as he was "complimenting everybody to try [*12]  to make things go smoother," because he understood that the employees on the night shift, where he had recently been transferred, were "very uncomfortable with [his] presence because of being transgendered" (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 42-43). Immediately upon making the comment, the plaintiff apologized to the employee, noting that it did not come out right and he did not intend it in any inappropriate way (id. 43). The plaintiff testified that the employee laughed and told him she was not offended and thought the situation was funny (id.). The employee raised the issue about the plaintiff's comment when she was terminated from employment, along with accusations against other employees (id. 44-48; doc. 44-5 at 7, Cynthia Wilmore stmt.).
The plaintiff testified that he never raised his shirt at work to show his chest or scars, as was referenced in the final written warning (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 66-67, 177; see doc. 44-7). The plaintiff acknowledged that he "might have" had conversations with Lawanda Attaway, a temporary employee, and Lisa Harrison, a human resources representative, about details of his gender transition surgery and the remaining surgery he still had to have done, the costs associated with [*13]  the transition process, and possibly details about his romantic relationships (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 65-67).
On January 3, 2017, the plaintiff complained to Harrison in human resources that he was being harassed by an employee, Tara Cunningham. The plaintiff complained that Cunningham treated him differently than she treated other supervisors and was very argumentative and disrespectful to him. He also complained that Cunningham laughed or coughed sarcastically when she heard someone introduce him as "Mr." (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 143-45, 154-55; doc. 50-5). In an email to Cynthia Wilmore3 and Hill on January 3rd, Harrison stated that the plaintiff felt that he was "being harassed based on his sexual orientation by Tara Cunningham" (doc. 50-5 at 3). Harrison stated that she told the plaintiff to reach out to Hill so that they could sit down with Cunningham and address her behavior (id.). Harrison also told Hill to talk to Cunningham about her position to "remind her that she is classified as an operator" (id.). According to the plaintiff, Hill "had to sit [Cunningham] down and write her up for insubordination" (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 145). The plaintiff testified that Cunningham believed that [*14]  she was Hill's employee and "not under us supervisors," but Hill explained to the plaintiff and another supervisor that Cunningham "works under us" (id. 145).
On January 26, 2017, the plaintiff was terminated from employment in a telephone call with Gorie and Hill. In a memorandum regarding "termination" and noting the "attendees" were herself and Hill via telephone, Gorie stated that it was brought to her attention on that date and was later confirmed by the plaintiff that he was directed by supervisors with MS Company4 to bring a contract temporary employee to the office so that she could be released, but the plaintiff ignored the directive and revealed to the employee on the production floor that she had failed a drug screen. According to the memorandum, the plaintiff "was aware that his actions were inappropriate." Gorie noted that, based on the plaintiff's final written warning in November, "we decided to terminate [the plaintiff]. We contacted him via phone" (doc. 44-12). Gorie testified that she and Hill made the decision to terminate the plaintiff's employment (doc. 50-4, Gorie dep. 18).
The plaintiff testified that the MS Company supervisors told him the employee had failed a drug test [*15]  and asked him to bring the employee to them. The plaintiff asked if he could speak with the employee first, and neither of the supervisors objected. The plaintiff escorted the employee to the other side of equipment so they were alone without others around. He explained to the employee that she failed her drug test and was to meet with the MS supervisor, but he knew she had medical issues and that she could ask to appeal it (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 73-80, 165-69; doc. 50-6). After being terminated from employment, the plaintiff asked Shubert if Gorie left a letter for him as to the reasons why he was being terminated from employment, and Shubert stated that he could not find one (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 166-67). The plaintiff notes in the response to the motion for summary judgment that "one was later produced" (doc. 50 at 7), apparently referencing the termination memorandum signed by Gorie (see doc. 44-12).
Following the plaintiff's termination from employment, he applied for various production and shift supervisor level positions with other companies (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 84-85; doc. 44-14). In the types of positions for which he applied, his job responsibilities would have been similar to [*16]  the responsibilities he had with the defendant, including working with teams and maintaining production goals (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 84-85). The plaintiff testified that he was fully qualified for these supervisory and shift-lead positions when he applied for them (id. 86). The plaintiff testified that he would describe himself as "people-oriented" (id. 9-10). The plaintiff is currently employed by Amazon as a stower, and, in that position, he is "very interactive" with other employees (id. 35) When the plaintiff started at Amazon, he notified them of his ASD disability, but he did not request an accommodation based upon his disability (id. 35-36, 86). Since working at Amazon, the plaintiff has applied for promotions for managerial and supervisory positions (id. 30-31). In those positions, the plaintiff would be required to have direct contact with employees and conduct tasks such as leading meetings, and he plans to continue applying for such positions (id. 32, 34).

APPLICABLE LAW AND ANALYSIS

Standard of Review
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56 states, as to a party who has moved for summary judgment: "The court shall grant summary judgment if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of [*17]  law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). As to the first of these determinations, a fact is deemed "material" if proof of its existence or nonexistence would affect the disposition of the case under the applicable law. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). An issue of material fact is "genuine" if the evidence offered is such that a reasonable jury might return a verdict for the non-movant. Id. at 257. In determining whether a genuine issue has been raised, the court must construe all inferences and ambiguities against the movant and in favor of the non-moving party. United States v. Diebold, Inc., 369 U.S. 654, 655, 82 S. Ct. 993, 8 L. Ed. 2d 176 (1962).
The party seeking summary judgment shoulders the initial burden of demonstrating to the district court that there is no genuine issue of material fact. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 325, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). Once the movant has made this threshold demonstration, the non-moving party, to survive the motion for summary judgment, may not rest on the allegations averred in his pleadings; rather, he must demonstrate that specific, material facts exist that give rise to a genuine issue. Id. at 324. Under this standard, the existence of a mere scintilla of evidence in support of the plaintiff's position is insufficient to withstand the summary judgment motion. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 252. Likewise, conclusory allegations or denials, without more, are insufficient to preclude the granting of [*18]  the summary judgment motion. Id. at 248. "Only disputes over facts that might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law will properly preclude the entry of summary judgment. Factual disputes that are irrelevant or unnecessary will not be counted." Id.

Title VII Discrimination
Title VII prohibits an employer from failing or refusing to hire, discharging, or otherwise discriminating "against any individual with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, because of such individual's . . . sex." 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(a)(1). A plaintiff asserting claims for discriminatory treatment and retaliation "may avoid summary judgment by proceeding under the burden-shifting framework established in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973)." Haynes v. Waste Connections, Inc., 922 F.3d 219, 223 (4th Cir. 2019) (parallel citations omitted). "[T]he elements of a prima facie case of discrimination under Title VII are: (1) membership in a protected class; (2) satisfactory job performance; (3) adverse employment action; and (4) different treatment from similarly situated employees outside the protected class." Coleman v. Md. Court of Appeals, 626 F.3d 187, 190 (4th Cir. 2010). If the plaintiff establishes a prima facie case of discrimination or retaliation, then the burden of production shifts to the employer to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory or nonretaliatory [*19]  justification for its action. Haynes, 922 F.3d at 223. If the employer satisfies this burden, then the plaintiff must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the employer's purportedly neutral reasons were a pretext for discrimination or retaliation. Id.5
The defendant first argues that the plaintiff's transgender status does not qualify as a protected class under Title VII (doc. 44 at 8-9). As acknowledged by the parties, the Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit has not specifically addressed this issue, there is a split among the circuit courts that have addressed it, and the question is currently pending before the Supreme Court of the United States. In R.G. & G.R. Harris Funeral Homes, Inc. v. EEOC, the Supreme Court granted certiorari limited to the following question: "Whether Title VII prohibits discrimination against transgender people based on (1) their status as transgender (2) sex stereotyping under Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, 490 U.S. 228, 109 S. Ct. 1775, 104 L.Ed.2 268 (1989)." 139 S. Ct. 1599 (2019) (No. 18-107). The Court heard oral argument in October 2019, and a decision is expected this term.6
The plaintiff argues in response to the defendant's motion that he is able to meet the first element of a prima facie case under a theory of gender stereotyping (doc. 50 at [*20]  10). The defendant did not respond to this argument in its reply (see doc. 52). As argued by the plaintiff, the Supreme Court in Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins recognized employment discrimination based on sex stereotyping. 490 U.S. at 250-52 ("As for the legal relevance of sex stereotyping, we are beyond the day when an employer could evaluate employees by assuming or insisting that they matched the stereotype associated with their group, for '[i]n forbidding employers to discriminate against individuals because of their sex, Congress intended to strike at the entire spectrum of disparate treatment of men and women resulting from sex stereotypes.'" (citation omitted)). Although the Fourth Circuit has yet to apply Price Waterhouse expressly to Title VII claims brought by transgender individuals, several district courts in this circuit have concluded that allegations of gender stereotyping are cognizable Title VII sex discrimination claims and, by extension, Title IX sex discrimination claims. See Kadell v. Folwell, 446 F. Supp. 3d 1, 2020 WL 1169271, at *6 (M.D. N. C. 2020) (Title IX case); Grimm v. Gloucester County Sch. Bd., 302 F. Supp.3d 730, 745-46 (E.D. Va. 2018) (Title IX case); M.A.B. v. Bd. Of Educ. of Talbot Cty., 286 F. Supp.3d 704, 714 (D. Md. 2018) (Title IX case stating, "[T]his Court has concluded that discrimination on the basis of transgender status constitutes gender stereotyping [*21]  because 'by definition, transgender persons do not conform to gender stereotypes.' As a result, transgender discrimination is per se actionable sex discrimination under Title VII based on Price Waterhouse." (quoting Finkle v. Howard Cty., 12 F. Supp.3d 780, 787-88 (D. Md. 2014))). See also Boyd v. Johnson Food Servs., LLC, C.A. No. 3:17-cv-3414-JMC, 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 37341, 2019 WL 1090725, at *6 (D.S.C. Mar. 8, 2019) (noting that "gender stereotype claims are protected under Title VII" in denying motion to dismiss gender stereotype claim). Based upon the foregoing, the undersigned finds that the plaintiff has met the first element of a prima facie case of discrimination.
The defendant next argues that the plaintiff cannot meet the second element of a prima facie case by showing that he had satisfactory job performance. "Such a showing of satisfactory performance does not require the plaintiff to show that he was a perfect or model employee. Rather, a plaintiff must show only that he was qualified for the job and that he was meeting his employer's legitimate expectations." Haynes, 922 F.3d at 225. The defendant specifically argues that the plaintiff did not meet the defendant's legitimate expectations based on his violations of the No Harassment Policy that led to his suspension (making a comment about an employee's rear end, sharing details [*22]  regarding his gender transition surgery and remaining surgeries, discussing costs associated with the transition process, raising his shirt to reveal scarring on his chest, and sharing details of romantic relationships) and the incident in January 2017 that led to his termination from employment (telling a temporary employee on the production floor that she failed a drug screen) (doc. 44 at 9-10). In response, the plaintiff argues that where, as here, "'the defendant's proffered evidence for showing that a plaintiff was not meeting the employer's expectations mirrors the nondiscriminatory reason produced by the employer, courts have assumed a prima facie case and proceeded to the pretext inquiry in the interests of fairness and efficiency'" (doc. 50 at 11) (quoting Jones v. Giant Foods, Inc., C.A. No. JFM-00-3469, 2000 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 21813, 2000 WL 1835393, at *2 (D. Md. Nov. 27, 2000) (citations omitted)). This court agrees and will proceed to the consideration of pretext.
As noted, the defendant states that the plaintiff was given the final written warning and suspension based on his violation of the No Harassment Policy, and he was terminated from employment for telling the temporary employee on the production floor that she failed a drug screen. With regard to the reasons given for his suspension, [*23]  the plaintiff admits making the comment about the employee's rear end. However, the plaintiff denies that the employee was offended and notes that the employee only raised the issue after being terminated from employment when she made allegations against multiple people. He denies raising his shirt to show scarring on his chest and notes that the only evidence in the record supporting this is an unsworn statement by Harrison. The plaintiff acknowledges talking to Attaway and Harrison about issues with his gender reassignment, but contends there is nothing to show that he did so inappropriately. With regard to the reason given for his termination from employment, the plaintiff admits telling the employee that she failed the drug screen, but he denies doing it within earshot of any other employees and points out that, when he asked the MS Company supervisors if he could speak to the employee prior to bringing her in, he was never told he could not do so (doc. 50 at 11-12). "What matters in the Title VII analysis, however, is not whether [the plaintiff actually violated the No Harassment Policy or publicly disclosed confidential information to the employee on the production floor], but [*24]  whether [the defendant] in good faith believed he did." Jones, 2000 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 21813, 2000 WL 1835393, at *2 (citing Hawkins v. Pepsico, Inc., 203 F.3d 274, 279 (4th Cir. 2000) (the court should not evaluate whether the reason proffered was "wise, fair, or even correct, ultimately, so long as it truly was the reason for the plaintiff's termination" (internal quotations and citation omitted)); Moore v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 683 F.2d 1321, 1323 n. 4 (11th Cir.1982) (the court inquires only into whether "the defendant in good faith believed plaintiff's performance to be unsatisfactory and that the asserted reason for the discharge is therefore not a mere pretext for discrimination")).
The plaintiff argues that he has shown sufficient evidence that the defendant's reasons for his suspension and termination are pretext for discrimination. Specifically, the plaintiff argues that much of the conduct in the final written warning was only an issue because he is transgender. However, the plaintiff has failed to present evidence supporting the argument. The plaintiff cites other employees whom he claims engaged in similar conduct but were not suspended or terminated from employment (doc. 50 at 14-15). To establish a valid comparator, the plaintiff must produce evidence that he and the comparator "dealt with the same supervisor, [were] subject to the same standards and ... [*25]  engaged in the same conduct without such differentiating or mitigating circumstances that would distinguish their conduct or the employer's treatment of them for it." Haynes, 922 F.3d at 223-24 (quoting Haywood v. Locke, 387 F. App'x 355, 359 (4th Cir. 2010)). Specifically, the plaintiff notes that a non-transgender male supervisor raised his shirt to show off his stomach to female employees and was not reprimanded (doc. 50 at 15). However, the plaintiff has presented only hearsay evidence in support (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 177-78). He additionally claims that another supervisor, Bill Norris, who is non-transgender, was sent an email with an alleged performance improvement plan, was accused of wrongdoing by the same employee who accused the plaintiff of making the comment about her rear end, and was constantly late to work, but Norris was not suspended or terminated from employment (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 47-48, 50, 179; doc. 50-2, Hill dep. 27). However, the plaintiff has pointed to no evidence that the reasons for Norris' placement on a performance improvement plan or that the allegations made against Norris by the employee were in any way similar to the conduct for which the plaintiff was suspended and later terminated from employment. As for Norris being "constantly [*26]  late to work," the plaintiff presents only his conclusory, unsubstantiated testimony on this point. The plaintiff also points to Hill as a comparator, arguing that Hill told the plaintiff that he should get tested for ADHD, but Hill was only verbally reprimanded (doc. 50 at 15) (citing doc. 50-2, Hill dep. 17-18). Even assuming that this is sufficiently similar conduct to the plaintiff's, it is undisputed that Hill was the plaintiff's supervisor, and, therefore, he is not a valid comparator. See Haynes, 922 F.3d at 223-24.
As evidence of pretext, the plaintiff further contends that he "had a previous issue with Ms. Gorie related to his transgender status and getting medical coverage" (doc. 50 at 15). The plaintiff testified that when the defendant was taking over the plant from Faurecia, he spoke to the temporary workers who were doing the human resources processing, and he was told he needed to speak to Gorie, but he "could never find her. She was busy." He testified that he emailed Gorie several times asking whether the new health insurance would cover his transgender-related health issues, but Gorie did not respond, and it was only when he happened to see her that she told him the insurance "did not cover [*27]  transgender" (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 171-73). However, the plaintiff has presented absolutely no evidence that Gorie's failure to immediately respond to the emails - which the plaintiff himself testified were sent during the defendant's takeover of the plant and a very busy time for the human resources department - was motivated by discriminatory animus and in any way related to his final written warning and termination from employment.
The plaintiff further argues that the defendant's "subjective and incomplete investigation" prior to the issuance of the final written warning is evidence of pretext (doc. 50 at 14). The plaintiff testified that he was not interviewed during the investigation of his alleged violation of the No Harassment Policy for which he received a two-day suspension (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 58, 64-65, 176-77). As recognized by the Fourth Circuit in Villa v. CavaMezze Grill, LLC, "evidence of an obviously inadequate investigation into the employee's misconduct could tend to show that claimed employee misconduct was actually pretext for prohibited animus." 858 F.3d 896, 905 (4th Cir. 2017) (emphasis added) (citing Smothers v. Solvay Chems., Inc., 740 F.3d 530, 542 (10th Cir. 2014)). Here, however, the plaintiff has failed to show that the investigation was obviously inadequate. [*28]  As an exhibit to the motion for summary judgment, the defendant has including statements from employees dated in October 2016 that substantiate the conduct set out in the final written warning (docs. 44-5, 44-8). Moreover, there is no indication that the defendant's policy required that an employee be interviewed prior to the employee being punished for misconduct. See Palomino v. Concord Hosp. Enters. Co., 126 F. Supp. 3d 647, 655 (D.S.C. 2015) (rejecting plaintiff's argument that failure to interview her demonstrated pretext; she offered no evidence that company was required to do so). Viewing all evidence in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, the court is convinced that no reasonable jury could find that the quality of the defendant's investigation itself (or in combination with any other fact in the record) can establish pretext.7
"[T]o establish that a proffered reason for the challenged action was pretext for discrimination, the plaintiff must prove 'both that the reason was false, and that discrimination was the real reason' for the challenged conduct." Jiminez v. Mary Washington Coll., 57 F.3d 369, 378 (4th Cir. 1995) (citation omitted). The plaintiff has failed to present sufficient evidence showing that the reasons given by the defendant for the adverse employment actions were not the actual reasons, and he [*29]  has likewise failed to raise a reasonable inference that sex discrimination was the real reason for his final written warning and/or termination from employment. The ultimate question in an employment discrimination case is whether the employer intentionally discriminated against the plaintiff on a prohibited basis. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 146, 120 S. Ct. 2097, 147 L. Ed. 2d 105 (2000). Although the court has applied the McDonnell Douglas framework to this record, the undersigned has done so while keeping that ultimate question in mind. After careful review of the record and the applicable law, the court concludes the plaintiff has failed to establish a "genuine, triable issue," Celotex, 477 U.S. at 327, as to whether the defendant discriminated against him on the basis of sex. Accordingly, summary judgment should be granted to the defendant on this cause of action.

Title VII Retaliation
Title VII prohibits retaliation "against an employee because, in relevant part, she 'has opposed any practice made an unlawful employment practice by this subchapter.'" Boyer-Liberto v. Fontainebleau Corp., 786 F.3d 264, 281 (4th Cir. 2015) (quoting 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-3(a)). "A prima facie case of retaliation requires proof that: (1) the plaintiff engaged in protected activity, (2) [he] suffered an adverse employment action, and (3) there was a causal connection between the protected [*30]  activity and the adverse action." Ray v. Int'l Paper Co., 909 F.3d 661, 669 (4th Cir. 2018) (citation omitted). In order for the plaintiff to prove that he engaged in a protected activity, he "need 'only ... prove that he opposed an unlawful employment practice [that] he reasonably believed had occurred or was occurring.'" Coleman v. Loudoun Cty. Sch. Bd., 294 F. App'x 778, 781 (4th Cir. 2008) (quoting Peters v. Jenney, 327 F.3d 307, 320 (4th Cir. 2003)). "This requires that the plaintiff: (1) have a good faith belief that the employer is engaging in an unlawful employment practice; and (2) that the belief is objectively reasonable in light of the facts." Id. (citing Peters, 327 F.3d at 321).
The defendant argues that the plaintiff cannot show that he engaged in protected activity or a causal link between any protected activity and his termination from employment (doc. 44 at 13-14). The undersigned disagrees. The plaintiff testified that, prior to his suspension, he went to Shubert and asked why he was being investigated and told Shubert that he felt humiliated and harassed because he was followed to the restroom and people were making comments (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 56-58, 175-77). The defendant notes that Shubert testified that the plaintiff never complained to him about being harassed because of his transgender status and that it is undisputed that Gorie and Hill, not Shubert, made [*31]  the decision to terminate the plaintiff's employment. However, the plaintiff made another complaint on January 3, 2017, when he told Harrison in human resources that he was being harassed by an employee. In an email to Wilmore and Hill on January 3rd, Harrison stated that the plaintiff felt that he was "being harassed based on his sexual orientation . . ." (doc. 50-5 at 3). Accordingly, at least one of the decisionmakers had notice of the plaintiff's complaint that he was being harassed prior to his termination from employment some three weeks later. As close temporal proximity can demonstrate causation, the undersigned finds that the plaintiff can make out a prima facie case of retaliation under Title VII. See Waag v. Sotera Defense Sols., Inc., 857 F.3d 179, 192 (4th Cir. 2017) ("[F]or purposes of establishing a prima facie case, close temporal proximity between activity protected by the statute and an adverse employment action may suffice to demonstrate causation." (citing Price v. Thompson, 380 F.3d 209, 213 (4th Cir. 2004), abrogated on other grounds by Univ. of Texas Sw. Med. Ctr. v. Nassar, 570 U.S. 338, 360, 133 S. Ct. 2517, 186 L. Ed. 2d 503 (2013))).
In Foster v. University of Maryland - Eastern Shore, 787 F.3d 243, 246 (4th Cir. 2015), the Fourth Circuit considered the effect of the Supreme Court's decision in University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center v. Nassar, 570 U.S. 338, 133 S. Ct. 2517, 186 L. Ed. 2d 503 (2013), on what Title VII retaliation plaintiffs must show to survive a motion for summary judgment. The court in Foster clarified that [*32]  the stringent but-for causation required for Title VII retaliation claims is applied not at the prima facie stage, but during the pretext analysis. 787 F.3d at 252 ("We conclude, therefore, that the McDonnell Douglas framework has long demanded proof at the pretext stage that retaliation was a but-for cause of a challenged adverse employment action. Nassar does not alter the legal standard for adjudicating a McDonnell Douglas retaliation claim."). Thus, in order to meet his burden at the pretext stage, the plaintiff must show that he would not have been suspended and/or terminated from employment but-for the defendant's retaliatory animus. Id.
The plaintiff argues that pretext is shown by the proximity in time between his complaint to Shubert and his suspension (approximately two weeks) and between his complaint to Harrison and his termination from employment (approximately three weeks). However, "temporal proximity, without more, does not support a finding of pretext. Jones v. UnitedHealth Group, Inc., 802 Fed. Appx. 780, 2020 WL 2116496, at *2-3 (4th Cir. 2020) (citing Gibson v. Geithner, 776 F.3d 536, 541 (8th Cir. 2015) (holding that, while proximity can establish a prima facie case of causation, it is insufficient to alone establish pretext)). Moreover, with regard to the plaintiff's suspension, [*33]  it is undisputed that the investigation into the plaintiff's conduct that led to the final written warning had already begun at the time the plaintiff complained to Shubert. Indeed, the reason the plaintiff went to Shubert in the first place was because he heard he was being investigated. Moreover, there is no evidence that Hill and Gorie, who issued the final written warning, knew that the plaintiff had told Shubert that he felt humiliated and harassed because someone followed him to the restroom and co-workers were making comments. Further, he has presented no evidence that raises an inference that retaliation for his complaint about harassment to Harrison was the reason for his termination from employment. In order to carry his burden at the pretext stage of showing "that retaliation was a but-for cause" of his suspension and/or termination, the plaintiff must present evidence to "establish both that the employer's reason [for the suspension and/or termination] was false and that retaliation was the real reason for the challenged conduct." Foster, 787 F.3d at 252 (citation, internal quotation marks, and brackets omitted). While the plaintiff clearly disagrees with the defendant's proffered reasons, he [*34]  has failed to produce evidence tending to show that the defendant's non-discriminatory reasons for his suspension and termination were false and that retaliation was the real reason. Based upon the foregoing, summary judgment should be granted to the defendant on the Title VII retaliation cause of action.

ADA Discrimination
The ADA prohibits a covered employer from discriminating against an individual "on the basis of disability." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). The McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework discussed above applies to both discrimination and retaliation claims under the ADA. Jacobs v. N.C. Admin. Office of the Courts, 780 F.3d 562, 572 (4th Cir. 2015). When bringing a wrongful discharge claim under the ADA, "a plaintiff must prove (1) that []he has a disability, (2) that []he is a 'qualified individual' for the employment in question, and (3) that [his employer] discharged [him] (or took other adverse employment action) because of [his] disability." Id. (quoting EEOC v. Stowe-Pharr Mills, Inc., 216 F.3d 373, 377 (4th Cir. 2000)). See Gentry v. E. W. Partners Club Mgmt. Co. Inc., 816 F.3d 228, 235-36 (4th Cir. 2016) (holding that the ADA requires that a plaintiff's disability be a but-for cause of the adverse employment action).
The defendant argues that the plaintiff did not have a disability as a matter of law (doc. 44 at 14-16). The ADA defines "disability" as a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits [*35]  one or more of the major life activities of an individual, a record of such an impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment. 42 U.S.C. § 12102(1). The ADA states that "major life activities include, but are not limited to, caring for oneself, performing manual tasks, seeing, hearing, eating, sleeping, walking, standing, lifting, bending, speaking, breathing, learning, reading, concentrating, thinking, communicating, and working." Id. § 12102(2). The EEOC has also identified "interacting with others" as a major life activity. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(i)(1)(i).
Pursuant to the ADA Amendments Act of 2008 ("ADAAA"), the definition of disability "'shall be construed in favor of broad coverage of individuals under this chapter, to the maximum extent permitted by [its] terms.'" Summers v. Altarum Inst., Corp., 740 F.3d 325, 329 (4th Cir. 2014) (quoting 42 U.S.C. § 12102(4)(A)). The ADAAA was intended to make it "easier for people with disabilities to obtain protection under the ADA." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.1(c)(4). The regulation clarifies that "[t]he primary object of attention in cases brought under the ADA should be whether covered entities have complied with their obligations and whether discrimination has occurred, not whether the individual meets the definition of disability." Id. Accordingly, "the question of whether an individual's impairment is [*36]  a disability under the ADA should not demand extensive analysis." Id. See also Jacobs, 780 F.3d at 572 (citation omitted).
Viewing the evidence in a light most favorable to the plaintiff, the undersigned finds that the plaintiff has presented sufficient evidence that he has a mental impairment that substantially limits him in a major life activity (such as concentrating and interacting with others) or that he was regarded as having such an impairment. It is undisputed that the plaintiff's supervisor, Hill, suggested that the plaintiff get tested for ADHD, because he felt the plaintiff had issues at work, including getting upset when someone interrupted him, inattentiveness, and being easily distracted (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 102-05, 146-47, 155). Further, the plaintiff has presented evidence that he was tested in September 2016, while he was employed by the defendant, and Dr. Peterson issued a report finding that the plaintiff had moderate ADHD symptoms and diagnosing the plaintiff with ASD. Further, the plaintiff's counselor wrote a letter to the defendant in October 2016 stating that the plaintiff had been diagnosed with ASD and, due to his disability, he "may have difficulty with social interactions and staying [*37]  focused on task" (doc. 44-10).
Having found that the plaintiff has presented sufficient evidence to show that he has a disability under the ADA, the undersigned will assume for purposes of this motion that the plaintiff can make out each of the remaining elements of a prima facie case of discrimination under the ADA. Accordingly, the burden shifts to the defendant to articulate legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for the plaintiff's suspension and termination from employment. As discussed above, the defendant has done so by presenting evidence that the plaintiff was suspended for violating the No Harassment Policy, and he was terminated from employment for telling a temporary contract employee on the production floor that she failed a drug screen (docs. 44-7, 44-12). Thus, the burden shifts back to the plaintiff to prove that these asserted justifications are pretextual.
The plaintiff argues that the defendant's "reasoning seems to shift as to why they alleged his actions called for termination, thus giving rise to . . . inference of pretext" (doc. 50 at 23). However, the plaintiff does not explain this statement nor does he cite any evidence in support. Rather, the evidence before [*38]  the court shows that the reasons given for the plaintiff's final written warning and ultimate discharge have remained consistent.
Further, while the temporal proximity between the plaintiff giving Shubert the letter from his counselor and his suspension is quite short, there is no indication in the record that Gorie knew about the letter prior to giving the plaintiff the final written warning. The plaintiff argues that "testimony trying to disclaim knowledge or receipt of the . . . letter from the counselor [and] the false assertions from . . . Gorie about what was said at the meeting and her seemingly concocted notes" are probative of pretext. However, Shubert acknowledged receiving the letter from the counselor, but he testified that he did not recall having any discussions with Gorie about the plaintiff's disability or accommodations (doc. 50-3, Shubert dep. 18-19), and Gorie testified that she never saw the letter prior to her deposition, and she did not recall Shubert ever mentioning it to her (doc. 50-4, Gorie dep. 79). Thus, the plaintiff's testimony that Gorie told him at the November 3rd meeting that she did not have any knowledge of the letter and would need a diagnosis (doc. [*39]  50-1, pl. dep. 58-61, 160-61) is consistent with Gorie's deposition testimony. The plaintiff's allegation that Gorie "seemingly concocted" her notes from the November 3rd meeting hangs on the plaintiff's threadbare allegation that Gorie had only one piece of paper on which to take notes. Further weighing against any inference of disability discrimination is the undisputed evidence showing that the plaintiff presented the letter from his counselor to Shubert only after the human resources department began investigating the plaintiff's conduct. Likewise, the plaintiff has failed to provide evidence sufficient to raise an inference that his termination from employment on January 26, 2017, was in any way motivated by his discussion with Gore and Hill about his disability approximately three months prior in the final written warning meeting on November 3, 2016.
The undersigned finds that a reasonable jury could not conclude that the plaintiff has presented sufficient evidence of pretext to ultimately prevail on this claim. The plaintiff he admits that he engaged in the conduct cited by the defendant for his suspension and termination from employment, while at the same time disputing the [*40]  details (see doc. 50 at 6-7, 12-13, 23). However, the court "'does not sit as a kind of super-personnel department weighing the prudence of employment decisions made by firms charged with employment discrimination. . . .'" DeJarnette v. Corning Inc., 133 F.3d 293, 299 (4th Cir. 1998) (quoting Giannopoulos v. Brach & Brock Confections, Inc., 109 F.3d 406, 411 (7th Cir.1997)). Rather, the court's
sole concern is "whether the reason for which the defendant discharged the plaintiff was discriminatory. Thus, when an employer articulates a reason for discharging the plaintiff not forbidden by law, it is not our province to decide whether the reason was wise, fair, or even correct, ultimately, so long as it truly was the reason for the plaintiff's termination."
Id. (quoting Giannopoulos, 109 F.3d at 410-11). The plaintiff has failed to present sufficient evidence to raise a reasonable inference that the defendant's given reasons for his suspension and termination from employment were not its true reasons, and he has likewise failed to raise a reasonable inference that discrimination based on his disability was the real reason for his suspension and/or termination from employment. Accordingly, summary judgment should be granted to the defendant on the plaintiff's ADA discrimination cause of action.

ADA Retaliation
Section 503 of the ADA prohibits retaliation against an employee [*41]  "because [that] individual has opposed any act or practice made unlawful by this chapter or because such individual made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing [thereunder]." 42 U.S.C. § 12203(a). As noted, the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework discussed above applies to both discrimination and retaliation claims under the ADA. Jacobs, 780 F.3d at 572. "Importantly, although intermediate evidentiary burdens shift back and forth under this framework, [the plaintiff] retains the ultimate burden of persuading the trier of fact, . . . that [his] engagement in the protected activities was a 'but for' cause of [his suspension and/or termination from employment]." Staley v. Gruenberg, 575 F. App'x. 153, 155 (4th Cir. 2014) (internal citations and quotation marks omitted).
The undersigned finds that the plaintiff can establish a prima facie case of ADA retaliation. Viewing the evidence in a light most favorable to the plaintiff, he has presented evidence upon which a reasonable jury could determine that he engaged in protected activity by providing Shubert with a letter from his counselor and in discussing his disability with Gorie and Hill and suggesting possible accommodations. With regard to the causation element, [*42]  the plaintiff has presented evidence that he placed the letter from his counselor on Shubert's desk on or about October 19th, and he received the final written warning and two-day suspension approximately two weeks later. Further, in the meeting with Hill and Gorie on November 3rd, the plaintiff testified that he mentioned the letter from his counselor and suggested accommodations for his issues, and he was terminated from employment approximately three months later. The undersigned finds that the temporal proximity is sufficient to satisfy prima facie causation. See Jacobs, 8780 F.3d at 575 (finding that "[s]uch close temporal proximity [three weeks] weighs heavily in favor of finding a genuine dispute as to causation." (citing Haulbrook v. Michelin N. Am., Inc., 252 F.3d 696, 706 (4th Cir.2001) (finding that temporal proximity alone can create a genuine dispute to causation))). However, as with the plaintiff's Title VII retaliation claim, temporal proximity alone is insufficient to satisfy the plaintiff's burden of showing that retaliation for his protected activities was a but-for cause of his suspension and termination from employment. For the reasons discussed above with regard to his Title VII claims and ADA discrimination claim, the plaintiff has failed to meet his [*43]  burden of showing pretext. Accordingly, the defendant's motion for summary judgment should be granted on the plaintiff's ADA retaliation cause of action.

ADA Failure to Accommodate
In his third cause of action entitled "ADAAA Disability Discrimination," the plaintiff alleges that he sought reasonable accommodations for his disability, but the defendant failed to engage in a legitimate interactive process, ignored his requests, and refused to accommodate his "request to modify his job so as to allow him to work in slightly smaller crowds" (doc. 1-1, compl. ¶¶ 59-60). To establish a prima facie case under the ADA for failure to accommodate, the plaintiff must show: "'(1) that he was an individual who had a disability within the meaning of the statute; (2) that the employer had notice of his disability; (3) that with reasonable accommodation he could perform the essential functions of the position; and (4) that the employer refused to make such accommodations.'" Wilson v. Dollar Gen. Corp., 717 F.3d 337, 345 (4th Cir.2013) (brackets and ellipses omitted) (quoting Rhoads v. Fed. Deposit Ins. Corp., 257 F.3d 373, 387 n.11 (4th Cir.2001)).
In its motion for summary judgment, the defendant does not address the alleged failure to accommodate as an independent claim, but, as part of the argument that summary judgment should [*44]  be granted on the ADA discrimination claim, the defendant argues that the plaintiff has not shown that he could perform the essential functions of his position with reasonable accommodation (see doc. 44 at 16-17). In response to the motion for summary judgment, the plaintiff also conflates the ADA discrimination and failure to accommodate claims (doc. 50 at 19-23). Out of an abundance of cation, the undersigned will address the failure to accommodate claim independently, in the event it is a claim the plaintiff has intended to pursue.
As noted, the plaintiff contends that the defendant failed to engage in an interactive process to identify a reasonable accommodation with which he could perform the essential functions of his job. In defining "reasonable accommodation," the ADA regulations provide:
To determine the appropriate reasonable accommodation it may be necessary for the covered entity to initiate an informal, interactive process with the individual with a disability in need of the accommodation. This process should identify the precise limitations resulting from the disability and potential reasonable accommodations that could overcome those limitations.
29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3). "The duty to engage in [*45]  an interactive process to identify a reasonable accommodation is generally triggered when an employee communicates to his employer his disability and his desire for an accommodation for that disability." Wilson, 717 F.3d at 346-47 (citations omitted). However, "'liability for failure to engage in an interactive process depends on a finding that, had a good faith interactive process occurred, the parties could have found a reasonable accommodation that would enable the disabled person to perform the job's essential functions.'" Id. at 347 (quoting Jones v. Nationwide Life Ins. Co., 696 F.3d 78, 91 (1st Cir. 2012)).
Here, the undersigned finds that the plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim fails because the plaintiff has not identified a reasonable accommodation that could have been discovered in the interactive process that would have enabled him to perform the essential functions of his position as a production supervisor. In his deposition, the plaintiff testified that he suggested accommodations to the defendant such as putting him "in accounting or someplace that dealt with numbers," because he needed "to be in an area that doesn't have such large groups of people," and he needed "to work in a smaller environment" (doc. 50-1, pl. dep. 61-62). It appears to be undisputed, however, [*46]  that the plaintiff's position as a production supervisor required that he interact with large groups of people, and he has failed to show how he could perform the essential functions of that position "in a smaller environment." In support of his contention that the defendant could have reassigned him to "accounting or someplace that dealt with numbers," the plaintiff notes that "[p]roviding a reasonable accommodation to a disabled employee may sometimes involve reassigning that employee to another position" (doc. 50 at 22). The plaintiff cites the federal regulations, which state that "[r]eassignment to a vacant position" is considered a "potential reasonable accommodation." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(2)(ii). However, "'reasonable accommodation' does not require an employer to reassign the qualified individual to a position occupied by another employee or to create a position when none exists." Mag.-Ward v. Donahoe, C.A. No. 4:11-CV-02896-RBH, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 113041, 2013 WL 4056313, at *17 (D.S.C. Aug. 12, 2013) (citing EEOC v. Sara Lee Corp., 237 F.3d 349, 355 (4th Cir. 2001) (finding reassignment not reasonable accommodation when it would require the employer to "bump another employee out of a particular position"); Lamb v. Qualex, Inc., 33 F. App'x 49, 59 (4th Cir. 2002) (finding employer not required to "create a new position as an accommodation to a disabled employee")). The "[p]laintiff has [*47]  the burden to establish the availability of one or more positions for which the employer could provide reasonable accommodation." Williams v. United Parcel Services, Inc., C.A. No. 2:10-1546-RMG, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 23080, 2012 WL 601867, at *6 (D.S.C. Feb. 23, 2012). The plaintiff has not done so here. "To simply assert that questions of fact exist regarding whether such positions or duties might exist is insufficient to carry [the plaintiff's] burden." Mag.-Ward, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 113041, 2013 WL 4056313, at *17 (citing Williams, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 23080, 2012 WL 601867).
As the plaintiff has failed to identify a reasonable accommodation that could have been discovered in the interactive process that would have enabled him to perform the essential functions of his position, summary judgment should be granted to the defendant on the plaintiff's ADA failure to accommodate cause of action.

CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION
Wherefore, based upon the foregoing, the undersigned recommends that the defendant's motion for summary judgment (doc. 44) be granted.
IT IS SO RECOMMENDED.
/s/ Kevin F. McDonald
United States Magistrate Judge
May 11, 2020
Greenville, South Carolina


End of Document

