Stuckey v. Hous. Auth. of Cook
United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois, Eastern Division
August 14, 2018, Decided; August 14, 2018, Filed
No. 16-cv-03443

Reporter
2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 243067 *; 2018 WL 11303207
STEVEN STUCKEY, Plaintiff, v. HOUSING AUTHORITY OF THE COUNTY OF COOK, et al., Defendants.
Prior History: Stuckey v. Hous. Auth. of Cook, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 234084 (N.D. Ill., Sept. 18, 2017)
Counsel:  [*1] For Housing Authority of the County of Cook, Defendant: Lori Ann Vanderlaan, LEAD ATTORNEY, Allie Burnet, Christina Marie Tribbia, Best Vanderlaan & Harrington, Chicago, IL.
For Management Office for Richard Flowers Homes, Defendant: Allie Burnet, Best Vanderlaan & Harrington, Chicago, IL.
For Office of Public Housing, Defendant: Ernest Yi Ling, LEAD ATTORNEY, United States Attorney's Office (NDIL - Chicago), Chicago, IL.
Steven Stuckey, Plaintiff, Pro se, Baltimore, MD.
For U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Defendant: Ernest Yi Ling, LEAD ATTORNEY, Chicago, United States Attorney's Office (NDIL - Chicago), Chicago, IL.
Judges: Andrea R. Wood, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Andrea R. Wood
Opinion



ORDER
Plaintiff's amended complaint [50] is dismissed without prejudice on the Court's review pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1915(e)(2). Stuckey's motion for a confidentiality order [48] and motion to transfer venue and for appointment of counsel [53] are denied. Defendants' motion to dismiss the amended complaint [55] is denied as moot. Plaintiff's motion to amend his civil cover sheet [59] is granted; the Court accepts Plaintiff's amended cover sheet [57]. Plaintiff shall have until 9/25/2018 to file a second amended complaint [*2]  that remedies the problems with his race and disability discrimination claims discussed in the Statement. If Plaintiff fails to submit a second amended complaint by 9/25/2018, this case will be dismissed with prejudice and closed. Plaintiff's motion requesting an extension of time to amend his complaint [44] is denied as moot. Status hearing set for 10/23/2018 at 9:30 AM. See the accompanying Statement for details.

STATEMENT
Plaintiff Steven Stuckey filed a complaint in the United States District Court for the District of Maryland on March 3, 2016 against the Housing Authority of Cook County ("HACC"), the Management Office of Richard Flowers Homes, the Office of Public Housing, and the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (collectively, "Defendants"). The complaint alleges that Stuckey was improperly evicted by HACC. Because all Defendants reside in Cook County, Illinois and all events alleged in the complaint occurred in Cook County, Illinois, the Maryland District Court sua sponte transferred the case to the appropriate venue, the Northern District of Illinois. Defendants subsequently filed a motion to dismiss, which the Court granted, giving Stuckey until 10/30/2017 [*3]  to file an amended complaint with regard to his disability discrimination and race discrimination claims (Dkt. No. 43). Stuckey timely filed an amended complaint (Dkt. No. 50).1 Shortly thereafter, Stuckey filed a motion for a confidentiality order (Dkt. No. 48) and a motion to transfer venue and for appointment of counsel (Dkt. No. 53).
The Court first turns to Stuckey's request to transfer venue (Dkt. No. 53). This is the second time Stuckey has requested that his case be transferred back to Maryland. Under 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b), however, a civil action may be brought only in (1) a district in which any defendant resides, if all defendants are residents of the state in which the district is located; (2) a district in which a substantial part of the events or omissions giving rise to the claim occurred; or, (3) if there is no district in which an action may otherwise be brought, any district in which any defendant is subject to the court's personal jurisdiction. As explained in the Court's previous order denying Stuckey's first request to transfer (Dkt. No. 9), because the named Defendants reside in Cook County, Illinois and all relevant events occurred in Cook County, Illinois the appropriate venue for [*4]  this case is the Northern District of Illinois. Stuckey has not alleged any connection between Maryland and Defendants in this case, and none of events of this case occurred in Maryland. The only relationship Maryland has to this case is that Stuckey currently resides there, and that is insufficient to establish proper venue and justify transfer.
The Court next turns to the merits of Stuckey's amended complaint. As an initial matter, the Court dismisses with prejudice the purported claims against the newly-added Defendant, the Circuit Court of Cook County 6th Municipal District. Stuckey has stated in open court that he seeks to sue the Circuit Court of Cook County for damages related to alleged constitutional violations that occurred during his court hearing there. But the Circuit Court of Cook County and the individual judges presiding there are protected by judicial immunity. Judicial immunity shields judicial "actors from liability for civil damages arising out of the performance of their judicial functions." Killinger v. Johnson, 389 F.3d 765, 770 (7th Cir. 2004). Therefore, the Circuit Court of Cook County cannot be held liable for actions taken during the course of Stuckey's case in the 6th Municipal District.
The remainder of the [*5]  amended complaint is dismissed without prejudice for failure to state a claim. Stuckey is proceeding in forma pauperis. Therefore, the Court is required to dismiss his case any at time if the complaint fails to state a claim on which relief may be granted. 28 U.S.C. § 1915(e)(2). Following the Court's order granting the prior motion to dismiss, the only claims Stuckey may raise in an amended complaint are his disability discrimination and race discrimination claims. However, Stuckey has failed to address and remedy the problems with his original complaint identified by the Court in its previous order.
Stuckey's amended complaint purports to state a claim of disability discrimination under the Federal Housing Act ("FHA"), the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), and the Rehabilitation Act. The FHA, ADA, and the Rehabilitation Act each prohibit a public entity from intentionally discriminating against an individual on the basis of his disability, failing to provide reasonable accommodations to a disabled individual, and enacting rules that have discriminatory effects on the disabled. See 42 U.S.C. § 3604(f) (FHA); 42 U.S.C. § 12143(ADA); 29 U.S.C. § 794 (Rehabilitation Act); see also Bloch v. Frischholz, 587 F.3d 771, 784 (7th Cir. 2009). An individual is disabled under the ADA, FHA, and Rehabilitation Act when he: [*6]  (1) has a mental or physical impairment that substantially limits a major life activity; (2) has a record of such impairment; or (3) is regarded as having such an impairment. See 42 U.S.C. § 3602(h); 42 U.S.C. § 12102(3)(A); 29 U.S.C. § 705(9). To state a prima facie case of disability discrimination, Stuckey must: (1) state how he is disabled—simply asserting that he has a disability is insufficient; and (2) state how Defendants discriminated against him because of his disability—i.e., what did Defendants do to Stuckey and why does he believe this action is related to his disability. The amended complaint does neither of these things.
Stuckey also seeks to bring a race discrimination claim. To state a claim for race discrimination under 42 U.S.C. § 1981, a plaintiff must plausibly allege in his complaint that he was subjected to intentional discrimination based on his race. See Tamayo v. Blagojevich, 526 F.3d 1074, 1081 (7th Cir. 2008). Under 42 U.S.C. § 2000a, "a plaintiff must show that he or she was denied the full and equal enjoyment of goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, and accommodations because of discrimination based on race." Efstathiou v. Romeo Carryouts & Liquors, Inc., 1997 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 14810, 1997 WL 603896, at *2 (N.D. Ill. 1997). Finally, Section 3604 of the Fair Housing Act makes it unlawful to "refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise [*7]  make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status, or national origin." 42 U.S.C. § 3604(a). To state a claim of racial discrimination under any of these statutes, Stuckey must allege that he is a member of a protected class—i.e., Stuckey must state his race—and also state how the Defendants discriminated against him because of his race. He has not done so in the amended complaint.
Because Stuckey's amended complaint fails to state a claim for either race or disability discrimination, it must be dismissed. Stuckey shall have until September 25, 2018 to file a second amended complaint that remedies the problems with his race and disability discrimination claims.
With regard to Stuckey's motion for a confidentiality order (Dkt. No. 48), Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 26(c) states that a "court may, for good cause, issue an order to protect a party or person from annoyance, embarrassment, oppression, or undue burden or expense . . . ." Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(c). "Rule 26(c) allows a court to shield certain documents from the public when there is good cause to do so." Bond v. Utreras, 585 F.3d 1061, 1067 (7th Cir. 2009). In his motion for a confidentiality order, Stuckey expresses concern that if he fully explains his circumstances in an amended complaint, it might taint [*8]  the jury. However, the Court will ensure during voir dire that no member of the jury has any prior knowledge of the case and that Stuckey receives a fair trial. If, however, Stuckey has some other reason why he believes a confidentiality order is necessary, he may file a new motion for a confidentiality order explaining why he needs such protection.
Additionally, Stuckey's request for attorney representation (Dkt. No. 53) is denied without prejudice. "There is no right to court-appointed counsel in federal civil litigation." Olson v. Morgan, 750 F.3d 708, 711 (7th Cir. 2014). The Court, however, has discretion to request that an attorney represent an indigent litigant on a volunteer basis under 28 U.S.C. § 1915(e)(1). Determining whether to recruit counsel involves a two-step analysis: (1) has the plaintiff made a reasonable attempt to obtain counsel on his own behalf or been effectively precluded from doing so; and, if so, (2) given the factual and legal complexity of the case, does this particular plaintiff appear competent to litigate the matter himself. Pruitt v. Mote, 503 F.3d 647, 654-55 (7th Cir. 2007) (en banc).
The Court finds that recruitment of an attorney is presently not warranted. This case is in earliest stages—Stuckey has not yet demonstrated that he is likely to be able to state a claim, [*9]  no defendant has been served, and no discovery is being conducted. Romanelli v. Suliene, 615 F.3d 847, 852 (7th Cir. 2010) (it is difficult to make an accurate determination regarding a plaintiff's ability or the complexity of a case when case is still in "its infancy"). The Court will reconsider assigning pro bono counsel for Stuckey if and when he submits a complaint that at least suggests a viable claim.
Finally, turning to the status of service on the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development ("HUD"), the United States Marshals were appointed to effect service to HUD. It is not clear from the summons (Dkt. No. 16) whether service was actually completed, but HUD has not filed an appearance. Regardless, no further action is required of Stuckey at this time.
Dated: August 14, 2018
/s/ Andrea R. Wood
Andrea R. Wood
United States District Judge


End of Document

