Taylor v. Ass'n of Ark. Counties
United States District Court for the Eastern District of Arkansas, Western Division
May 24, 2016, Decided; May 24, 2016, Filed
4:14CV00303-JM

Reporter
2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 67941 *
FREDA TAYLOR, PLAINTIFF v. ASSOCIATION OF ARKANSAS COUNTIES, DEFENDANT
Counsel:  [*1] For Freda A Taylor, Plaintiff: Teresa L. Bloodman, LEAD ATTORNEY, Attorney at Law, Maumelle, AR.
For Association of Arkansas Counties, Defendant: Regina Ann Young, LEAD ATTORNEY, Gary D. Marts, Jr., Neemah Aaron Esmaeilpour, William Stuart Jackson, Wright, Lindsey & Jennings, Little Rock, AR.
Judges: James M. Moody, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: James M. Moody
Opinion



ORDER
Pending before the Court is Defendant's motion for summary judgment (Docket No. 54). Plaintiff filed a response1, and Defendant filed a reply. For the reasons stated below, the motion is granted.

Background
This is an action for violations of the Family Medical Leave Act ('FMLA"), the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), the Equal Pay Act, Title VII, and 42 U.S.C. §1983. The following facts are taken from Defendant's statement of undisputed material facts (Docket No. 55).2 Freda Taylor began working for the [*2]  Association of Arkansas Counties ("ACC") in 1997 as an administrative assistant. Her duties included performing audits for workers' compensation, keeping rosters of all volunteer fire departments for workers' compensation, reconciling checking accounts, coding and classification for workers' compensation premiums, billing premiums, keeping up with the monthly report card with the Workers' Compensation Commission, and answering telephones.
On May 25, 2012, Taylor went to her doctor for a number of medical conditions, including anxiety, depression, hypertension, hypothyroidism, post-traumatic stress disorder, arthritis, attention-deficit disorder, and irritable bowel syndrome. Her doctor provided her with an off-work slip stating that she would need to be off work from May 25, 2012 to June 25, 2012. Taylor provided this off-work slip to ACC, who in turn provided Plaintiff with notice of her eligibility [*3]  for leave under the FMLA. Taylor requested FMLA leave and signed a form acknowledging her understanding that "a failure to return to work at the end of [her] leave period may be treated as a resignation unless an extension has been agreed upon and approved in writing by AAC." ACC also requested that Plaintiff report her status and advise ACC whether she intended to return to work every 15 days.
On June 13, 2012, Taylor's doctor certified that she would not be able to work until September 4, 2012, later than the June 25, 2012 date originally given for her return to work; he also reported that Taylor was "unable to perform any of her job functions" due to her medical condition. However, on August 16, 2012, Taylor reported to Chris Villines, the Executive Director of ACC, that she would return to work the following day, which was the date her 12 weeks of leave expired. Villines informed Taylor that she would need clearance from her doctor to return to work prior to the September 4, 2012 date her doctor had last given. Taylor was unable to provide a clearance to return to work from her doctor. In fact, when Taylor saw her doctor again on August 17, 2012, he faxed another certificate to [*4]  ACC stating that Taylor could not return to work until January 2, 1013.
On August 20, 2012, ACC sent Taylor a notice of termination of her employment, administratively terminating her employment effective August 17, 2012, due to her failure to return to work after her FMLA leave time expired. Taylor never requested any sort of accommodation from ACC. Beginning in October of 2014, but retroactive to June of 2012, Taylor began receiving Social Security disability payments for her medical conditions. At least as of the date of her deposition in November of 2015, Taylor remains unable to work. In October of 2012, ACC hired a woman older than 40 years of age to replace Taylor.

Summary Judgment Standard
The Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals has cautioned that summary judgment should be invoked carefully so that no person will be improperly deprived of a trial of disputed factual issues. Inland Oil & Transport Co. v. United States, 600 F.2d 725 (8th Cir. 1979), cert. denied, 444 U.S. 991, 100 S. Ct. 522, 62 L. Ed. 2d 420 (1979). The Eighth Circuit set out the burden of the parties in connection with a summary judgment motion in Counts v. MK-Ferguson Co., 862 F.2d 1338 (8th Cir. 1988):
[T]he burden on the moving party for summary judgment is only to demonstrate, i.e., '[to] point out to the District Court,' that the record does not disclose a genuine dispute on a material fact. [*5]  It is enough for the movant to bring up the fact that the record does not contain such an issue and to identify that part of the record which bears out his assertion. Once this is done, his burden is discharged, and, if the record in fact bears out the claim that no genuine dispute exists on any material fact, it is then the respondent's burden to set forth affirmative evidence, specific facts, showing that there is a genuine dispute on that issue. If the respondent fails to carry that burden, summary judgment should be granted.
Id. at 1339. (quoting City of Mt. Pleasant v. Associated Elec. Coop., 838 F.2d 268, 273-274 (8th Cir. 1988) (citations omitted). Only disputes over facts that may affect the outcome of the suit under governing law will properly preclude the entry of summary judgment. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248.

FMLA Interference Claim
The FMLA entitles an eligible employee to total of twelve workweeks leave during any twelve-month period because of a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform the functions of the employee. 29 U.S.C. § 2612(a)(1)(D). The employee is entitled to return from FMLA leave to the same employment held by the employee when the leave commenced or to an equivalent position. 29 U.S.C. §2614(a)(1). "However, an employee is not entitled to restoration if, at the end of the FMLA leave period, the employee [*6]  is still unable to perform an essential function of the job." Bloom v. Metro Heart Group of St. Louis, Inc., 440 F.3d 1025, 1030 (8th Cir. 2006) (quoting Hatchett v. Philander Smith Coll., 251 F.3d 670, 677 (8th Cir.2001)).
Taylor emailed Villines at ACC on August 16, 2012, the day before her twelve weeks of leave expired, and expressed her intention to return to work the following day. However, in light of the Fitness-for-Duty Medical Certification she had previously provided from her doctor certifying that she would not be able to return to work until September 4, 2012, Villines replied to Taylor's email the same day, advising her that she had to have clearance from her doctor before she could return to work. When she went back to her doctor on August 17, 2012, rather than clear her to return to work, Taylor's doctor pushed her return-to-work date back to January 2, 2013.
Taylor does not dispute these facts. Rather, she argues that the August 16, 2012 email from Villines was "tantamount to a termination as he never intended to allow Taylor to return to her employment at ACC" and that this premature termination interfered with the exercise of her FMLA leave. However, ACC has shown through Taylor's own doctor's certification that Taylor was not able to perform the essential functions of her job at the end of her twelve weeks of leave. [*7]  Therefore, she was not entitled to restoration at the end of her leave. Furthermore, Taylor has not disputed that she did, in fact, receive her full twelve weeks of leave under the FMLA. Absent a showing that the employer denied the employee entitlements under the FMLA, a claim for FMLA violations cannot survive. Quinn v. St. Louis Cty., 653 F.3d 745, 753 (8th Cir. 2011). ACC's motion for summary judgment on Taylor's FMLA interference claim is granted.

FMLA and ADA Discrimination Claims
Absent direct proof, Taylor's discrimination claims under the FMLA and the ADA are both analyzed under the familiar McDonnell Douglas3 burden-shifting framework requiring the employee to prove a prima facie case of discrimination, followed by the employer proving a legitimate reason for its actions, and finally the employee proving that the stated reason is pretextual. Burciaga v. Ravago Americas LLC, 791 F.3d 930, 934 (8th Cir. 2015) (applying the framework to an FMLA discrimination case); Greer v. Emerson Elec. Co., 185 F.3d 917, 920 (8th Cir. 1999) (applying the framework to an ADA discrimination cases).
To establish a prima facie case for discrimination under the FMLA, Taylor must prove that ACC was "motivated by [her] exercise of FMLA rights when it took the adverse actions" against her." Pulczinski v. Trinity Structural Towers, Inc., 691 F.3d 996, 1007 (8th Cir. 2012) (internal quotation omitted). Taylor offers no proof that she was fired for exercising her [*8]  FMLA rights. She testified that she thought she was fired because Villines "did not like women" . . . "older women especially." And she submitted that she thinks other employees were treated better when they had reason to be off of work, but none of her proof supports a finding that her termination was motivated by her exercise of her FMLA rights. Therefore, she has not made a prima facie case of discrimination under the FMLA.
To establish a prima facie case for discrimination under the ADA, with ACC conceding that she has a qualifying disability, Taylor must prove that she is qualified to perform the essential functions of her job with or without a reasonable accommodation. Libel v. Adventure Lands of Am., Inc., 482 F.3d 1028, 1034 (8th Cir. 2007). The proof provided by Taylor's own doctor on the date she proposed that she return to work, however, was that Taylor could not perform the essential functions of her job. That is why her doctor did not clear her to return to work at that time. Absent proof of this element, Taylor cannot prove a prima facie case of discrimination under the ADA.
Taylor argues that ACC was required to offer her accommodations under the ADA so that she could return to work. She did not request accommodation. However, Taylor takes the [*9]  position that when she communicated her desire to continue to work for ACC—beginning on the day she first took leave, the company was required to provide her with an opportunity to telecommute on an as-needed basis. In support of this argument Taylor relies on a case out of the Seventh Circuit, Hendricks-Robinson v. Excel Corp., 154 F.3d 685 (7th Cir. 1998), which held that "[a] request as straightforward as asking for continued employment is a sufficient request for accommodation." Id. at 694.
Regardless of the factual differences between this case and the Seventh Circuit case, that is not the law in this circuit. The Eighth Circuit has recently affirmed that to establish a prima facie case, the employer must have failed to engage in an "interactive process" about possible accommodations, which requires the employee to prove that: (1) the employer knew about the employee's disability; (2) the employee requested accommodations or assistance for his or her disability; (3) the employer did not make a good faith effort to assist the employee in seeking accommodations; and (4) the employee could have been reasonably accommodated but for the employer's lack of good faith. Schaffhauser v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 794 F.3d 899, 906 (8th Cir. 2015) (citing Peyton v. Fred's Stores of Ark., Inc., 561 F.3d 900, 902 (8th Cir. 2009). It is undisputed that ACC knew about Taylor's disability, but the Court finds [*10]  that under these facts she did not request accommodation for her disability. Furthermore, Taylor has failed to show that her disability could have been reasonably accommodated as she now argues.
Even if she could establish a prima facie case of discrimination under both the FMLA and the ADA, ACC has met its burden of proving that it had a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for terminating Taylor. On the day her leave expired her doctor reported that her medical conditions prevented her from returning to work until January 2, 2013. This shifts the burden back to Taylor to prove that this reason was a pretext for discrimination. To meet her burden, Taylor claims that she was disparately treated, pointing to the treatment of three other employees, Amanda Cook, Cindy Posey, and David Morris. Proving disparate treatment is a rigorous test at the pretext stage, requiring an employee to show that the potential comparators "have dealt with the same supervisor, have been subject to the same standards, and engaged in the same conduct without any mitigating or distinguishing circumstances." Schaffhauser v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 794 F.3d 899, 904 (8th Cir. 2015) (citations omitted).
Amanda Cook was an employee, and daughter of Taylor's supervisor, who sustained [*11]  severe injuries in a car wreck. Taylor claims that Cook received long-term disability coverage even though she had not been there long enough to qualify and that her job was left open for over year while she was on long-term disability. Taylor, on the other hand, did not qualify for disability coverage. There situations were not similar, and Taylor does not offer other proof she and Cook were similarly situated.
The only argument presented with respect to Cindy Posey was that she was an ACC employee who had a fall on AAC's parking lot and that Posey was provided a laptop and arrangements were made for her to work from the hospital and her home for over a year while she recovered from her injuries. Taylor has provided no facts to satisfying her burden of proving that Posey dealt with the same supervisor or had the same standards she did. She also fails to prove what requests Posey made under the FMLA or ADA or to otherwise qualify Posey as a comparator.
Likewise, Taylor has not proven that she was similarly situated to David Morris. Morris took a leave of absence for two years so he could run for a political office. This is in no way similar to an employee taking FMLA leave or requesting [*12]  accommodation under the ADA. Taylor has failed to show that the reasons ACC terminated her were a pretext for discrimination, and ACC's motion for summary judgment on Taylor's FMLA and ADA discrimination claims is granted.

Wage Discrimination Claims
Taylor asserts that ACC discriminated against her on the basis of sex in violation of the Equal Pay Act ("EPA") and Title VII by paying male employees more money for doing the same work that she did. Since Taylor's allegations relate solely to unequal pay for equal work, her Title VII claim is governed by the standards of the EPA. Drum v. Leeson Elec. Corp., 565 F.3d 1071, 1072 (8th Cir. 2009). To establish a prima facie case under the EPA, an employee must prove an employer paid different wages to men and women performing equal work. Id. Taylor has failed to make a prima facie case. She identified four male employees whom she believed would prove her case, but offered no proof as to what they made or how their job responsibilities compared to hers. As ACC pointed out in its reply brief, Taylor cites to a page from her deposition to support her allegation that the four male employees made significantly more than she did for less work, but she failed to attach that deposition page as an exhibit. Furthermore, [*13]  unsubstantiated allegations in Taylor's own deposition would be insufficient to defeat a motion for summary judgment. See, Davenport v. Riverview Gardens Sch. Dist., 30 F.3d 940, 945 (8th Cir.1994) (affirming summary judgment on race discrimination claim where "plaintiff presented no such evidence other than his own unsubstantiated allegations in deposition"). ACC's motion for summary judgment on Taylor's wage discrimination claims is granted.

§1983 Claims
Taylor alleges that she was unlawfully discriminated against because of her sex and her age in violation of 42 U.S.C. §1983. The Court agrees with the conclusions of Judge Kristine G. Baker that the weight of authority suggests that the ADEA is the exclusive remedy for age discrimination. See Bass v. Univ. of Arkansas System, No. 5:12-CV-00286-KGB, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 131360, 2015 WL 5712850, at *6 (E.D. Ark. Sept. 29, 2015). Furthermore, Taylor's claim for sex discrimination is procedurally barred since she failed to include in in her EEOC charge. Taylor argues that even if her EEOC filings did not include her sex discrimination claim, it is a valid claim and was "reasonably related" to those filed with the EEOC, relying on two Second Circuit cases.4 The Eighth Circuit has held that it does not "require that subsequently-filed lawsuits mirror the administrative charges" as long as "the sweep of any subsequent [*14]  judicial complaint" is no broader than "the scope of the EEOC investigation which could reasonably be expected to grow out of the charge" filed in the EEOC complaint. Wedow v. City of Kansas City, Mo., 442 F.3d 661, 674 (8th Cir. 2006) (quoting Duncan v. Delta Consol. Indus., Inc., 371 F.3d 1020, 1025 (8th Cir.2004)). A review of the EEOC intake questionnaire affirms the conclusion that the sex discrimination claim contained in Taylor's second amended complaint is not reasonably related to the charges she made to the EEOC. For these reasons, ACC's motion for summary judgment on age and sex discrimination pursuant to §1983 is granted.

Conclusion
Therefore, Defendant's motion for summary judgment (Docket No. 54) is GRANTED. Plaintiff's motion for extension of time to respond to the motion (Docket No. 66) is denied as moot.
IT IS SO ORDERED this 24th day of May, 2016.
/s/ James M. Moody
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

JUDGMENT
Consistent with the Order entered separately today, this case is dismissed with prejudice.
IT IS SO ORDERED this 24th day of May, 2016.
/s/ James M. Moody
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

