Theilig v. United Techs. Corp.
United States District Court for the District of Connecticut
March 25, 2010, Decided; March 25, 2010, Filed
CIVIL NO. 3:07-CV-1530(EBB)

Reporter
2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 153629 *
LEONARD THEILIG, Plaintiff, v. UNITED TECHNOLOGIES CORPORATION, PRATT & WHITNEY DIVISION, Defendant.
Prior History: Theilig v. United Techs. Corp., 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 141244 (D. Conn., Dec. 9, 2009)
Counsel:  [*1] For Leonard Theilig, Plaintiff: Barbara E. Gardner, LEAD ATTORNEY, Manchester, CT USA.
For United Tech Corp, Pratt & Whitney Div, Defendant: Albert Llosas Barrueco, LEAD ATTORNEY, Pepper Hamilton, LLP-NY, New York, NY USA; Albert Zakarian, LEAD ATTORNEY, Day Pitney LLP-Htfd-CT, Hartford, CT USA; Victoria Woodin Chavey, LEAD ATTORNEY, Jackson Lewis - P.C. Htfd, CT, Hartford, CT USA.
Judges: ELLEN BREE BURNS, SENIOR UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: ELLEN BREE BURNS
Opinion



RULING ON PLAINTIFF'S MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION
Plaintiff Leonard Theilig ("Theilig") asks the Court to reconsider its ruling on United Technologies, Pratt & Whitney Division's ("Pratt") Motion for Summary Judgment. Theilig's Motion for Reconsideration [doc. #50] is GRANTED. However, upon reconsideration, Pratt's Motion for Summary Judgment is GRANTED as originally issued.
Theilig's Complaint alleged discrimination in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12201, et seq., and disability discrimination under the Connecticut Fair Employment Practices Act ("CFEPA"), Conn. Gen. Stat. § 46a-60, et seq. It contained two causes of action, one under each statute.
The Court granted Pratt's Motion for Summary Judgment on both counts. Theilig moves for reconsideration [*2]  on the grounds that "the Court failed to address plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim and/or discrimination claim as a separate claim(s)."
The standard for granting a motion for reconsideration is strict. See Shrader v. CSX Transp., Inc., 70 F.3d 255, 257 (2d Cir. 1995). Such a motion will generally be denied unless the "moving party can point to controlling decisions or data that the court overlooked—matters, in other words, that might reasonably be expected to alter the conclusion reached by the court." Id. "The major grounds justifying reconsideration are an intervening change of controlling law, the availability of new evidence, or the need to correct a clear error or prevent manifest injustice." Virgin Atl. Airways, Ltd. v. Nat'l Mediation Bd., 956 F.2d 1245, 1255 (2d Cir. 1992) (internal quotation marks omitted).
Despite the high threshold for a motion for reconsideration, the Court nevertheless finds reconsideration appropriate here because when considering a motion for summary judgment in discrimination cases, "[t]he trial court must be especially cautious in deciding whether to grant this drastic provisional remedy . . . because the employer's intent is often at issue and careful scrutiny may reveal circumstantial evidence supporting an inference of discrimination." Belfi v. Prendergast, 191 F.3d 129, 135 (2nd Cir. 1999). However, even construing Theilig's ADA claim [*3]  to include a failure to accommodate claim separate from a discrimination claim, summary judgment in Pratt's favor is still appropriate.
In order to make out a prima facie case under the ADA based on an employer's failure to accommodate, a plaintiff must show that: (1) he is an individual with a disability within the meaning of the ADA; (2) that the employer had notice of the disability; (3) that with reasonable accommodation, he could perform the essential functions of the position sought; and (4) that the employer refused to make such an accommodation. Mitchell v. Washington Cent. Sch. Dist., 190 F.3d 1, 6 (2d Cir. 1999). Because Theilig proffered to Pratt only one accommodation which was, by law, an unreasonable accommodation of his claimed disability, and then, when it was not granted, resigned, he failed to establish a prima facie case of a failure to accommodate under the ADA.
An ADA plaintiff "must show, as part of her burden of persuasion, that an effective accommodation exists that would render her otherwise qualified." Borkowski v. Valley Cent. Sch. Dist., 63 F.3d 131, 139 (2d Cir. 1995). "On the issue of reasonable accommodation, the plaintiff bears only the burden of identifying an accommodation, the costs of which, facially, do not clearly exceed its benefits." Id. This burden is not a heavy one. See id. Moreover, [*4]  the question of whether a proposed accommodation is reasonable is "fact-specific" and must be evaluated on "a case-by-case basis." Wernick v. Fed. Reserve Bank, 91 F.3d 379, 385 (2d Cir. 1996). Nevertheless, district courts may properly grant summary judgment when a plaintiff fails to meet even this light burden. See id.; Borkowski, 63 F.3d at 139.
According to the uncontested facts presented by the parties, as of November 2004, Theilig's psychiatrist, Dr. Hira Jain ("Jain") concluded that Theilig's condition posed a significant risk of workplace violence or suicide as a result of Theilig having told him that he "did not know what [he would] do if [he saw]" his former supervisors again. Theilig continued to be regularly treated by Jain throughout the Fall of 2004 and into the Winter of 2005. During this time, Jain concluded that Theilig could not return to work under any conditions due to his deepened depression and potential for workplace violence.
By a letter dated March 14, 2005, Jain stated that Theilig could return to work only if he worked from home with "no direct person to person contact and definitely none with his previous coworkers." In this letter, Jain cited Theilig's "significant potential for violence" as support for his recommended restrictions. Jain further [*5]  advised that "under no circumstances should [Theilig] return to work under the old work environment." This was the only proffered accommodation presented by Theilig prior to his resignation in July 2005.
The evidentiary threshold for reasonable accommodation is set forth in Borkowski and in Jackan v. New York State Dep't of Labor, 205 F.3d 562 (2d Cir. 2000). Borkowski states that: "It is enough for the plaintiff to suggest the existence of a plausible accommodation, the costs of which, facially, do not clearly exceed its benefits. Once the plaintiff has done this, she has made out a prima facie showing that a reasonable accommodation is available, and the risk of nonpersuasion falls on the defendant." 63 F.3d at 138. In Jackan, the Second Circuit clarified that statement as follows:
Read out of context, that sentence arguably suggests that the plaintiff bears only a burden of production on the existence of an accommodation, rather than the burden of persuasion. But when the sentence is read in the context of the preceding sentences, it clearly refers to the reasonableness of the accommodation, not its existence . . . . Before a factfinder reaches the question of the reasonableness of the accommodation- upon which the burden of persuasion falls on the employer-defendant—it must first [*6]  determine that an accommodation existed.
205 F.3d at 567. Jackan holds that a court must consider the "reasonableness, not the existence, of the [proposed] accommodation." Id. (quotations omitted).
Theilig's own psychiatrist insisted that there was no accommodation available to Pratt that would allow Theilig to return to work without being a risk for workplace violence or suicide if he was placed in contact with any of his prior colleagues or supervisors. As a matter of law, this is not a reasonable accommodation.
Gaul v. Lucent Techs., 134 F.3d 576 (3d Cir. 1998), cited by Pratt, is analogous to the situation here. In Gaul, plaintiff-appellant Dennis Gaul's proposed accommodation was that he not be subjected to "prolonged and inordinate stress." Id. at 577. As the Third Circuit stated, this accommodation "would impose a wholly impractical obligation on . . . any employer." Id. at 581. Similarly, in this case, ensuring that Theilig had "no direct person to person contact and definitely none with his previous coworkers" was a wholly impractical obligation for Pratt. This is especially true when the consequences of Theilig having any contact with these people was a risk of workplace violence or suicide. Additionally, the court in Gaul noted that "by asking to be transferred [*7]  away from individuals who cause him prolonged and inordinate stress, Gaul is essentially asking this court to establish the conditions of his employment, most notably, with whom he will work." Id. This, the court held, was not required by the ADA. Id. The Third Circuit then cited to Second Circuit precedent, stating that "nothing in the law leads us to conclude that in enacting the disability acts, Congress intended to interfere with personnel decisions within an organizational hierarchy. Congress intended simply that disabled persons have the same opportunities available to them as are available to nondisabled persons." Wernick, 91 F.3d at 384.
In Kennedy, the Second Circuit affirmed summary judgment where the plaintiff had requested an accommodation that, like the accommodation requested here, would have involved no personal contact whatsoever with her current supervisor. 193 F.3d at 121-22. The Kennedy Court further ruled that, because the plaintiff was requesting not just a change in the supervisor to whom she reported, but also sought, as Theilig does here, total protection from any contact with the supervisor in question, it would be impossible for the employer to implement the requested accommodation. Id. at 123.
Theilig's reliance [*8]  on McBride v. BIC Consumer Prods. Mfg. Co., Inc., 583 F.3d 92, 96 (2d Cir. 2009), is misplaced. In McBride, the Second Circuit made clear that the burden of establishing a reasonable accommodation rests on the plaintiff and that an "employer's failure to engage in . . . an interactive process . . . does not relieve a plaintiff of her burden of demonstrating, following discovery, that some accommodation . . . was possible." 531 F.3d at 101 (emphasis added). Here, Theilig proffered an unreasonable accommodation to Pratt, was not granted this accommodation, and then subsequently resigned. Accordingly, pursuant to McBride, the Court need not reach the issue of whether Pratt failed to engage in the interactive process with Theilig and, if so, whether that failure could rationally support an inference that Pratt violated the ADA.
Because Theilig's sole requested accommodation prior to resignation exceeded the scope of a reasonable accommodation, Pratt was not required to grant it—especially because Theilig's psychiatrist implicitly warned that any deviation from that accommodation could have led to workplace violence or suicide. Theilig thus failed, as a matter of law, to identify a reasonable accommodation "the costs of which, facially, do not clearly exceed its benefits," as required [*9]  to survive summary judgment. Borkowski, 63 F.3d at 138.
Accordingly, Pratt's Motion for Summary Judgment remains GRANTED.
SO ORDERED
/s/ ELLEN BREE BURNS
SENIOR U.S. DISTRICT JUDGE
Dated at New Haven, Connecticut this 25th day of March, 2010.


End of Document

