Thomas v. Fed. Express
United States District Court for the Central District of California
November 19, 2009, Decided; November 19, 2009, Filed
Case No. CV 09-00474-RGK (Ex)

Reporter
2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 110024 *
KAREN THOMAS v. FEDERAL EXPRESS, et al.
Subsequent History: Affirmed by Thomas v. Fed. Express Corp., 2011 U.S. App. LEXIS 9794 (9th Cir. Cal., May 11, 2011)
Counsel:  [*1] For Karen Thomas, an indivdual, Plaintiff: Barbara P E DuVan, LEAD ATTORNEY, Attorney at Law, Torrance, CA; Robert Alan Hennig, LEAD ATTORNEY, Robert A Hennig Law Offices, Los Angeles, CA.
For Federal Express Corporation, a corporation doing business as Fedex Express, Defendant: Frederick L Douglas, LEAD ATTORNEY, PRO HAC VICE, Federal Express Corporation, Memphis, TN; Stacey Olivia Jue, LEAD ATTORNEY, Federal Express Corporation, Legal Department, Irvine, CA.
Judges: The Honorable R. GARY KLAUSNER, U.S. DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: R. GARY KLAUSNER
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES - GENERAL
Proceedings: (IN CHAMBERS) Order Re Plaintiff's and Defendant's Motions for Summary Judgment (DE 35 and 43)

I. INTRODUCTION
Plaintiff Karen Thomas ("Plaintiff") alleges that her former employer, Federal Express Corporation ("Defendant"), violated the California Fair Employment and Housing Act ("FEHA") by failing to reasonably accommodate her disability and by discriminating against her because of it. Cal. Gov. Code § 12940. Plaintiff and Defendant have moved for summary judgment. For the reasons explained below, the Court GRANTS Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment and DENIES as moot Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment.

II. STATEMENT  [*2] OF UNDISPUTED FACTS
Defendant employed Plaintiff first as a driver and then as a courier from 1989 to 2008. (Def.'s UF 1-2.) During her employment tenure, Plaintiff sought twenty three leaves of absences for a total of 2407 days. (Rayne Decl. P 5-6, Ex. A & B.) Defendant granted the first twenty two requests for leave and allowed Plaintiff to return to work each time. (Def.'s UF 17.) The twenty third request for a leave of absence came after Plaintiff sustained a shoulder injury at work in November 2005, only a week after Plaintiff had returned from another leave of absence. (Def.'s UF 18-20.) Again, Defendant granted Plaintiff's request for leave of absence immediately. (Def.'s UF 21.) This time, however, Plaintiff's leave of absence lasted thirty months, the maximum allowed by Defendant's Leave of Absence Policy (the "Policy"). (Def.'s UF 13.) As a result, Defendant terminated Plaintiff's employment with eligibility for conditional rehire on May 16, 2009. (Rayne Decl. P 26.)
Defendant has an entire department (entitled "HMCP") dedicated to managing employees that are on leave of absence. (Def.'s UF 7.) Two individuals within HMCP were in charge of handling Plaintiff's leave of absence  [*3] in times pertinent to this action: Nancy Hanlon ("Hanlon"), from December 2003 until June 2006; and Myriam Rayne ("Rayne"), from June 2006 to May 2008. (Def.'s UF 8-9.)
During Plaintiff's thirty-month leave, Hanlon and Rayne repeatedly communicated with Plaintiff to inquire about her medical condition and return to work date. (Def.'s UF 23; Hanlon Decl. Ex. E-H; Rayne Decl. Ex D-G, I-J.) Originally, Plaintiff's medical records indicated that she could return to work on November 23, 2005 with some restrictions. (Rayne Decl. Ex. F page 42.) Then Plaintiff submitted another note that postponed her return to work to December 10, 2005. (Rayne Decl. Ex. F page 43.) Accordingly, in December 2005, Hanlon sent Plaintiff a letter, asking Plaintiff to return to perform to a temporary work assignment with some restrictions. (Hanlon Decl. P 8 & Ex. G.) In response, Plaintiff submitted multiple medical notes from her physicians, postponing her return to work to December 31, then to January 11, then to February 1, then to February 11, then to February 23, and then to March 2006. (Rayne Decl. Ex. F pages 44-49.) Accordingly, in March 2006, Hanlon wrote another letter to Plaintiff, informing her that  [*4] a courier position was available to her for her return in March 2006. (Hanlon Decl. P 10 & Ex. J.) Again, Plaintiff responded with another medical note from her physician, this time stating that Plaintiff could not return to work in any capacity, and that she was temporarily totally disabled. (Hanlon Decl. P 11 & Ex. L.)
Even though Dr. Capen's note indicated that Plaintiff was temporarily totally disabled, Hanlon reviewed all available temporary work assignments to find a suitable assignment for Plaintiff to no avail. (Def.'s UF 33; Hanlon Decl. P 12.) On March 30, 2006, Hanlon spoke on the phone with Plaintiff about Dr. Capen's notes and Plaintiff's restrictions and asked Plaintiff to inform her if her restrictions changed. (Def.'s UF 33; Hanlon Decl. P 12.) Plaintiff never submitted any further notes advising Defendant, Hanlon, or Rayne of any improvements in her medical situation. (Def.'s UF 34.) Rather, from March 2006 to May 2008, Plaintiff remained disabled and unable to return to work in any capacity. (Def.'s UF 35.)
On June 9, 2006, Hanlon wrote a letter to Plaintiff, advising her that due to Defendant's corporate restructuring, Rayne will replace Hanlon and will be in charge  [*5] of managing Plaintiff's leave of absence. (Def.'s UF 34; Hanlon Decl. P 13 & Ex. M.) Plaintiff was not fully cooperative with Rayne. For example, in October 2007, Rayne could not reach Plaintiff and had to contact Plaintiff's mother, who was listed as an emergency contact, in order to reach her. (Rayne Decl. P 13 & Ex. M.) Moreover, Plaintiff claimed that she could not call Rayne back during business hours because of cell phone charges during those hours, even after Rayne offered Plaintiff a toll-free number. (Rayne Decl. Ex. D page 31.)
On February 4, 2008, Rayne wrote a letter to Plaintiff, reminding her that she would reach the end of her thirty-month disability leave period under defendant's Policy by May 17, 2008. (Rayne Decl. Ex. G.) The letter outlined Defendant's Policy and stated that Plaintiff had "from the date of [her medical restriction] release until the expiration of the leave period to secure a position [with Defendant]." Id. The letter also stated that Plaintiff would "receive placement preference for any lateral or lower level position for which [she] successfully complete the selection process." Id. The letter further stated that Plaintiff would "be provided assistance  [*6] in applying for any posted positions for which [she met] the requirements and express[ed] an interest." Id. But Rayne warned Plaintiff that she must assist Defendant in finding her a vacant position, and that waiting until the end of her leave period would make that very difficult. Id. Finally, Rayne requested a copy of Plaintiff's resume and offered to help Plaintiff improve her resume and competitiveness for other positions with Defendant. Id.
Plaintiff never submitted her resume to Defendant and never applied for any positions within the company until the end of the thirty month period. Neither did she express any interest in any of the positions or suggested how Defendant could accommodate her disability in any given position. Nonetheless, on her own initiative, Rayne initiated a job change applications for Plaintiff on her behalf to aid her return to the company on March 27, 2008. (Rayne Decl. Ex. I.) Rayne asked Plaintiff to review the job description, consult with her doctor, and let Rayne know if she can perform the job by April 2, 2008. Id. Rayne also forwarded a "reasonable accommodation request form" to Plaintiff, so that Plaintiff may suggest reasonable accommodations that  [*7] would enable her to perform the position by April 7, 2008. Id. Rayne sent the letter with overnight mail. Id. Plaintiff did not supply the records until the application date expired. For a second time, Rayne initiated a job change application for another available position on April 10, 2008. (Rayne Decl. Ex. J.) Plaintiff again failed to submit the documents by the given deadline, April 16, 2008, and the application was never completed.
On May 7, 2008, about ten days before the thirty-month deadline, Rayne called Plaintiff to discuss Plaintiff's work restrictions and to identify an available position. (Def.'s UF 71; Rayne Depo. 45:9-51:1.) Rayne and Plaintiff reviewed the available job listings together but were unable to identify a position that Plaintiff was able to perform. Id. Defendant terminated Plaintiff at the end of the thirty month leave period. (Rayne Decl. Ex. T.)

III. JUDICIAL STANDARD
Pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56(c), summary judgment is proper only where "the pleadings, the discovery and disclosure materials on file, and any affidavits show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the [moving party] is entitled to judgment as a matter  [*8] of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). Upon such showing, the court may grant summary judgment "on all or part of the claim." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a)-(b).
To prevail on a summary judgment motion, the moving party must show that there are no triable issues of material fact as to matters upon which it has the burden of proof at trial. See Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 325, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). On issues where the moving party does not have the burden of proof at trial, the moving party is required only to show that there is an absence of evidence to support the non-moving party's case. See id. at 326.
To defeat a summary judgment motion, the non-moving party may not merely rely on its pleadings or on conclusory statements. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e). Nor may the non-moving party merely attack or discredit the moving party's evidence. Nat'l Union Fire Ins. Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co., 701 F.2d 95, 97 (9th Cir. 1983). The non-moving party must affirmatively present specific admissible evidence sufficient to create a genuine issue of material fact for trial. See Celotex Corp., 477 U.S. at 324.

IV. DISCUSSION
A. Failure to Provide Reasonable Accommodation Claim
Plaintiff claims Defendant violated FEHA by failing  [*9] to accommodate for her disability. Under FEHA, the employer is obligated to make "reasonable accommodations" for the disability of its employee. Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(k). The employer has an affirmative duty to engage in an interactive process with the employee that is designed to reveal how the employer may accommodate the her disability. Jensen v. Wells Fargo Bank, 85 Cal.App.4th 245, 256, 102 Cal. Rptr. 2d 55 (2000). There is no requirement that the interactive process be formal or "ritualized;" an informal interactive process will suffice. Wilson v. County of Orange, 169 Cal.App.4th 1185, 1195, 87 Cal. Rptr. 3d 439 (2009). According to FEHA, reasonable accommodations include:
Job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, reassignment to a vacant position, acquisition or modification of equipment or devices, adjustment or modification of examinations, training materials or policies, the provision of qualified readers or interpreters, and other similar accommodations for individuals with disabilities.
Cal. Gov. Code § 12926(n)(2).
In order to prevail in a failure to accommodate claim, the plaintiff must first establish that she suffers from a disability covered by FEHA. Jensen, 85 Cal.App.4th at 257. Once disability  [*10] is established, the employer may only obtain summary judgment by showing that 1) the employer offered reasonable accommodations that the employee refused, 2) the employee could not qualify for any vacant position within employer's organization with or without accommodations, or 3) "the employer did everything in its power to find a reasonable accommodation . . . but the employee failed to engage in discussions in good faith." Id. at 262.
Here, the second and third inquiries indicate that Defendant is entitle to summary judgment. With respect to the second inquiry, undisputed facts indicate that Plaintiff could not have qualified for any vacant position with Defendant. The parties do not dispute that Plaintiff submitted medical records and physician notes to Defendant that stated she was "temporarily totally disabled" from March 29, 2006 through April 7, 2008. (Def.'s UF 35; Rayne Decl. Ex. F. Page 75-76.) On April 7, 2008, Plaintiff submitted another medical note to Defendant, which stated that her disability status was "permanent and stationary" without any further explanation (Rayne Decl. Ex. F. Page 78.) Indeed, Plaintiff refused at least one offer for a temporary assignment and  [*11] one offer to return to her previous position, reasoning that her medical condition would not allow her to return to work. Therefore, according to undisputed medical records, Plaintiff was unable to perform any jobs until three weeks prior to the end of her thirty-month leave of absence.
Finally, on April 28, 2008, less than three weeks prior to expiration of the thirty-month deadline, Plaintiff submitted a medical evaluation form to Defendant that states: Plaintiff can only lift, push, or pull less than five pounds; Plaintiff is unable to perform repetitive pulling, pushing, and fine manipulations with her right hand; Plaintiff cannot balance, twist, or turn for more than two thirds of her work day; Plaintiff cannot work in an environment with odors and fume, caustic or toxic components, and moving machinery parts; and that it is unclear if and when Plaintiff's condition will improve. (Rayne Decl. Ex. F. Page 80-81.) Upon receiving this information, Rayne reviewed the list of available positions and could not identify a position that Plaintiff could perform with or without reasonable accommodations. (Rayne Decl. P 22; Rayne Depo. 45:9-51:1.) Moreover, on May 7, 2008, Rayne called Plaintiff  [*12] and reviewed the available positions with her to determine whether Plaintiff was interested and able to perform any of them. (Def.'s UF 71; Rayne Depo. 45:9-51:1.) Rayne could not identify any jobs, and nothing in the record indicates that Plaintiff indicated interest or the ability to perform any of the jobs either. In this light, there is no genuine dispute of material fact that would allow Plaintiff's claim to proceed to trial.
Plaintiff offers the opinion of an expert, Edward L. Bennet ("Bennet"), stating that twenty six available positions could have been performed by Plaintiff, and that Defendant failed to reasonably accommodate Plaintiff by refusing to offer her those positions. Plaintiff's proffered evidence does not rescue its claim from summary judgment for at least three reasons. First, there is no foundation for Bennet's opinion. His report does not explain why he believes Plaintiff could have performed any of the positions listed at all. Second, Bennet's opinion contradicts undisputed evidence that shows Plaintiff would not have been able to perform the positions listed in Bennet's report. For example, Bennet states that Plaintiff could have been a Checker/Sorter. A Checker/Sorter  [*13] is responsible for checking and sorting packages that weigh up to seventy five pounds. (Rayne Decl.P 25.) But Plaintiff cannot lift more than five pounds. Bennet states that Plaintiff could have been a Dispatcher. The Dispatcher's main responsibility at Defendant's corporation is to schedule package pick-ups and deliveries and involves heavy use of computers for data entry. Id. But Plaintiff is unable to use her right hand for fine manipulations. Other jobs that Bennet lists involve lifting weights up to seventy five pounds, computer data entry, or working near machinery and fumes, none of which Plaintiff can do. Third, Plaintiff's own deposition shows that she was unwilling to work anywhere but in Los Angeles, and Bennet does not point out the locations for the allegedly available positions. Defendant's evidence, on the other hand, shows that many of the listed positions were not available in the Los Angeles area. (Rayne Decl. P 25.) In this light, Bennet's unsubstantiated assertions do not create a genuine dispute of material facts. Based on all the facts presented by the parties, it is clear that Plaintiff could not work in any vacant position at Defendant's company.
Plaintiff also  [*14] argues that notwithstanding her disability and restrictions, Defendant's policy of disallowing more than thirty months of leave is itself evidence of failure to accommodate. That is not so. "Reasonable accommodation does not require the employer to wait indefinitely for an employee's medical condition to be corrected." Hanson v. Lucky Stores, 74 Cal.App.4th 215, 227, 87 Cal. Rptr. 2d 487 (1999)(citation omitted). Indeed, in Hanson, the California Court of Appeal held a sixteen month leave adequate. Id. Here, Plaintiff's final leave of absence alone lasted thirty months. Also, there is nothing in the record that indicates Plaintiff even asked for her leave of absence to be extended beyond thirty months. Rather, as discussed below, the facts indicate that Plaintiff impeded any chance for reasonable accommodations within the thirty month period. Therefore, Plaintiff cannot argue that thirty month of leave and the assistance she received to get back to work is insufficient under FEHA.
Next, with respect to the third inquiry, Defendant has established through undisputed facts that it did all within its power to accommodate Plaintiff, but Plaintiff's failure to engage in good faith broke down the interactive process.  [*15] See Jensen, 85 Cal.App.4th at 262. As stated above, both Hanlon and Rayne kept in touch with Plaintiff and offered her temporary work assignments as well as a courier position while Plaintiff was on leave. Every time, Plaintiff rejected their offers and postponed her return to work date, eventually to April 2008. Even though Rayne reminded Plaintiff that her thirty-month deadline was approaching three months in advance and that finding a job for her would be very difficult if she waited until the end of the thirty month period, Plaintiff waited until three weeks before the deadline to update Defendant with her severe work restrictions. Nonetheless, in order to prompt her to participate in the interactive process, Rayne filed at least two job change applications on Plaintiff's behalf. But Plaintiff failed to complete the applications until the positions were filled. Rayne also encouraged Plaintiff to suggest how Defendant could modify the available positions to accommodate her disability, but Plaintiff did not cooperate. Despite receiving job listings from Rayne, Plaintiff never seriously pursued any of the jobs. Finally, there is no evidence that demonstrates Plaintiff made a good  [*16] faith effort to at least assist Defendant with finding her a vacant position by seriously engaging in discussion with Rayne as to how Defendant could accommodate her. These undisputed facts make a clear showing that Plaintiff's lack of diligence broke down the interactive process and eliminated Defendant's chance to accommodate Plaintiff.
B. Discrimination Claims
Plaintiff also argues that Defendant discriminated against her because of her disability. To bring a discrimination claim based on a disability under FEHA, the plaintiff has to establish that she was able to perform her job with or without reasonable accommodations. Jensen, 85 Cal.App.4th at 255-56. Here, it is undisputed that Plaintiff was not able to perform her duties as a courier, which requires lifting packages that weigh up to seventy five pounds. (Reyne Decl. P 25.) Moreover, there is nothing in the record that could indicate any discriminatory conduct by Defendant. Plaintiff's discrimination claims do not withstand summary judgment.

IV. CONCLUSION
For the reasons explained above, the Court GRANTS Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment and DENIES as moot Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment.

IT IS SO ORDERED.
    :    
Initials  [*17] of Preparer slw


End of Document

