Thomson v. Int'l Paper Co.
United States District Court for the Northern District of Iowa, Cedar Rapids Division
April 22, 2021, Decided; April 22, 2021, Filed
No. C20-37-LTS

Reporter
2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 256346 *; 2021 WL 7185084
NICHOLAS THOMSON, Plaintiff, vs. INTERNATIONAL PAPER COMPANY, et al., Defendants.
Counsel:  [*1] For Nicholas Thomson, Plaintiff: Emily Elaine Wilson, Melissa Carol Hasso, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Sherinian and Hasso Law Firm, Des Moines, IA USA; Mark D Sherinian, Sherinian & Hasso Law Firm, West Des Moines, IA USA.
For International Paper Co, Leon Hospodarsky, Individually and in his Corporate Capacity, Defendants: Ethan S Olson, Stephanie Glenn Techau, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Nyemaster Goode PC, Cedar Rapids, IA USA; Louis ¶ Britt, III, Mollie Katherine Wildmann, Russell W Jackson, PRO HAC VICE, Ford Harrison LLP, Memphis, TN USA.
Judges: Leonard T. Strand, Chief United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Leonard T. Strand
Opinion



MEMORANDUM OPINION AND ORDER


I. INTRODUCTION
This case is before me on a motion (Doc. 32) for partial summary judgment by plaintiff Nicholas Thomson and a motion (Doc. 36) for summary judgment by defendants International Paper Company (IP) and Leon Hospodarsky. The parties have filed resistances (Docs. 42, 43) and replies (Docs. 57, 58). Oral argument is not necessary. See Local Rule 7(c).

II. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
Thomson filed a petition at law and jury demand in the Iowa District Court for Linn County on February 11, 2020. Defendants removed the case to this court on March 16, 2020, based on federal question jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1331 and supplemental jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1367. See Doc. No. 1. Thomson filed an unresisted motion for leave to amend his complaint, which was granted on June 9, 2020. See Docs. 18, 19, 20. He later filed an unresisted motion for leave to file a second amended complaint, which was granted on November 23, 2020. See Docs. 28, 29, 30. Thomson alleges that he suffers from ulcerative colitis and that his employer discriminated and retaliated against him based on his disability. He also alleges [*3]  defamation based on comments from his supervisor insinuating that he was not truly on medical leave. Thomson asserts the following claims:
•Count I - Disability discrimination under the Iowa Civil Rights Act (ICRA) (against both defendants)
•Count II - Disability discrimination under the Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended by the ADA Amendment Act of 2008 (ADAAA) (against IP)
•Count III - Retaliation/Discrimination under the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) (against both defendants)
•Count IV - Defamation (against both defendants)
Doc. 30.
Defendants seek summary judgment on all claims. Thomson moves for partial summary judgment as to one element of his claims under the ICRA and ADAAA - whether he is an individual with a disability. I will address defendants' motion first, followed by plaintiff's motion.

III. SUMMARY JUDGMENT STANDARDS
Any party may move for summary judgment regarding all or any part of the claims asserted in a case. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). Summary judgment is appropriate when "the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue of material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322 (1986).
A material fact is one that [*4]  "'might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law.'" Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248 (1986). Thus, "the substantive law will identify which facts are material." Id. Facts that are "critical" under the substantive law are material, while facts that are "irrelevant or unnecessary" are not. Id.
An issue of material fact is genuine if it has a real basis in the record, Hartnagel v. Norman, 953 F.2d 394, 395 (8th Cir. 1992) (citing Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586-87 (1986)), or when "'a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party' on the question." Woods v. DaimlerChrysler Corp., 409 F.3d 984, 990 (8th Cir. 2005) (quoting Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248). Evidence that only provides "some metaphysical doubt as to the material facts," Matsushita, 475 U.S. at 586, or evidence that is "merely colorable" or "not significantly probative," Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249-50, does not make an issue of material fact genuine.
As such, a genuine issue of material fact requires "sufficient evidence supporting the claimed factual dispute" so as to "require a jury or judge to resolve the parties' differing versions of the truth at trial." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248-49. The party moving for entry of summary judgment bears "the initial responsibility of informing the court of the basis for its motion and identifying those portions of the record which show a lack of a genuine issue." Hartnagel, 953 F.2d at 395 (citing Celotex, 477 U.S. at 323). Once the moving party has met this burden, the nonmoving party must go beyond the pleadings [*5]  and by depositions, affidavits, or otherwise, designate specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial. Mosley v. City of Northwoods, 415 F.3d 908, 910 (8th Cir. 2005). The nonmovant must show an alleged issue of fact is genuine and material as it relates to the substantive law. If a party fails to make a sufficient showing of an essential element of a claim or defense with respect to which that party has the burden of proof, then the opposing party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Celotex, 477 U.S. at 322.
In determining if a genuine issue of material fact is present, I must view the evidence in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Matsushita, 475 U.S. at 587-88. Further, I must give the nonmoving party the benefit of all reasonable inferences that can be drawn from the facts. Id. However, "because we view the facts in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party, we do not weigh the evidence or attempt to determine the credibility of the witnesses." Kammueller v. Loomis, Fargo & Co., 383 F.3d 779, 784 (8th Cir. 2004). Instead, "the court's function is to determine whether a dispute about a material fact is genuine." Quick v. Donaldson Co., Inc., 90 F.3d 1372, 1376-77 (8th Cir. 1996).

IV. DEFENDANTS' MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT

A. Relevant Facts
The following facts are undisputed for purposes of defendants' motion, except where noted otherwise:

1. Facts Related to Disability Discrimination and [*6]  Retaliation Claims
On September 22, 2014, IP hired Thomson to work in a process support role at its Cedar River Mill in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. Thomson was diagnosed with and has suffered from ulcerative colitis since 2005. Ulcerative colitis is a chronic digestive disorder characterized by relapsing and remitting occurrences of inflammation in the colon lining. This inflammation impairs the function of the colon and leads to common symptoms of diarrhea, rectal bleeding, urgency, tenesmus (the feeling of the need to pass stools even when the bowels are empty), incontinence and abdominal pain. Untreated, it can lead to anemia, malnutrition, dehydration, the need for hospitalization or surgery or cancer. Thomson began experiencing ulcerative colitis flare-ups in February 2016. During a flare-up, he experienced symptoms of frequent diarrhea, severe abdominal pain, fatigue and rectal bleeding and was unable to work. Thomson applied for and was approved for short-term disability (STD) leave and FMLA leave in 2016 through 2019.
Thomson began his work as a Core I Team Member Level 1. A Core I Team Member may progress to Core I Team Member Levels 2 through 5, followed by Core II Team Member Level [*7]  6 through Core III Team Member Level 13. Thomson was assigned to Team D throughout his employment with IP and reported to Team Leader Leon Hospodarsky as his primary supervisor. Mike Ealy and Ben Markland were also Thomson's Team Leaders at times.
Thomson notified his Team Leader when he needed to miss work. Hospodarsky knew1 Thomson had to miss work on occasion due to stomach issues. Thomson also discussed his medical condition with Team Members Dillon Williams, Kendall Clayton and Mitch Grimm and Human Resources (HR) employee, Deb Ralston. Ralston assisted Thomson with submitting leave claims to Sedgwick.2 Glenn Morgan, the HR Manager at the Cedar River Mill facility from December 2014 through June 2018, also knew that Thomson had an intestinal issue and assisted Thomson with getting his claims approved through Sedgwick. Any absences approved by Sedgwick were absences due to STD, long-term disability or FMLA leave. HR notified Thomson's Team Leaders via email when it received notices from Sedgwick of new claims or the status of a claim - whether it was approved or denied. Ealy learned from Hospodarsky in early 2016 that Thomson's leave was STD or FMLA-protected leave. He knew that Thomson's [*8]  absences were caused by a medical condition related to his intestines. Markland also understood that Thomson had an intestinal issue and that his absences were designated as "Sedgwick" or STD because of that medical issue.
Thomson never heard Team Members make comments to him about this medical condition or use of FMLA leave. The parties dispute whether Hospodarsky harassed Thomson for taking medical leave. Defendants note Thomson testified the only times Hospodarsky would discuss Thomson's medical issue was when he would check in with Thomson to ask how things were going. Thomson, citing a statement from Williams, notes that Hospodarsky would single Thomson out and watch him more closely than his coworkers and would give Thomson extra work. Defendants acknowledge Grimm testified that Hospodarsky may have called on Thomson "probably a little more" but he could not recall any particular tasks Hospodarsky assigned to Thomson.
The parties dispute whether moving between Levels within the Core I Team constitutes a promotion. Thomson notes that Core I Team Members advance from Level 1 to Level 2 automatically in the absence of any safety incidents or accountability issues and that advancements [*9]  to further levels occur by obtaining additional skills. In any event, by December 15, 2016, Thomson had advanced to Core I Team Member Level 5, with approval from Hospodarsky at each Level. By 2017, Thomson had achieved all of the skills and qualifications necessary to be eligible for a promotion to a Core II position. He received no performance improvement plans and was never demoted.
IP's Core II Promotion Selection Process3 is initiated by HR posting the opportunity on an information board at the mill. Team Members interested in applying must submit a Job Interest Form to HR. The Team Member's Team Leader will then complete a Team Member Evaluation Form, which serves as a "gate" to promotion. Without a favorable Team Member Evaluation Form, a candidate is not eligible to interview.
In completing the Form, the Team Leader seeks input from the candidate's fellow Team Members. The Team Leader then reviews the Form with the candidate to provide feedback. The purpose of this process is to make sure the candidate is fully informed of the information provided to the Selection Panel. Anything the candidate needed to improve upon that would be relevant to a promotion decision should have been [*10]  reflected on the Form. This allowed the candidate to be fully informed of any feedback and to appeal that feedback if he or she disagreed with it.
Candidates were required to obtain their Team Leader's recommendation to proceed through the Promotion Selection Process. HR then formed a Selection Panel to conduct behavioral/technical interviews of the eligible candidates. The Selection Panel for Core II positions consisted of four Team Leaders (one from each of the four Teams in the mill) and a combination of four Core II or Core III Team Members. Selection Panel members were required to attend training before serving on a Selection Panel.
The Selection Panel interviews followed an Interview Guide and candidates were expected to answer questions in the "STAR" format - "Situation, Task, Action and Result." After the interviews, each Panel member would score each candidate in the categories using a Rating Scale to evaluate the candidate's answers to questions based on the STAR format. Typically, receiving two or more ratings of "2" for interview scores indicated the candidate should not be recommended for promotion.4 The Panel would then discuss each candidate's interview performance and [*11]  agree on a "consensus" score in each of the interview categories. Based exclusively on the interview consensus scores, the Panel decided whether the candidate was "Recommended" or "Not Recommended" to move to the next step in the promotion process - the Panel Discussion. It is undisputed that IP's policies provide that absences for STD or FMLA cannot be counted against an employee for purposes of employment decisions such as promotions. These absences also do not count against an employee under IP's attendance policy.
The parties dispute when the Panel reviewed the Team Member Evaluations and Team Member's Job Interest Form and resume. Defendants claim it occurred after a candidate was "Recommended" according to the above process. Thomson states the Team Member Evaluation Forms and resumes were distributed to Panel members before the interviews and that there was no formalized discussion about the Team Member Evaluation Forms. Thomson adds that candidates who received a "Not Recommended" status could still be reviewed during the Panel Discussion stage, noting that at least three candidates had their status of "Not Recommended" (based on interview consensus scores) changed to "Recommended" [*12]  (based on the Panel Discussion).
The parties also dispute the process of discussing feedback about a candidate. Defendants claim the Panel members discuss any and all feedback, whether from the candidate's coworkers, Team Leaders or any other employee in the mill. Thomson agrees that Panel members discuss this type of feedback during the Panel Discussion but denies that "any and all feedback" was a permissible factor for Panel members to consider. He notes that IP's Promotion Selection Process policy provides that promotions are to be based only on (1) the Panel Interview and (2) past job performance as represented by the Team Member Evaluation Form.5 He also notes that any feedback about the candidate to be considered in the promotion decision had to be included in the Team Member Evaluation Form so that the candidate would be fully informed of it and could address any concerns.
Thomson further states that to the extent Panel members discussed matters outside of the two areas listed above, they could discuss only their personal observations and first-hand knowledge based on their own interactions with the candidate, not any subjective opinions about the candidate. Following the Panel [*13]  Discussion, the Panel members rank the "Recommended" candidates. Thomson disagrees with defendants that these rankings are based solely on the "interviews and work performance" noting that candidates who did not qualify for promotion based on poor interview scores were still recommended for promotion. See Doc. 43-1 at 8-10 (describing candidates' scores in comparison to Thomson's scores).
Thomson applied and received interviews for promotions to the Core II position in August 2017, May 2018, and April 2019. IP had four openings for the Core II position in August 2017. Thomson completed the Job Interest Form and submitted it to HR. Hospodarsky completed the Team Member Evaluation Form and indicated that Thomson was "More than Acceptable" in Safety, Teamwork and Work Performance and "Acceptable" in Engagement. According to Hospodarsky, a Team Member would need to be on a committee, and be a valued member of the committee, to receive a "More than Acceptable" rating in the Engagement category.
Selection Panel members for the 2017 Selection Process included: Team Leaders Lance Holub, Chris Zaino, Ealy and Gus Ronnenburg and Team Members Cory McBride, Devin Bilsland, Alex Gridder and Chris [*14]  Grace. Morgan was also present during the interviews and Panel Discussion. Thomson interviewed for one of the Core II positions on October 13, 2017. He received two ratings of "2" for his interview scores, and, as a result, was "Not Recommended" for promotion based on his interview. However, following the Panel Discussion, Thomson was reclassified as "Recommended" and the Selection Panel ranked all "Recommended" candidates. Thomson was ranked eighth and was not promoted. Team Members Dillon Williams, Jason Denny, Sean Perry and Tony Meza received the promotions.
In April 2018, HR posted another promotion opportunity for two Core II positions. Thomson initially was not eligible due to absences that were waiting to be approved by Sedgwick as FMLA leave. On April 22, 2018, Hospodarsky sent an email to Operations Manager Ross George and copied HR, reporting that he believed Thomson was ineligible for promotion because he was on an attendance plan and not allowed to miss any more work until the following year. George agreed. Thomson spoke with Morgan who subsequently called Sedgwick. Thomson's FMLA was approved and he became eligible for the promotion.
Hospodarsky and Ealy completed a Team [*15]  Member Evaluation Form on May 29, 2018, giving Thomson the same "More than Acceptable" rating in Safety, Teamwork and Work Performance and "Acceptable" rating in Engagement. The Form also stated Thomson "performs his job very well" and that he "flows to work when upset conditions arise." Doc. 43-3 at 38. The form reflects no negative feedback about Thomson's work performance, attitude, or interactions with others. A prior unsigned draft of the Form stated Thomson "Retains skills well during his absence with a medical condition," which was changed to "Retains knowledge and skills well" on the signed version. Id. at 37-38.
Thomson interviewed for the position on May 31, 2018, before a Selection Panel consisting of: Team Leaders Troy Hartz, Grace, Gus Ronnenberg and Hospodarsky and Team Members Brian Lyman, Jason Henson, Clayton and Dean Keck. Morgan was also present. Before the Selection Panel convened to discuss all of the candidates, Hartz asked if attendance plays a role in the decision. Hospodarsky responded that attendance was accounted for via the Team Leader Evaluation and that if attendance was an issue, the individual would not be eligible for a promotion because the Team Leader [*16]  Evaluation would have kept them out of the process.
The 2018 Panel members had attended training from Morgan and HR during which they were informed that certain factors could not be considered in the promotion decision - specifically, the candidate's medical conditions. Morgan also instructed Panel members they could not consider absences that were for STD, Sedgwick or FMLA. They could consider only what they observed regarding the candidate's work performance and how they behaved.
The Panel gave Thomson four "3" ratings and one "4" rating in his interview consensus ratings. The Panel "Recommended" Thomson for promotion based on his interview scores. The Panel gave Josh Tupy six "2" ratings in his interview consensus ratings. He was "Not Recommended" for promotion following his panel interview. The Panel gave Bob Nelson two "2" ratings and four "3" ratings in his interview consensus ratings. He was also "Not Recommended" for promotion. The Panel gave Ed Sarsfield two "2" ratings and four "3" ratings in his interview consensus ratings. He was "Not Recommended" for promotion following his panel interview.
The parties dispute what was said during the Panel Discussion. They agree that Hospodarsky [*17]  knew that if a candidate had an attendance issue within the mill, he or she would not be eligible for promotion because the Team Leader Evaluation Form would have identified this and kept them out of the process. He also knew that Thomson was not on an attendance plan and was eligible for promotion and that Thomson's medical condition could not be held against him. Defendants, citing Clayton's deposition and Morgan's declaration, admit that Hospodarsky raised Thomson's attendance as a potential concern, but add that Morgan told the Panel that Thomson was not on an attendance plan and instructed them not to discuss or factor Thomson's attendance into any decision. According to defendants, Thomson's attendance was not discussed further and his FMLA leave and alleged medical condition were never discussed.
Thomson, citing Clayton's deposition, states Hospodarsky complained at the start of the discussion: "Him [sic] not being there affects the team and staffing and is it somebody that we want to recommend going forward, because if they're not there, how can we promote people moving forward? I mean, to get promoted and trained, it's hard to train somebody that's [sic] not there." Doc. 43-6 [*18]  at 12. Another Panel member remarked: "Hey, he's never here. He's always absent." Doc. 43-14 at 1. Thomson admits Morgan instructed the Panel that Thomson was not on an attendance plan and that his attendance could not be discussed. He adds that Morgan also stated, "We can't talk about medical. If he's not on an attendance plan or anything like that, it's not up for discussion." Morgan also advised that they could not consider Thomson's absences "because he is under FMLA. He's under Sedgwick. Those absences are protected, and you cannot consider that" and said, "you guys cannot hold that against Nick. He's protected under Sedgwick and FMLA." See Doc. 43-1 at 14-15.
Morgan was surprised that Thomson's attendance was discussed because he had informed Panel members in advance that they were not to consider those issues in their decision-making. Thomson disputes that his attendance was not discussed further after Morgan's statements. Citing Clayton's deposition, he states that during the final stage of the decision-making process, a Panel member stated about Thomson: "If you're not here, I don't see why we should promote." Id. at 15.
The Panel Discussion also addressed other complaints about [*19]  Thomson. Thomson emphasizes that these complaints were raised after the discussion about his attendance and about it being an impermissible factor to consider. During this part of the Discussion, Hospodarsky, Hartz, Ronnenberg and Grace discussed Thomson's attitude and interactions with coworkers. Specifically, they discussed feedback and complaints they had received from Team Members. The Team Member Evaluation Form said nothing about Thomson's attitude or interactions with coworkers and Hospodarsky had rated Thomson "More than Acceptable" in the "Teamwork" category. The complaints included Thomson's "poor attitude" and that Thomson did not provide adequate assistance when he "made relief" (the term used for shift change). One other Team Member told Hospodarsky he did not like working with Thomson and believed Thomson was lazy.
There is no documentation of any of the complaints the Panel members raised about Thomson in the 2018 Panel Discussion. Thomson notes that Hospodarsky had received one complaint about Thomson's interactions with a coworker in 2014. He never investigated any other complaints about Thomson and never counseled or disciplined Thomson for any attitude problems or [*20]  issues with coworker interactions. Hospodarsky's most recent "One-to-One Review" with Thomson on May 8, 2017, raised no concerns about Thomson's attitude or coworker interactions. Doc. 43-3 at 17. Hospodarsky did receive a complaint from the one Team Member who did not want to work with Thomson.
Thomson denies Hospodarsky believed the complaints about Thomson were serious enough to change Thomson's rating from "Recommended" to "Not Recommended," and nor was the complaint from the coworker about Thomson being lazy. He also denies that these complaints from other Team Members (none of which were included in the Team Member Evaluation Form) were appropriate to consider in the decision-making process. He cites IP's Promotion Selection Process policy, which indicates the promotion decision is to be based only on the Panel interview and past job performance as represented in the Team Member Evaluation Form. He adds that any discussion outside of these two factors had to be based on Panel members' own personal observations or first-hand knowledge of interactions with the candidate. Thomson also denies that these secondhand complaints from Team Members were the reason the Panel decided not [*21]  to promote him. He notes that candidates were given feedback forms following the promotion process and his feedback form listed his "opportunities" as "results were weak" and "technical,"6 neither of which were related to his attitude or interactions with coworkers.
Defendants state the Panel also discussed Thomson's lack of committee involvement. Thomson denies this stating that the only two issues the Panel discussed pertaining to him were (1) his attendance and his protection under Sedgwick and FMLA and (2) coworkers' complaints about his attitude and interactions at shift change. Thomson admits that Hospodarsky suggested he join a committee but denies that this was a reason why the Panel did not promote him, as it was not identified as an "opportunity" on his feedback form. Thomson adds that Hospodarsky rated Thomson's Engagement as "Acceptable" on his Evaluation Form and other candidates had been promoted from Core I to Core II without any committee involvement.
The Panel ultimately promoted three candidates for the two open positions. Thomson was not one of them. Based on the Panel Discussion, Thomson was designated as "Not Recommended" for promotion. Hospodarsky specifically stated [*22]  during the Panel Discussion that he did not recommend Thomson for promotion. Out of the 13 candidates, Thomson was the only candidate who was "Recommended" following the interview and then "Not Recommended" based on the Panel Discussion. See Doc. 43-4 at 7 (2018 Promotion "Final Disposition" chart). Tupy, Nelson and Sarsfield were each identified as "Not Recommended" following the interview and "Recommended" following the Panel Discussion.
The parties dispute the reason why the Panel decided not to recommend Thomson for the promotion. Defendants state it was based on the Panel Discussion regarding Thomson's work performance and unsatisfactory attitude. Thomson states it was based on his disability and use of FMLA leave. He also states that had it been for the other reasons, they would have been identified on the feedback form as "opportunities" or discussed on the Team Member Evaluation Form, which had identified his work performance as "More than Acceptable." He adds that IP also did not follow its own procedures in deciding who was "Recommended" or "Not Recommended" for the promotion, noting that the Panel had changed Thomson's status and that the three candidates who were "Recommended" [*23]  were not eligible because they each had two or more interview consensus ratings of "2."
After the promotion candidates were selected, Hospodarsky and Keck met with Thomson to provide feedback. Thomson's feedback form stated his strengths were "calm" and "prepared with good examples" and his opportunities were "results were weak" and "technical." Doc. 43-4 at 14. It said nothing about his attitude or interactions with coworkers. Thomson mentioned that he heard his medical condition had been discussed and Keck and Hospodarsky denied this. The parties dispute whether Thomson also stated during this meeting that he thought promotions should be based strictly on seniority and that he did not think Team Members should have to perform any extracurricular activities.
Thomson believed the process was discriminatory because his medical condition had been discussed. He complained to Mill Manager Derek Depuydt, Ralston and Morgan on April 27, 2018 about this issue. All three understood that Thomson was making a complaint of discrimination at this meeting. Defendants state Morgan was present during the Promotion Selection Process and advised Thomson that his medical issue was not discussed and therefore [*24]  found it unnecessary to conduct further investigation.
Thomson also complained to Operations Manager George on May 4, 2018, that his medical condition had factored into the promotion decision, to which George responded "that would be illegal." Doc. 43-4 at 12. George also stated Morgan "was in the panel and it didn't happen there." Id. George interpreted Thomson's comments as a complaint of illegal conduct and discussed Thomson's comments with Morgan.
IP posted a third promotion opportunity for a Core II position in February 2019. Thomson applied and after Hospodarsky and Markland completed the Team Member Evaluation Form,7 Thomson interviewed for the position on April 9, 2019. The 2019 Selection Panel included Team Leaders Grace, Markland, Marty Anderson and Jason Henson and Team Members Adam Nehre, Clayton, Devin Bisland and Paul Schliemann. Jana DeNeve, HR Manager, was also present and served as facilitator.8 The same Promotion Selection Process policy was in place at this time. Based on the Panel Interview,9 Thomson was "Recommended" but was ultimately "Not Recommended" for promotion following the Panel Discussion.
During the Panel Discussion, Panel members discussed Thomson's absenteeism. [*25]  Defendants state it was raised by Bisland, who stated it was difficult to gauge Thomson's work performance because of his absenteeism. Thomson denies Bisland stated this,10 but, citing Clayton's deposition, states that five or six Panel members raised concerns about his attendance, noting the first unnamed Panel member to bring it up said Thomson "was never here." Doc. 43-1 at 23. Bisland knew Thomson was taking STD leave for an issue related to his stomach, and that he must have been on disability because he otherwise would have been fired for missing that much work. Defendants state that DeNeve immediately explained that Thomson's attendance could not be discussed and that the Panel could only consider the candidate's work performance. Defendants also state Thomson's attendance was not discussed further and that his FMLA and alleged medical condition were never discussed.
Thomson, citing Clayton's deposition, states that Panel member Clayton (not DeNeve) said Thomson's attendance was medical and they could not discuss it. DeNeve confirmed stating "Yes, medical we cannot discuss." Id. Thomson states Bisland then remarked, "Well, I think it should play a part . . ." before it was shut [*26]  down again.11 Id. Thomson further denies this was the end of the discussion about his attendance. Citing DeNeve's deposition, he notes Anderson raised Thomson's attendance later in the discussion by saying something to the effect of, "What if you needed vacation and he wasn't there?" to which DeNeve replied, "He doesn't have an attendance problem, Marty, so we're not going to discuss that." Doc. 43-7 at 10. Anderson retorted something to the effect of "But, you know, this could impact the team" after which DeNeve called for a break and had a private discussion with Anderson to remind him Thomson's attendance could not be brought up again.
Finally, citing Clayton's deposition, Thomson notes that at the final stage of the decision-making process a Panel member said, "If you're not here, I don't see why we should promote." Doc. 43-6 at 12. After the Selection Process, Thomson notes Clayton told Thomson that his "medical" had been brought up and Markland told Thomson and Williams that Thomson's "medical condition" had been discussed. Doc. 43-1 at 24 (citing Docs. 43-6 at 27; 43-14 at 15; 43-5 at 12).
The Panel Discussion also involved other complaints about Thomson. Thomson emphasizes that [*27]  these complaints were raised after his attendance was discussed, after Panel members were informed by Clayton and DeNeve that Thomson's medical could not be discussed and after DeNeve called for a break to speak with Anderson privately about not discussing Thomson's attendance. These complaints included that Thomson was negative towards Team Leaders and Team Members during pre-shift meetings, he was not willing to stay late to help out with shift change, that he left before he properly made shift change at times when duties were not completed and that, on one occasion, he talked negatively about Grace at the pre-shift meeting after Grace left. Panel members also believed Thomson felt like he was better than his coworkers and they discussed his negative attitude. Thomson states these issues were raised by the same Panel members who had complained about Thomson's attendance and were told they could not take that into consideration. He notes these comments were based on input they had heard from other Team Members.
Thomson notes there is no documentation in his personnel records of any attitude problems, nor was he ever counseled for having them. Defendants dispute this, citing the feedback [*28]  form for the 2019 Promotion Selection (provided to Thomson after the promotion decision), which states "perception is that you act superior to others" and "avoid speaking negatively about others." Doc. 53 at 48. The 2019 Team Member Evaluation Form contained no reference to any attitude problems or other complaints about Thomson. The parties dispute the extent to which these complaints about Thomson are true. See Doc. 53 at 59-70.
Following the Panel Discussion, Thomson was "Not Recommended" for promotion. Eight out of the eleven candidates interviewed were promoted. Thomson was not one of them. The other two candidates who did not receive promotions received two or more ratings of "2" for interview scores, which resulted in a "Not Recommended" for promotion designation. Reed Thomson was promoted, but he too, had two "2" scores in his interview consensus ratings. In contrast, Thomson had the second highest interview consensus ratings out of the eleven candidates.
The reason Thomson was "Not Recommended" is disputed. Defendants cite Thomson's poor attitude and comments made by Panel members concerning his attitude. Thomson states the reason was his disability and FMLA leave. He notes [*29]  one of the final comments made about him at the final stage of the decision-making process was, "If you're not here, I don't see why we should promote." Doc. 43-1 at 26. Thomson also notes there was no negative feedback or complaints on his Team Member Evaluation Form and he had never been warned, reprimanded or disciplined for any reason, other than an attendance warning that was removed. The parties agree that one of the purposes of the Team Member Evaluation Form is to make sure the Team Member is fully informed of feedback that would be provided to the promotion panel.
Markland met with Thomson afterwards to provide feedback. The feedback form identified the following "opportunities" for Thomson: "results were weak," "more details/explain the process completely," "perception is that you act superior to others," and "avoid speaking negatively about others." Doc. 53 at 52. Markland informed Thomson that one of the opportunities was when Thomson was "making relief." He advised Thomson to avoid speaking negatively about others and that when Thomson was relieving a prior shift, he had been negative towards Team Members on the prior shift. Thomson adds that at this meeting he asked Markland [*30]  if his medical was brought up during the selection process and Markland informed him that it was. Thomson also complained to Markland that he had not received a 2018 performance evaluation that could have told him what he needed to work on for more opportunities. There is no documentation of performance deficiencies or concerns about Thomson's conduct, attitude or interactions with others in his personnel records aside from the feedback form following the 2019 Promotion Selection Process.
Shortly thereafter, Markland again told Thomson that his medical condition had been brought up during the promotion process, this time in the presence of Williams. Thomson spoke with Depuydt about his concern that his medical condition was being considered in promotion decisions. According to defendants, Thomson stated he believed people had been talking about his medical condition outside the Panel and that promotion decisions were made prior to the Panel meeting. Thomson states that he complained to Depuydt in May 2019 that he heard his medical issue was again brought up during the Promotion Selection Process and he felt that this was discriminatory. He also told Depuydt that he was disappointed [*31]  and upset because he had raised this same issue with Depuydt in 2018 and Depuydt had told Thomson it would not happen again.
Depuydt followed up with DeNeve. DeNeve confirmed that Thomson's absences had been discussed; specifically, that Anderson had said that Thomson never shows up for work and should not be promoted because he never shows up. DeNeve told the Panel it was inappropriate to discuss Thomson's attendance because it was tied to his medical condition. DeNeve did not tell Depuydt whether anyone else brought up Thomson's absences or medical issues. Doc. 53 at 56. Thomson points out that Bisland, Anderson and another Panel member brought up attendance again after DeNeve's warning. See Doc. 43-1 at 29. Depuydt never asked to review any of the scores of the 2019 promotion candidates and did not ask DeNeve at what stage Thomson was taken out of consideration for the promotion. The first time DeNeve became aware that Thomson felt the 2019 Promotion Selection Process had been discriminatory was through a civil rights complaint he later filed.
On June 4, 2019, Thomson sent a text message to Hospodarsky resigning from his employment with IP. Thomson stated in his deposition he resigned [*32]  because he was "so tired of the humiliation of being basically faced as a liar, and my medical being used against me for promotion." Doc. 43-16 at 16. At the time of his resignation, Thomson had already secured employment with Quaker Oats. Thomson visited his doctor the day of his resignation and the doctor noted: "He states he doesn't think he's stressed, but his wife thinks he is. There are issues at work, and he is having to fight regarding recent health issues. He was working swing shift 12-hour days, but is starting a new job this upcoming Thursday with better hours. He is thinking this will be less stressful." Doc. 43-15 at 31. On a subsequent job application for another employer, Thomson stated he left IP because he "secured new employment with better benefits." Id. Thomson notes this was not the only reason he left IP, stating that he declined to disclose his disability and indicate he was discriminated against because of it on the subsequent job application.
After announcing his resignation, Thomson was scheduled to be off work the following week but stated he would be willing to work Wednesday and Thursday of the current week. Hospodarsky told him he did not need to report [*33]  to work but to contact HR. DeNeve and Thomson spoke about his resignation. While Thomson admits he did not testify in his deposition about saying anything to DeNeve about his medical condition being discussed during the promotion process, he points out that his memory may not be accurate and notes other parts of the record indicate he told DeNeve he was resigning because he was upset that he had not been promoted. In documents prepared for Thomson's unemployment claim, IP stated Thomson "had indicated that he was upset with lack of promotion and therefore sought other employment." Doc. 53 at 59.
Prior to resigning, Thomson filed a complaint with the Iowa Civil Rights Commission (ICRC) on May 8, 2019. The complaint did not include allegations relating to his resignation and he did not mark the category "Forced to Quit/Retire." Doc. 43-1 at 32. IP submitted a response, which DeNeve reviewed and approved. The response stated "several team members reported numerous work-related deficiencies [Thomson] regularly displayed." Doc. 53 at 57. These included: "repeatedly belittling his co-workers, demonstrating an attitude that he believed he was superior to them" and that he had "publicly made [*34]  harmful statement concerning his co-workers and his supervisors." Id. at 57-58. The response also noted that Markland had given Thomson acceptable ratings in all five categories in the 2019 Team Member Evaluation Form, but stated that Markland had concerns that Thomson had not shown a desire or willingness to "go above and beyond" to assist other Team Members and had not demonstrated an initiative or aspirations to learn more about the position Id. at 58. The only negative reference in the Evaluation Form was that Thomson "could be more involved in team/mill committees and initiatives." Id. Markland does not recall ever telling anyone that he thought Thomson had not shown a desire or willingness to go above and beyond to assist other team members.

2. Facts Related to Defamation Claim
On January 3, 2018, Thomson took a photograph of a deer he had shot that day while deer hunting. Thomson texted the photograph to Grimm and posted it to Facebook. Hospodarsky came to Grimm's work area and the two of them began talking about deer hunting. Grimm asked Hospodarsky if he had seen the picture of Thomson's deer. When Hospodarsky said he had not, Grimm showed him the picture. Hospodarsky then went [*35]  to Ealy and said, "We'll have to do something about this, I'm sure" and said words to the effect of "Look, I think, according to this picture, [Thomson] was actually out deer hunting when he was supposed to be sick on medical leave." Doc. 53 at 71.
The parties dispute whether other Team Members reacted to the photo. Defendants claim that upon learning of the photo, Team Members expressed concern to Hospodarsky because they believed Thomson was hunting while out on medical leave. They contend that to alleviate these concerns and "keep peace within the team," Hospodarsky reported these complaints to George. Thomson states there is no testimony from Team Members about expressing concern to Hospodarsky because they believed Thomson was hunting on medical leave. He states the only person to have testified about having such a concern was Hospodarsky. He denies that the report to George was to "keep peace within the team" and states the assertion that Team Members raised concerns is false. Citing George's deposition, Thomson states that Hospodarsky told George that a Team Member had brought the deer photo to his attention because he believed Thomson had gone hunting while he was on disability. [*36]  Grimm had not said anything to Hospodarsky about Thomson hunting while on medical leave. According to Thomson, Hospodarsky later told Thomson that he had seen the picture and had to report it, saying nothing about other Team Members raising any concerns.12
George understood from Hospodarsky that someone was implying that Thomson may have been lying about being sick that day. Thomson states Clayton, Depuydt, Grimm and Markland understood Hospodarsky's allegation that Thomson was hunting while on medical leave to be a claim by Hospodarsky that Thomson was lying.13 A couple weeks after Hospodarsky made the report to George, George sent an email asking Hospodarsky when the picture was brought to his attention, to which Hospodarsky responded: "It was toward the beginning of January. He was hunting Late Muzzleloader season and the season is the very end of December through January 10th." Doc. 53 at 74. Hospodarsky also sent George an email listing the dates Thomson was absent and the dates he had worked from December 18, 2017, through February 8, 2018, again making note of the late muzzleloader season. George testified that the email was not much help because he did not know the date the photograph [*37]  was taken. George then spoke to Morgan in HR about the issue.
When Thomson returned to work, George and Morgan called him into a meeting. They informed him they had received reports that Thomson had been out deer hunting while on medical leave. Thomson stated he had not and showed them the deer picture to prove it was on a day he was not scheduled to work. This was the first time George had viewed the photo. George and Morgan believed Thomson and there was no further investigation regarding the deer photo.14 Thomson told Morgan that the issue made him so mad that he could not sleep at night, noting Hospodarsky had assumed he was out hunting while on medical leave. Later, Hospodarsky asked to speak to Thomson and explained he had seen the photo and felt he had to report it.
Thomson met with George the following day. Thomson complained that Hospodarsky had lied in claiming that Thomson was out deer hunting while on FMLA. Thomson told George that Hospodarsky should be fired for using this false accusation to try to get Thomson fired. Defendants state no one told Thomson that Hospodarsky had specifically said Thomson was lying or was deer hunting while on medical leave.

B. Analysis

1. Disability [*38]  Discrimination Claims - Counts I and II
Thomson alleges in Counts I and II that defendants discriminated against him in violation of the ICRA and ADA by (1) failing to promote him because he has a disability, (2) retaliating against him for requesting reasonable accommodations for his disability, (3) treating him less favorably than his coworkers because of his disability and (4) constructively discharging him. See Doc. 30. Defendants argue they are entitled to summary judgment on Counts I and II because: (1) Thomson did not exhaust his administrative remedies regarding the 2017 and 2018 promotional decisions or his resignation, (2) he cannot establish a failure to promote disability discrimination claim and (3) his resignation did not amount to a constructive discharge.

a. Exhaustion of Administrative Remedies
Thomson acknowledges he cannot seek damages for discrimination arising out of the 2017 or 2018 promotions, see Doc. 46 at 20, but argues evidence related to them is material to the 2019 decision and Thomson's constructive discharge claim. Thomson argues that when viewing his pro se complaint to the ICRC liberally, IP was on notice of his constructive discharge claim.

i. Evidence [*39]  of 2017 and 2018 Decisions
While exhaustion of the 2017 and 2018 promotions is not at issue, I will consider the parties' arguments about whether evidence of these decisions may be considered as to Thomson's other claims. Thomson argues the facts surrounding these decisions provide context for his claims and are relevant to assessing IP's motive and pretext in the 2019 decision. He contends they also are material to determining whether IP constructively discharged Thomson. See Doc. 46 at 20-21. Defendants argue that evidence of these decisions is not relevant because each Panel was made up of different members. They note that in cases where prior bad acts are found to be relevant, the prior bad acts were allegedly committed by the same actors.
"Evidence of prior acts of discrimination is relevant to an employer's motive in discharging a plaintiff, even where this evidence is not extensive enough to establish discriminatory animus by itself." Estes v. Dick Smith Ford, Inc., 856 F.2d 1097, 1104 (8th Cir. 1988). "The existence of past acts and the employee's prior knowledge of their occurrence, however, does not bar employees from filing charges about related discrete acts so long as the acts are independently discriminatory and charges addressing those [*40]  acts are themselves timely filed." National R.R. Passenger Corp. v. Morgan, 536 U.S. 101, 113 (2002). "Nor does the statute bar an employee from using the prior acts as background evidence in support of a timely claim." Id. See also Phillip v. ANR Freight Systems, Inc., 945 F.2d 1054, 1056 (8th Cir. 1991) (reversing district court's exclusion of evidence of other age discrimination lawsuits filed against ANR stating that admission of such "background evidence may be critical for the jury's assessment of whether a given employer was more likely than not to have acted from an unlawful motive." (quoting Estes, 856 F.2d at 1103)). See also Smith v. Mayo Clinic, 158 F. Supp. 3d 764, 770 (D. Minn. 2016) (considering, as context, statements made by coworkers and supervisors seven months before termination); McNeal v. University of Minnesota Physicians, Civ. No. 15-3442 (RHK/JSM), 2016 WL 355069, at *6 (D. Minn. Jan. 28, 2016) (concluding plaintiff's allegations of discriminatory actions against plaintiff and others prior to the discrete act at issue were appropriate as background evidence to support plaintiff's claims).
I find that facts related to the 2017 and 2018 promotions provide relevant background evidence even if they did not involve the same set of actors. Notably, there was some overlap between each panel. Chris Grace sat on all three Panels (in 2017 as a Team Member and in 2018 and 2019 as a Team Leader). Devin Bisland sat on the 2017 and 2019 Selection Panels (both times as a Team Member). Jason Henson sat on the [*41]  2018 and 2019 Selection Panels (first as a Team Member and then as a Team Leader). Morgan also sat on the 2017 and 2018 Panels. Each Panel also considered the same Team Member Evaluation Form that had been completed by Hospodarsky each time and contained the same ratings of "More than Acceptable" in Safety, Teamwork and Work Performance and "Acceptable" in Engagement. I will consider the facts surrounding the 2017 and 2018 promotions in analyzing Thomson's claims of disability discrimination.

ii. Constructive Discharge Claim
Both the ADA and ICRA require a plaintiff to exhaust his or her administrative remedies. Under the ADA, a plaintiff must file an administrative complaint with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) and obtain a right-to-sue letter before pursuing a private action. See 42 U.S.C. § 12117(a) (adopting Title VII's procedures set forth in § 2000e-5). Under the ICRA, a plaintiff must file a complaint with the ICRC within 300 days after the alleged discrimination. Iowa Code § 216.15(13). Thomson filed his complaint with the ICRC, which was cross-filed with the EEOC, on May 8, 2019. He resigned on June 4, 2019. The issue is whether he was required to amend or file new complaint to pursue his constructive discharge [*42]  claim in this action or whether his original complaint provided adequate notice of the claim.
"Constructive discharge exists when the employer deliberately makes an employee's working conditions so intolerable that the employee is forced into an involuntary resignation." First Judicial Dist. Dep't of Correctional Servs. v. Iowa Civil Rights Comm'n, 315 N.W.2d 83, 87 (Iowa 1982). Thomson argues that when liberally construing his pro se administrative complaint, IP was on notice of a constructive discharge claim. He cites the narrative summary describing the alleged discriminatory promotion decision in which he stated: "This is the second time this has happened and nothing has been done. It is to the point that I'm looking for another job." Doc. 46 at 27 (citing Doc. 36-2 at 292). He argues that the scope of an EEOC investigation would have necessarily included the claim that Thomson left his job at IP due to the inability to promote based on disability. Also, when he resigned approximately a month after he filed his administrative complaint, he told the HR manager that he was resigning due to IP's repeated discriminatory promotion processes. He argues that failing to view his pro se complaint liberally would bar his claim on a technicality and frustrate the ICRA's and ADA's remedial purposes. [*43] 
The Eighth Circuit has stated:
To determine whether an allegedly discriminatory action falls within the scope of a claim, 'the administrative complaint must be construed liberally' in order to further the remedial purposes of applicable legislation, i.e., to prohibit unlawful employment practices, and a plaintiff 'may seek relief for any discrimination that grows out of or is like or reasonably related to the substance of the allegations in the administrative charge.'
Stuart v. General Motors Corp., 217 F.3d 621, 631 (8th Cir. 2000) (quoting Nichols v. American Nat'l Ins. Co., 154 F.3d 875, 886-87 (8th Cir. 1998)). "The breadth of the civil suit is, therefore, as broad as the scope of any investigation that reasonably could have been expected to result from the initial charge of discrimination." Id. "While a charge of discrimination 'need not specifically articulate the precise claim, it must nevertheless be sufficient to give the employer notice of the subject matter of the charge and identify generally the basis for a claim.'" Malone v. Ameren UE, 646 F.3d 512, 516 (8th Cir. 2011) (quoting Humphries v. Pulaski Cnty. Special Sch. Dist., 580 F.3d 688, 697 (8th Cir. 2009)). See also E.E.O.C. v. Delight Wholesale Co., 973 F.2d 664, 668 (8th Cir. 1992) ("The permissible scope of an EEOC lawsuit is not confined to the specific allegations in the charge; rather, it may extend to any discrimination like or related to the substance of the allegations in the charge and which reasonably can be expected to grow out of the investigation [*44]  triggered by the charge.").
Defendants, on the other hand, point out that a discharge (whether constructive or not) is a discrete act must be included in the administrative complaint to exhaust administrative remedies. See Richter v. Advance Auto Parts, Inc., 686 F.3d 847, 851 (8th Cir. 2012) ("Each discrete act is a different unlawful employment practice for which a separate charge is required."); Sellars v. Deere & Co., 791 F.3d 938, 943 (8th Cir. 2015) ("Each incident of discrimination and each retaliatory adverse employment action decision constitutes a separate actionable unlawful employment practice that must be individually addressed before the EEOC."). Federal courts have dismissed claims of constructive discharge for failure to exhaust administrative remedies. See Henson v. Union Pacific Railroad Co., Case No. 19-00082-CV-W-GAF, 2019 WL 3082469, at * 4 (W.D. Mo. July 15, 2019) (plaintiff did not exhaust administrative remedies as to constructive discharge claim because administrative complaint had been filed and not amended nine months before separation); Wilkes v. Nucor-Yamato Steel Co., Case No. 3:14-cv-00224-KGB, 2015 WL 5725771, at *11 (E.D. Ark. Sept. 25, 2015) (plaintiff failed to exhaust her administrative remedies as to her termination claim because she did not file an additional charge or amend her charge with the EEOC after her termination). But see Udofot v. Colson Caster Corp., No. 3:02CV000243 JLH, 2005 WL 8164132, at *3 (E.D. Ark. June 9, 2005) (failure to promote claim was reasonably related to plaintiff's termination claim). In Henson, the court reasoned that the "reasonable relation" theory does not apply to [*45]  discrete acts and that each discrete act constitutes its own unlawful employment practice for which administrative remedies must be exhausted. Henson, 2019 WL 3082469, at *4. Henson relied on Chapman v. Carmike Cinemas, 307 F. App'x 164, 174 (10th Cir. 2009) in which the court, citing Morgan, explained that while a constructive discharge may be akin to other claims, once it is complete, it is most akin to a wrongful discharge, which is a discrete and identifiable act.
I agree with defendants that Thomson did not administratively exhaust his constructive discharge claim, as such a claim constitutes a discrete act requiring its own charge. See Daud v. Nat'l Multiple Sclerosis Society, Case No. 17-00378-CV-W-ODS, 2018 WL 3370575, at *3 (W.D. Mo. July 10, 2018) ("Each discrete discriminatory act, such as a termination, failure to promote, denial or transfer, or refusal to hire, constitutes a separate actionable offense and must be identified in the administrative charge."). Thomson's administrative complaint was never amended after the date of Thomson's resignation and he did not submit a new one after he resigned. Under these circumstances, courts have concluded that a constructive discharge claim must be dismissed for failure to exhaust administrative remedies. See Moses v. Dassault Falcon Jet-Wilmington Corp, 894 F.3d 911, 920 (8th Cir. 2018) (plaintiff failed to exhaust termination claim because he never filed a new EEOC charge for the termination and therefore, all federal claims [*46]  related to the termination were beyond the scope of the EEOC charge); Daud, 2018 WL 3370575, at *3 (plaintiff failed to exhaust her wrongful termination claim because her EEOC charge did not identify her termination and only identified a failure to promote claim even though the charge was filed 12 days after her termination and included her last day of employment).
Because Thomson failed to exhaust his administrative remedies as to his constructive discharge claim, defendants are entitled to summary judgment on that claim.

b. Merits of Failure to Promote Disability Discrimination Claims
The ADA and ICRA prohibit employers from discriminating against individuals on the basis of disability.15 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a); Iowa Code § 216.61. A plaintiff can demonstrate discrimination through direct evidence or by raising an inference of discrimination through indirect evidence under the McDonnell Douglas16 burden-shifting framework. See St. Martin v. City of St. Paul, 680 F.3d 1027, 1033 (8th Cir. 2012). It is unclear whether Thomson is attempting to show discrimination through direct or indirect evidence. See Doc. 46 at 12-13 (noting that the "motivating factor" standard17 applies in both ICRA and ADA claims, but also referencing the burden-shifting framework used for cases without direct evidence). Because both parties utilize the [*47]  burden-shifting framework of McDonnell Douglas in analyzing Thomson's claims, I will do the same. See Doc. 40 at 9; Doc. 46 at 12-13.
A prima facie case of disability discrimination requires the plaintiff to show he: (1) had a disability within the meaning of the relevant statute, (2) was qualified to perform the essential functions of his job with or without reasonable accommodation and (3) suffered an adverse employment action because of his disability. Higgins v. Union Pacific Railroad Co., 931 F.3d 664, 669 (8th Cir. 2019) (citing Cody v. Prairie Ethanol, LLC, 763 F.3d 992, 996-97 (8th Cir. 2014)). If Thomson is able to establish a prima facie case, the burden shifts to defendants to proffer a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse action. See Kratzer v. Rockwell Collins, Inc., 398 F.3d 1040, 1044 (8th Cir. 2005). If defendants are able to show a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason, the burden shifts back to Thomson to show that defendants' stated reason is pretext. Id.
Defendants state that each of the 2017, 2018 and 2019 Selection Panels determined that Thomson had numerous behavioral deficiencies precluding his promotions. Doc. 40 at 9. They cite Thomson's poor attitude, negative comments and inadequacies at shift change as reasons the 2018 and 2019 Selection Panels chose not to promote him. Id. at 11. Specifically, with regard to the 2019 decision, Panelists [*48]  discussed Thomson's attitude at work and towards his coworkers and Team Leaders. One Panelist noted Thomson had gotten into an argument with and screamed at his Team Leader. Another Panelist stated that "making relief" with Thomson was "intimidating." They agreed not to promote Thomson based on his problematic attitude. See Doc. 40 at 11-12.
When the employer offers a non-discriminatory reason for the adverse action, the court may presume that plaintiff has made a prima facie case and "move directly to the issue of pretext." See Williams v. United Parcel Service, Inc., 963 F.3d 803, 808 (8th Cir. 2020) (quoting Wagner v. Gallup, Inc., 788 F.3d 877, 886 (8th Cir. 2015)). Of course, "[t]o show pretext, the plaintiff must demonstrate more than at the prima facie stage because, at the pretext stage, the evidence is viewed in light of the employer's justification." Ebersole v. Novo Nordisk, Inc., 758 F.3d 917, 925 (8th Cir. 2014). A plaintiff may show pretext multiple ways. He may show both that the employer's reason was false and that discrimination was the real reason. See Williams, 963 F.3d at 808. He may also show that the explanation has no basis in fact, rendering it "unworthy of credence." Fiero v. CSG Sys., Inc., 759 F.3d 874, 878 (8th Cir. 2014) (citing Fitzgerald v. Action, Inc., 521 F.3d 867, 873 (8th Cir. 2008)). Of course, "[a] reason cannot be proved to be a pretext for discrimination unless it shown both that the reason was false, and that discrimination was the real reason." St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 515 (1993) (emphasis in original) (internal [*49]  quotations omitted). Pretext may also be shown with proof that the employer "(1) failed to follow its own policies, (2) treated similarly-situated employees in a disparate manner, or (3) shifted its explanation of the employment decision." Shaffhauser v. United Parcel Service, Inc., 794 F.3d 899, 904 (8th Cir. 2015) (quoting Lake v. Yellow Transp., Inc., 596 F.3d 871, 874 (8th Cir. 2010)). The "critical inquiry" is whether the employer had a good-faith belief in its reason for declining to promote plaintiff. See Wierman v. Casey's General Stores, 638 F.3d 984, 998 (8th Cir. 2011).
Defendants argue Thomson cannot establish a prima facie case because he has no evidence that similarly situated employees not part of his protected group were promoted instead.18 Doc. 40 at 9. Even if Thomson could establish a prima facie case, defendants argue Thomson cannot demonstrate pretext for essentially the same reasons and because the record supports the legitimate nondiscriminatory reason they put forth. Because there appears to be no dispute (for purposes of defendant's motion for summary judgment) whether Thomson had a disability, was qualified19 to perform the essential functions of the job and suffered an adverse employment action, I will focus on the issue of pretext in light of the nondiscriminatory reason alleged by defendants.
Thomson argues a jury could find IP's reasons for not promoting Thomson were pretext for five reasons: (1) panel members advocated discriminatory reasons not to promote Thomson, (2) IP failed to follow its Promotion Selection Process policies, (3) there are inconsistences between documentation and the reasons given, (4) the given reasons are false and (5) IP gave false information to the ICRC. Thomson notes that in the 2018 and 2019 Panels, multiple Panelists raised Thomson's disability-related absences as a reason he should not be promoted. They discussed nondiscriminatory reasons only after they were told not to consider Thomson's protected medical leave. When viewing the facts in the light most favorable to Thomson, he argues a reasonable jury could conclude the Panelists contrived or exaggerated complaints about Thomson to cover for the real reason they chose not to promote him - his disability and use of FMLA leave.
Defendants argue that the record demonstrates that none of the Panel members ever discussed Thomson's actual medical condition, only his attendance. Doc. 40 at 14. They contend attendance is separate from a purported disability and that when [*51]  his attendance was raised, HR quickly intervened and foreclosed any further discussion related to his attendance. Id.
With regard to IP's Promotion Selection policy, it is undisputed the policy states that selection for promotion "will be based on the both the [sic] Panel Interview and past job performance as represented by the Process Team Member Evaluation Form. Past job performance based on the evaluation form will have a greater weight on the selection than the interview." Doc. 43-3 at 27. Defendants note that the record is replete with evidence that the Selection Panels based their decisions on job performance as observed by Panel members or feedback from other Team Members. However, Thomson's point is that IP did not follow its own policy in doing so and because Thomson's Evaluation Forms and interview scores were otherwise positive, this evidence suggests that defendants' alleged nondiscriminatory reason for declining to promote Thomson was pretext. See McCullough v. Univ. of Ark. for Med. Scis., 559 F.3d 855, 863 (8th Cir. 2009) ("An employer can certainly choose how to run its business, including not to follow its own personnel policies regarding termination of an employee or handling claims of discrimination, as long as it does not unlawfully discriminate [*52]  in doing so."). Thomson also points out that Tupy, Nelson and Sarsfield were "Recommended" for promotion in 2018 and Reed Thomson in 2019 over Thomson, even though none of them were eligible for promotion under IP's policy based on their interview scores. Defendants admit that these individuals were identified as "Recommended" following the Panel Discussion. IP's chart of candidates states that to be "Recommended" for a Core II position, a candidate should: (1) have interview consensus ratings of 3 or higher in safety, (2) have no interview consensus ratings of 1 and (3) have no more than one interview consensus ratings of 2.
Thomson next argues a jury could choose to disbelieve IP's proffered reasons for not promoting him because there is no evidence that IP ever documented or counseled Thomson for his attitude or behavior. He argues the contradiction between the positive feedback on his Evaluation Forms (which, according to IP's policy are entitled to greater weight) and the complaints about his attitude and behavior that defendants rely upon to explain their promotion decisions, is further evidence of pretext. He contends the feedback forms following the promotion process also demonstrate [*53]  defendants' reasons are pretextual because the 2018 form said nothing about any attitude problems and the 2019 form states his "results were weak" and he needed "more details/explain the process completely," even though his interviews were second to the best and the Panel promoted six others who scored worse than him in their interviews.
Thomson also argues that the record shows defendants' reasons are false. He cites testimony from his coworkers stating that he was a team player, he treated them respectfully and enjoyed working with him. Thomson's Team Leader Markland never received any complaints about Thomson. Hospodarsky received only one complaint back in 2014 and never saw Thomson engage in further behavior where he was talking down to employees.20 Thomson also notes that Panelists discussed only behaviors and attitudes they claimed to have heard from others.
Finally, Thomson argues IP's response to the ICRC about why Thomson was not promoted in 2019 demonstrates IP's reasons were pretextual. IP stated Thomson was not promoted in 2019 in part because Markland "had given Thomson 'acceptable' ratings on his Evaluation Form but raised concerns that Thomson had not shown a desire or [*54]  willingness to 'go above and beyond' to assist other Team Members and had not demonstrated an initiative or aspirations to learn more about the position." Doc. 43-4 at 53. Thomson states the Evaluation Form includes no such concerns and that Markland testified he never told anyone he held these concerns about Thomson or held those opinions about him.
Viewing the facts in the light most favorable to Thomson, I find he has produced sufficient evidence from which a reasonable jury could conclude that IP's purported reasons related to Thomson's attitude and behavior were false and the real reason was discrimination based on his disability. A reasonable jury could conclude that defendants' alleged reasons related to Thomson's attitude and behavior were contrived because those issues had not been documented, were not included in Thomson's Team Member Evaluation Forms, were not discussed in the feedback after the 2017 and 2018 promotion decisions and were raised as a basis for declining to promote him only after the issue of his FMLA-protected absences had been raised and discussed as being a reason not to promote him. See Feltmann v. Sieben, 108 F.3d 970, 975 (8th Cir. 1997) (noting plaintiff is required to "produce evidence of conduct or statements [*55]  by persons involved in [the employer's] decision-making process reflective of a discriminatory attitude sufficient to allow a reasonable jury to infer that that attitude was a motivating factor in [the employer's] [adverse action].").
Because the record demonstrates genuine issues of material fact as to whether defendants' proffered reasons were merely pretext for discrimination, defendants' motion for summary judgment on Counts I and II is denied.

c. Individual Liability
Defendants argue that Hospodarsky is entitled to summary judgment on these claims for the separate reason that he was not responsible for making the decision not to offer Thomson a promotion, noting that he participated in only one Selection Panel. While Hospodarsky did provide the Team Member Evaluation Form for each of Thomson's applications for the Core II position (indicating he was eligible for promotion), it is undisputed that Hospodarsky participated in only the 2018 Selection Panel. Thomson does not address the issue of individual liability in his resistance.
The ADAAA provides that "[n]o covered entity shall discriminate against a qualified individual on the basis of disability in regard to job application procedures, [*56]  the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). A "covered entity" is defined as "an employer, employment agency, labor organization, or joint labor-management committee." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(2). An employer is defined as "a person engaged in an industry affecting commerce who has 15 or more employees . . . and any agent of such person." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(5)(A). Some courts have recognized that a supervisory employee is not individually liable as an employer within the meaning of the ADA or ADAAA. See Alsbrook v. City of Maumelle, 184 F.3d 999, 1005 n.8 (8th Cir. 1999) (recognizing that three circuit courts of appeal have held there is no liability under Title I of the ADA against individuals who do not otherwise qualify as "employers" under the statutory definition); Fish v. Ristvedt, 192 F. Supp. 2d 1024, 1027-28 (D.N.D. 2002) (noting that while the Eighth Circuit has not decided the issue, it would likely preclude individual liability under Title I of the ADA).
With regard to the ICRA, the Iowa Supreme Court has held that a supervisory employee is subject to individual liability for unfair employment practices under Iowa Code § 216.6(1). See Vivian v. Madison, 601 N.W.2d 872, 878 (Iowa 1999) (noting differences between Title VII of the federal Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the ICRA). However, the individual must be found to have "control [of] [*57]  the company's hiring decisions." Id. at 876 (citing Sahai v. Davies, 57 N.W.2d 898, 901 (Iowa 1997)).
I agree that Hospodarsky cannot be personally liable for any discriminatory actions. He did not sit on the 2019 Selection Panel and had no control over the employer's ultimate hiring decision. Thus, he is entitled to summary judgment on the failure to promote claims in Counts I and II. However, in addition to failure to promote, Counts I and II allege discrimination based on retaliation for requesting reasonable accommodation and treating Thomson less favorably than his coworkers. Those claims are discussed below with regard to both defendants.

d. Merits of Retaliation and Less Favorable Treatment Claims
Thomson's second amended complaint also alleges a violation of the ADAAA and ICRA "by retaliating against Thomson for requesting reasonable accommodations for his disability." Doc. 30 at ¶¶ 39, 47. Defendants argue any retaliation claim fails because Thomson cannot demonstrate that any promotion decision was causally connected to any protected activity. Doc. 40 at 17, n.3. Defendants also argue that Thomson's allegation that "Defendants discriminated against Thomson in violation of the [ADAAA and ICRA] by treating Thomson less favorably than [*58]  his coworkers because of his disability," see Doc. 30 at ¶¶ 40, 48, is without merit because the record demonstrates that none of the Panel members discussed Thomson's actual medical condition, only his attendance. See Doc. 40 at 14. Further, when Thomson's attendance was raised during the Panel Discussion, HR intervened and foreclosed any further discussion related to his attendance.
With regard to his retaliation claim under the ADAAA and ICRA, Thomson contends that a reasonable jury could find that IP retaliated against him for seeking leave as an accommodation. See Doc. 46 at 19-20. He argues requesting an accommodation is a protected activity and that a reasonable jury could find that his use of leave as an accommodation for his disability was a factor in the decision not to promote him. Id. Thomson does not address his claim that he was treated less favorably than his coworkers based on his disability.21
A retaliation claim under the ADAAA requires a plaintiff to prove (1) he engaged in a protected activity; (2) he suffered a materially adverse employment action and (3) there was a causal connection between the protected activity and the adverse employment action. Lors v. Dean, 746 F.3d 857, 867 (8th Cir. 2014) (quoting [*59]  Stewart v. Indep. Sch. Dist. No. 196, 481 F.3d 1034, 1043 (8th Cir. 2007)). Under the ADAAA, there must be a but-for causal connection between the protected activity and adverse employment action. Under the ICRA, the protected conduct need only be a "motivating factor" in the adverse employment decision. See Haskenhoff v. Homeland Energy Sols., LLC, 897 N.W.2d 553, 584 (Iowa 2017). "Once the plaintiff establishes this prima facie case, then a rebuttable presumption of discrimination arises, and the burden shifts to the defendant articulate a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse employment action." E.E.O.C. v. Prod. Fabricators, 763 F.3d 963, 969 (8th Cir. 2014). Thomson argues that he engaged in protected activity by taking FMLA leave. The ADA retaliation statute provides: "No person shall discriminate against any individual because such individual has opposed any act or practice made unlawful by this chapter or because such individual made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this chapter." 42 U.S.C. § 12203(a). Multiple courts have held that taking FMLA leave does not qualify as a request for an ADA accommodation. See Waggel v. George Washington University, 957 F.3d 1364, 1373 (D.C. Cir. 2020) ("we reject Waggel's argument that her requests for FMLA leave should have been construed as requests for an ADA accommodation"); Acker v. General Motors, L.L.C., 853 F.3d 784, 791 (5th Cir. 2017) ("a request for FMLA leave is not a request for a reasonable accommodation [*60]  under the ADA" because "an employee seeking FMLA leave is by nature arguing that he cannot perform the functions of the job, while an employee requesting a reasonable accommodation communicates that he can perform the essential functions of the job."); Preddie v. Bartholomew Consolidated Sch. Corp., 799 F.3d 806, 815 (7th Cir. 2015) ("His periodic requests for his own health-related leave, which account for roughly one-third of his absences, without more, does not qualify as 'protected activity' under the ADA."); Johnson v. JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A., 293 F. Supp. 3d 600, 609 n.8 (W.D. La. 2018 ) ("Plaintiff intimates that he engaged in a protected activity by taking medical or disability leave. Taking such leave, however, does not amount to activity protected under the ADA because it in no way reflects opposition to any act or practice made unlawful under the ADA."). But see Capps v. Modelez Global, LLC, 847 F.3d 144, 156 (3d. Cir. 2017) (concluding that "a request for FMLA leave may qualify, under certain circumstances, as a request for a reasonable accommodation under the ADA, see 29 C.F.R. § 825.702(c)(2), and to the extent that the District Court held otherwise, that was error."). The Eighth Circuit has recognized that under the ADA, a request for "a medical leave of absence might, in some circumstances, be a reasonable accommodation." Lipp v. Cargill Meat Solutions, Corp., 911 F.3d 537, 545-46 (8th Cir. 2018).
Under these circumstances, I find that Thomson's use of FMLA leave did not constitute a request [*61]  for reasonable accommodation under the ADAAA. The Department of Labor regulations emphasize the distinction between leave as a reasonable accommodation under the ADA and leave under the FMLA. See 29 C.F.R. § 825.702(a) ("FMLA's legislative history explains that FMLA is 'not intended to modify or affect . . . the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 [as amended] or the regulations issued under that act. Thus, the leave provisions of the [FMLA] are wholly distinct from the reasonable accommodation obligations of employers covered under the [ADA] . . . ."). Thomson has not presented evidence to show that he requested medical leave as a reasonable accommodation as opposed to leave under the FMLA or STD. The regulations emphasize that these are separate requests and FMLA leave has different requirements than leave as a reasonable accommodation. See 29 C.F.R. § 825.702. Had Thomson exhausted his FMLA leave and requested additional leave as an accommodation, that would be more in line with a request for accommodation under the ADAAA. The circumstances here demonstrate that Thomson took leave based on his rights under the FMLA and did not request leave as an accommodation under the ADAAA. Thus, I find that Thomson's FMLA leave cannot be construed as a request for reasonable [*62]  accommodation or engaging in protected activity under the ADAAA. For the same reason, I find his FMLA leave cannot constitute protected activity under the ICRA. Defendants are entitled to summary judgment on Thomson's claims of retaliation and less favorable treatment under Counts I and II.

2. FMLA Retaliation/Discrimination - Count III
"The FMLA entitles an employee to twelve weeks of leave from work during any twelve-month period if the employee meets certain statutory requirements." Pulczinski v. Trinity Structural Towers, Inc., 691 F.3d 996, 1005 (8th Cir. 2012) (citing 29 U.S.C. § 2612(a)(1)). An employee is entitled to FMLA leave if she is suffering from "a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform the functions of [his] position." 29 U.S.C. § 2612 (a)(1). Section 2615(a)(1) makes it unlawful for an employer to "interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of or the attempt to exercise" rights provided under the FMLA. Section 2615(a)(2) makes it unlawful for "any employer to discharge or in any other manner discriminate against any individual for opposing any practice made unlawful" by the FMLA.
The Eighth Circuit has recognized three types of claims arising under Section 2615(a)(1)-(2): (1) entitlement claims, (2) discrimination claims and (3) retaliation claims. Johnson v. Wheeling Machine Products, 779 F.3d 514, 517 (8th Cir. 2015). A retaliation claim arises "if an employer takes 'adverse action' against [*63]  an employee who 'opposes any practice made unlawful under the FMLA - for example, if an employee complains about an employer's refusal to comply with the statutory mandate to permit FMLA leave.'" Brown v. Diversified Dist. Systems, LLC, 801 F.3d 901, 909 (8th Cir. 2015). A discrimination claim occurs "when an employer takes adverse action against an employee because the employee exercises rights to which he is entitled under the FMLA." Pulczinski, 691 F.3d at 1006. Thomson argues a reasonable jury could find that his use of leave was a factor in the decision not to promote him. Therefore, his claim is a discrimination claim. A prima facie case of FMLA discrimination requires proof that plaintiff (1) engaged in protected conduct; (2) suffered a materially adverse employment action and (3) the materially adverse action was causally linked to the protected conduct. Button v. Dakota, Minnesota & Eastern Railroad Corp., 963 F.3d 824, 835 (8th Cir. 2020).
Defendants argue that Thomson cannot make out a prima facie case of FMLA retaliation because he cannot demonstrate that the unfavorable promotion decision was causally related to his FMLA leave. Even if he could make a prima facie showing, defendants argue they have rebutted such a showing with their articulated reasons for their decisions and Thomson cannot establish that their proffered reasons were pretext for FMLA retaliation. [*64]  Both parties rely on the same arguments and evidence for this claim as for the disability discrimination claims.
Again viewing the facts in the light most favorable to Thomson, a reasonable jury could conclude that the Selection Panel's decision not to promote Thomson was causally related to his use of FMLA leave. As discussed above, it is undisputed that the Panel discussed Thomson's medical leave as a reason not to promote him. While HR intervened and informed the Panel they could not make a decision on that basis, a reasonable jury could conclude that the Panel's subsequent reasons for declining to promote him were pretext and that the real reason they chose not to promote him was due to his usage of FMLA leave.
Thomson has submitted evidence that the subsequent reasons (poor attitude and behavior) are not reflected in his personnel records (with the exception of one incident in 2014), were not mentioned in his Team Member Evaluation Forms (even though this was the purported basis for why he did not receive a promotion in 2017 and 2018) and were not mentioned in his feedback after the 2017 and 2018 Selection Processes to explain factors he could improve upon. Thomson has also submitted [*65]  evidence of IP's policy for the Promotion Selection Process, which states promotions "will be based on the both the [sic] Panel Interview and past job performance as represented by the Process Team Member Evaluation Form. Past job performance based on the evaluation form will have a greater weight on the selection than the interview." Doc. 43-3 at 27. Because Thomson's attitude and behavior were not discussed in either, a reasonable jury could conclude these reasons were pretext and the failure to promote him was causally linked to his taking FMLA leave.
Thomson has demonstrated a genuine issue of material fact as to a causal connection between the decision not to promote him and his FMLA leave. As such, defendants' motion as to Count III is denied with regard to IP. It is granted as to Hospodarsky for the same reasons as the failure to promote claims in Counts I and II.

3. Defamation - Count IV
Thomson's second amended complaint alleges: "Hospodarsky made statements to others that Thomson had lied about his disability being the reason why he missed work on at least one occasion." Doc. 30 at ¶ 64. He alleges these statements constitute defamation per se. Defendants argue Thomson cannot [*66]  point to any evidence in the record indicating that Hospodarsky lied about Thomson. They note that Hospodarsky testified he believed Thomson was on medical leave when he first saw the hunting picture and that Thomson has not sufficiently proven he was not on medical leave at the time he sent the picture to Grimm.22 They also argue that Hospodarsky's statement was one of opinion and is therefore not actionable.
Defamation per se includes statements that have "a natural tendency to provoke the plaintiff to wrath or expose him to public hatred, contempt, or ridicule, or to deprive him of the benefit of public confidence or social intercourse." Schlegal v. The Ottumwa Courier, a Div. of Lee Enterprises, Inc., 585 N.W.2d 217, 222 (Iowa 1998) (quoting Johnson v. Nickerson, 542 N.W.2d 506, 510 (Iowa 1996)). Examples of defamation per se statements "include an attack on the integrity and moral character of a party or an accusation that a person is a liar." Id. (citing Vinson v. Linn-Mar Community Sch. Dist., 360 N.W.2d 108, 116 (Iowa 1984)). In Vinson, the court concluded that a statement that an employee was fired for making incorrect entries on her timecard could reasonably be taken as imputing dishonesty to the employee and could therefore be understood as defamatory per se. Vinson, 360 N.W.3d at 116; see also Wilson v. IBP, Inc., 558 N.W.2d 132, 140 (Iowa 1996) (concluding statement regarding plaintiff's alleged untruthfulness about his condition and existence of videotape proving such [*67]  (when videotape did not, in fact, exist) could be reasonably understood as imputing dishonesty to plaintiff). "If a statement is defamatory per se, the elements of falsity, malice, and injury are legally presumed and the statement is actionable without proof of the same." Bandstra, 913 N.W.2d at 46-47 (citing Schlegel, 585 N.W.2d at 222).
The facts surrounding this claim are heavily disputed. According to defendants, after Team Members learned of the hunting photo, they expressed concerns to Hospodarsky regarding why an employee could be hunting while out on medical leave. Hospodarsky then reported these concerns to George to "keep peace within the team" and solicit assistance from his supervisor to maintain a productive and collaborative workforce. Doc. 40 at 22-23. They argue Thomson's claim should be dismissed because there is no evidence that Hospodarsky intentionally "lied" about Thomson. Even if Hospodarsky's statement turned out not to be factually accurate, they argue Thomson still cannot establish Hospodarsky "lied" about Thomson because Hospodarsky would have no way of knowing whether Thomson was hunting while on medical leave. At most, they argue Hospodarsky's statement is an opinion because it is subjective and not sufficiently [*68]  factual to be proven true or false. Id. at 23-25. They contend there is no evidence that Hospodarsky actually called Thomson a liar and emphasize that Hospodarsky made the statements not because he thought Thomson was lying but because he wanted to keep peace within the team. Doc. 58 at 12.
Thomson's version of the facts is that Hospodarsky told Ealy "we'll have to do something about this, I'm sure" after seeing the photo of the deer and said something to the effect that he thought Thomson was out deer hunting when he was supposed to be sick on medical leave. Doc. 46 at 28 (citing Doc. 53 at 71). Hospodarsky then told George there was a photo of Thomson with a deer while he was on medical leave and that people were upset about it. Id. at 29. Thomson states no Team Member, including Grimm, raised concerns about Thomson hunting while on medical leave. Id. Thomson states he was not out on medical leave when he shot the deer and defendants admit this for purposes of summary judgment. Ealy, George, Clayton, Depuydt, Grimm and Markland heard Hospodarsky's statement and all understood that Hospodarsky was reporting that Thomson was lying about being out sick when he was actually hunting.  [*69] Id.
I will first address defendants' argument that Hospodarsky's statements are nonactionable opinions. The Iowa Supreme Court has recognized that opinions may often imply an assertion of fact such that they would not be entitled to protection:
the framework of analysis is no longer whether the alleged defamatory statement is fact or opinion. Rather the framework of analysis now is whether the alleged defamatory statement can reasonably be interpreted as stating actual facts and whether those facts are capable of being proven true or false. Under this analysis, "statements of opinion can be actionable if they imply a provable false fact, or rely upon stated facts that are provably false." Moldea v. New York Times Co., 22 F.3d 310, 313 (D.C. Cir. 1994). The statement that the plaintiff must prove false is not the literal wording of the statement but what a reasonable reader or listener would have understood the author to have said.
Yates v. Iowa West Racing Ass'n, 721 N.W.2d 762, 770-71 (Iowa 2006) (citing Milkovich v. Lorain Journal Co., 497 U.S. 1, 16-17 (1990)). "The Iowa Supreme Court has adopted the following four-factor test to determine whether a statement is an opinion: (1) whether the "statement 'has a precise core of meaning for which a consensus of understanding exists or, conversely, whether the statement is indefinite and ambiguous'"; (2) the degree to which [*70]  the statement is "objectively capable of proof or disproof"; (3) "the context in which the" statement occurs; and (4) "the broader social context into which" the statement fits. Bandstra v. Covenant Reformed Church, 913 N.W.2d 19, 47 (Iowa 2018) (quoting Ollman v. Evans, 750 F.2d 970, 979 (D.C. Cir. 1984)).
Under this test, Hospodarsky's statements cannot be fairly categorized as nonactionable opinions. His statements had a precise core of meaning - that Thomson was lying23 about needing to be on medical leave because he was actually out hunting. See also Ealy Deposition (Doc. 43-9 at 4) ("Q: So based on the information Leon relayed to you, it was [sic] Leon making it clear that he thought Nick was lying about needing to be out on medical leave because instead he was actually out hunting? A: Yes."); George Deposition (Doc. 43-9 at 31) ("Q: Was the implication that you understood that, 'Hey, what would Nick be doing out hunting if he's supposedly sick?' In other words, was he lying about being sick that day. Was that your understanding? A: Correct. Correct. That somebody was implying that."); Clayton Deposition (Doc. 43-6 at 29) ("Q: Did you ever hear anybody say anything about Nick being out hunting when he said he was on medical leave? A: I heard a story. Q: What story did you hear? A: That he shot [*71]  a deer while he was called off sick. Q: Who did you hear that from? A: Mitch and Nick. Q: So what did Mitch say about that? A: The picture that got sent to him - that Nick sent him a picture of a buck that he shot, and he showed it to Leon, and Leon looked at it, and then I heard that he took that to HR and said that he was hunting when he was off on medical or off on sick leave. And that's all I heard."); Depuydt Deposition (Doc. 43-8 at 23) ("Q: But was it clear to you the reason he wanted to check upon it was because the implication was that Nick was hunting when he said he was on medical leave and therefore he wasn't being truthful? A: I think that's accurate, yeah.");24 Grimm Deposition (Doc. 43-10 at 22) ("Q: But you were under the impression that both Leon and Mike believed that Nick had shot the deer during a time that he was on medical leave; is that correct? A: That was my impression, yes.")25 ; Markland Deposition (Doc. 43-13 at 16) ("Q: Well, did you hear that there was a picture of a deer that Nick had shot while he was on medical leave? A: I heard that there was a picture of him with a deer, yes, posted while he was out on leave. That's what I heard. Q: And you can't remember [*72]  who you heard it from? A: I don't recall if that was from someone off the floor or from Leon . . . . Q: Do you remember the implication being that Nick was lying about being on medical leave because he was actually out hunting. A: I do believe that would be the implication behind it, yes.").
Hospodarsky's statements were also objectively verifiable based on dates Thomson was on medical leave and the date the photo was taken. See Jones v. Palmer Commc'ns, Inc., 440 N.S.2d 884, 891 (Iowa 1989), overruled on other grounds by Schlegal, 585 N.W.2d at 224 ("if a statement is precise and easy to verify, it is likely the statement is fact."). The context and social context in which the statement was made also suggest it was not an opinion. Hospodarsky took the matter to his supervisor, suggesting that he thought some action should be taken. In sum, Hospodarsky's statements "imply a provable false fact," Moldea, 22 F.3d at 313, and therefore, are actionable.
Defendants' other argument is that Thomson has not pointed to any evidence in the record indicating that Hospodarsky lied about Thomson, i.e., that Thomson has not sufficiently proven that he was not on medical leave at the time he sent the picture to Grimm. Doc. 40 at 22-23. Thomson argues that Hospodarsky's statements were defamatory per [*73]  se meaning "the elements of falsity, malice, and injury are legally presumed, and the statement is actionable without proof of the same." Doc. 46 at 29-30 (quoting Bandstra v. Covenant Reformed Church, 913 N.W.2d 19, 46-47 (Iowa 2018)). Thomson has presented sufficient facts from which a reasonable jury could conclude that Hospodarsky's statements were defamatory per se. As such, Thomson need not demonstrate a fact issue as to falsity to survive summary judgment and defendants are not entitled to summary judgment on Count IV.

V. PLAINTIFF'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
Thomson seeks summary judgment on the first element of his disability discrimination claims - whether he has a disability as a matter of law.

A. Relevant Facts
The following facts are undisputed for purposes of Thomson's motion, except where noted otherwise. Thomson was diagnosed with ulcerative colitis in 2005. In 2014, he was hired at IP's Cedar River mill. In February 2016, Thomson began having bloody stools, vomiting and abdominal pain that was attributed to his ulcerative colitis. Under IP's Salary Continuance Plan, an employee may be eligible to receive benefits during periods of disability if the employee was under the regular care of a physician licensed to practice medicine and Sedgwick [*74]  determined the employee was unable to perform his job because of illness or injury. Beginning in 2016, Thomson submitted claims through Sedgwick for STD and salary continuance benefits. Ralston knew Thomson had colitis that would periodically make it necessary for Thomson to miss work. On occasion, Ralston assisted Thomson with navigating the Sedgwick disability claims filing process. When Sedgwick would approve or deny a disability claim, it would send IP's HR contact an email with notice of the status of Thomson's claims. Sedgwick approved Thomson for STD leave for his ulcerative colitis starting in 2016. IP, through Sedgwick, approved Thomson's absences for "salary continuance" and STD leave under IP's Disability Plan for 32 days in 2016, 33 days in 2017, 26 days in 2018 and 20 days in 2019.
Hospodarsky, Markland and Ealy each supervised Thomson during his employment with IP. They knew Thomson had to miss work on occasion and that Thomson was approved for "salary continuance" or STD leave. Hospodarsky knew that Thomson had stomach issues, including diarrhea, bloody stools and pain. Defendants deny that Ealy or Markland knew Thomson missed work because of an intestinal disorder. When [*75]  HR received email notifications of Sedgwick's approval or denial of Thomson's disability claims, HR notified Thomson's Team Leaders via email of the claims status.
During his employment, Thomson did not receive any performance improvement plans and was not demoted. Thomson states he also did not receive any performance warnings or reprimands. Thomson's absences approved for STD leave did not count against him for attendance purposes. These absences likewise could not count against Thomson for purposes of promotion decisions.
Ulcerative colitis is a chronic impairment of the gastrointestinal system. Thomson has testified that when experiencing a flare-up of his ulcerative colitis symptoms, he must be by a bathroom all the time or lying in bed. He has also testified that he had to leave work early "five to six times" between 2016 and the date he resigned. Id. at 10. When he has a flare-up, Thomson has testified he will have diarrhea and have stools as frequently as three to five times per hour.
When Thomson went to visit Leon Qiao, M.D., on June 1, 2005, he had been having diarrhea for two weeks with bleeding and abdominal pain. Dr. Qiao performed a colonoscopy the next day and took biopsies. [*76]  The colonoscopy confirmed Thomson had ulcerative colitis. Thomson visited Dr. Qiao again on June 19, 2005, complaining of worsening diarrhea and abdominal cramping and that he was also passing blood. Dr. Qiao admitted Thomson to the hospital for an overnight stay for the exacerbation of his ulcerative colitis. Thomson contacted Dr. Qiao's office again on June 24, 2005, reporting worsening symptoms of multiple diarrheal stools, weakness and fatigue. Dr. Qiao examined Thomson on June 29, 2005, noting Thomson "has ulcerative colitis which is somewhat getting better" and planned a follow-up visit in three weeks. Thomson saw Dr. Qiao again on November 7, 2005, after experiencing recurrent diarrhea and frequency occurring several times an hour, possibly with some blood. He also felt fatigued. Dr. Qiao ordered further testing.
On February 10, 2016, Thomson went to the doctor after having four days of dark bloody stools, vomiting and abdominal pain, for which the doctor admitted him to the emergency room. Thomson sought further medical treatment for ulcerative colitis on February 12, February 17,26 February 19 and February 20, when Thomson felt like he was gradually improving. On February 24, [*77]  2016, Thomson was admitted to the Emergency Department with abdominal pain and was given fluids and pain medication. He followed up with his medical provider on February 29. A CT scan confirmed his colitis and his doctor contacted the gastroenterology office for an evaluation.
On March 10, 2016, Thomson reported worsening symptoms of heartburn, intermittent trouble swallowing, chronic gastroesophageal reflux disease with recent flare-up of symptoms, with his history of chronic ulcerative colitis. He had been suffering on and off with diarrhea and over the last few months, his symptoms had worsened, with three to four loose bowel movements per day. His physician ordered a colonoscopy for an evaluation of flare-up of colitis. Thomson went to see his medical provider again on March 16, 2016, for another uncontrolled flare of ulcerative colitis with continued left-sided abdominal pain. On March 29, he underwent an endoscopy and colonoscopy with biopsy. An evaluation of tissue samples revealed he had "acute colitis."
On April 22, 2016, Thomson was admitted to the Emergency Department for severe abdominal pain, nausea, and about 20 episodes of watery diarrhea since the day before. He was admitted [*78]  and hospitalized through April 24, 2016, for "Clostridium difficile colitis." He followed up with a medical provider on April 27, 2016. On May 20, 2016, Thomson reported to the Emergency Department with abdominal pain and bloody stools. On May 24, 2016, he saw a medical provider for follow up of his ulcerative colitis and discussed therapy options. Thomson had another follow up on July 21, 2016.
Thomson was referred to a gastroenterology specialist at Mayo Clinic on September 6, 2016. On October 6, 2016, the specialist diagnosed Thomson with abdominal wall pain and other digestive system issues including esophagitis, hiatal hernia, reflux disease and occasional blood in stool.
On January 30, 2017, Thomson sought medical treatment for abdominal pain, blood in his stool and vomiting blood over three days. He had been unable to sleep for a couple days due to the pain. Thomson saw David Elliott, M.D., at the University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics Center (UIHC) for Digestive Disease on July 19, 2017. Dr. Elliott confirmed the ulcerative colitis diagnosis and developed a treatment plan.
On October 31, 2017, Thomson sought medical treatment for abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting. His provider [*79]  completed FMLA paperwork and instructed Thomson to continue following up with UIHC. Thomson sought treatment for another flare-up in November 2017 consisting of five days of headaches, tiredness, abdominal pain, vomiting and blood in his stools. At this point, his symptoms had been occurring off and on for the past couple of years. He was put on prednisone and his symptoms improved during a recheck three days later on November 17, 2017. Thomson sought treatment for another flare-up on December 13, 2017. On December 20, 2017 he experienced another flareup with rectal bleeding and frequent diarrhea throughout the day.
On January 10, 2018, Thomson reported to the Emergency Room for a flare-up with sharp left-sided abdominal pain. On January 12, 2018, he followed up with his medical provider and they discussed coordinating care regarding abdominal pain and colitis due to his frequent flare-ups. The doctor recommended more aggressive treatment. On February 1, 2018, Thomson submitted for lab work ordered by his gastroenterologist. On February 21, 2018, Thomson was admitted to the Emergency Department with complaints of abdominal pain, rectal bleeding and possible influenza. Thomson's flare-ups [*80]  continued in May, June and July. He sought medical treatment for nausea, vomiting, headache, frequent diarrhea and abdominal pain. On July 3, 2018, he reported seven days of abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting (watery 4 to 5 times daily) and weight loss. Medical providers recommended he go to the Emergency Department based on his symptoms and underlying concerns of dehydration. At the Emergency Department he was given fluids and discharged with medication, after which he felt better.
On July 18, 2018, Thomson was reevaluated at the UIHC Digestive Diseases Clinic for his ulcerative colitis at which time his last flare-up had been about a month earlier. His diagnosis of ulcerative colitis remained unchanged.
On September 11, 2018, Thomson sought medical treatment for a flare-up involving two days of vomiting (two to four times per day) with abdominal pain, chills, diarrhea and sweats. Three days later, he began experiencing severe diarrhea (four episodes per hour) initially with a small amount of blood present. He was admitted to the Emergency Department on September 17, 2018, for a possible ulcerative colitis flare, with abdominal pain, nausea and diarrhea. He was experiencing three to four [*81]  diarrhea episodes every hour and felt like every time he would eat something it would "run right through him."
On November 28, 2018, Thomson was re-evaluated at the UIHC Digestive Diseases clinic. Dr. Elliott assessed Thomson as having ulcerative colitis that was "currently in clinical remission." Thomson reported back to UIHC on February 23, 2019, after seven days of abdominal pain. He visited UIHC again on March 23, 2019, reporting that he was having diarrhea five to ten times a day and vomiting two to four times a day. On April 10, 2019, Thomson visited UIHC for a migraine and colitis flare, reporting three days of abdominal pain, diarrhea several times an hour and after eating.
On April 16, 2019, Thomson visited UIHC for a follow up on his ulcerative colitis management. At a subsequent follow up on May 7, the provider determined Thomson needed a colonoscopy, which was performed on May 14, 2019. The colonoscopy did not show a presence of inflammation of Thomson's colon, meaning that his ulcerative colitis was in remission. As of May 2019, Thomson's ulcerative colitis symptoms seemed well-controlled. While Thomson remains in remission, his ulcerative colitis is a permanent and lifelong [*82]  impairment.

B. Analysis
Under the ADAAA, an individual is considered "disabled" if he or she (1) has "a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such individual," (2) has "a record of such an impairment" or (3) is regarded by his employer as having such an impairment. See 42 U.S.C. § 12102(1). Thomson argues he is disabled under the first or second prong. With regard to the first prong, major life activities include, but are not limited to "caring for oneself, performing manual tasks, seeing, hearing, eating, sleeping, walking, standing, lifting, bending, speaking, breathing, learning, reading, concentrating, thinking, communicating, and working." 42 U.S.C. § 12102(2)(A). Major life activities also include major bodily functions, as defined by the ADA. Scheffler v. Dohman, 785 F.3d 1260, 1261 (8th Cir. 2015) (citing 42 U.S.C. § 12102(2)). Major bodily functions are, among other things, "functions of the immune system, normal cell growth, digestive, bowel, bladder, neurological, brain, respiratory, circulatory, endocrine, and reproductive functions." 42 U.S.C. § 12102(2)(B). In determining whether an impairment "substantially limits" a major life activity, the applicable regulations state:
An impairment is a disability within the meaning of this section if it substantially [*83]  limits the ability of an individual to perform a major life activity as compared to most people in the general population. An impairment need not prevent, or significantly or severely restrict, the individual from performing a major life activity in order to be considered substantially limiting. Nonetheless, not every impairment will constitute a disability within the meaning of this section.
29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(1)(ii). Thus, a diagnosis of ulcerative colitis does not automatically demonstrate that Thomson had a disability while employed at IP. See Kirkeberg v. Canadian Pacific Ry., 619 F.3d 898, 903 (8th Cir. 2010). The regulations also provide that the term "substantially limits" is to "be construed broadly in favor of expansive coverage to the maximum extent permitted by the terms of the ADA" and that it is "not meant to be a demanding standard." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(1)(i). It is a "threshold issue" that "should not demand extensive analysis," see id. § 1630.2(j)(1)(iii), and "shall be interpreted and applied to require a degree of functional limitations that is lower than the standard for 'substantially limits' applied prior to the ADAAA." Id. § 1630.2(j)(1)(iv). It does not require scientific, medical or statistical analysis. Id. § 1630.2(j)(1)(v). "An impairment that is episodic or in remission is a disability if it would substantially limit a major [*84]  life activity when active." Id. § 1630.2(j)(1)(vii). Under the second prong, an individual has a "record of an impairment" if he "has a history of, or has been misclassified as having, a mental or physical impairment that substantially limits one or more major activities." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(k).
The ICRA defines disability as "the physical or mental condition of a person which constitutes a substantial disability." Iowa Code § 216.2(5). The regulations clarify that the term "substantially handicapped person" "shall mean any person who has a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities, has a record of such impairment, or is regarded as having such an impairment." Iowa Admin. Code r. 161-8.26(216).
Both statutes are to be construed broadly. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.1(c)(4) ("The primary purposes of the ADAAA is to make it easier for people with disabilities to obtain protection under the ADA. Consistent with the Amendments Act's purpose of reinstating broad scope of protection under the ADA, the definition of "disability" in this part shall be construed broadly in favor of expansive coverage to the maximum extent permitted by the terms of the ADA"); 42 U.S.C. § 12102(4)(A) ("The definition of disability in this chapter shall be construed in favor of broad coverage of individuals under [*85]  this chapter, to the maximum extent permitted by the terms of this chapter."); Iowa Code § 216.18(1) ("This chapter shall be construed broadly to effectuate its purposes.").
Thomson argues there is no genuine factual dispute that he has an actual disability. He notes the digestive system is a "body system," for which a physiological disorder qualifies as a "physical impairment" under the ADAAA. Doc. 32-1 at 14 (citing 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(h)(1). He also notes that a "major life activit[y]" defined by the statute and regulations include functions of the "digestive" and "bowel" systems. Id. at 14-15 (citing 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(i)(l) and 42 U.S.C. § 12102(2)(B)). The fighting issue is whether the impairment "substantially limits" a major life activity identified under the statute. When considering his active symptoms during flare-ups, Thomson argues there is no question about the debilitating effects of his condition.
Thomson also argues he has a record of a disability as a matter of law based on his medical and employment records. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(k)(1) ("An individual has a record of a disability if the individual has a history of, or has been misclassified as having, a mental or physical impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities."). He cites the statute's broad construction [*86]  and cases in which courts have found a record of disability as a matter of law. He contends the medical and employment records, when construed broadly, establish a record of disability - i.e., a history of an impairment that substantially limits a major life activity. Doc. 32-1 at 17-19.
Defendants argue Thomson has not put forth sufficient evidence that his limitations rose to the required level of "substantially limiting" for purposes of summary judgment. Doc. 42 at 3. They argue Thomson relies on self-serving unsworn medical records of diagnoses and impairments.27 They also argue that whether an impairment is substantially limiting for purposes of a disability claim is a question of fact that should be left to the jury. Id. Defendants point out the court must conduct an assessment of Thomson's condition in the light most favorable to them to determine whether his condition is substantially limiting. Id. at 4-5. They argue Thomson has not identified any cases in which a court has concluded colitis is a disability as a matter of law.
With regard to whether Thomson has a record of an alleged disability, defendants argue Thomson did not allege in his second amended complaint that he [*87]  was discriminated against on the basis of a record of an impairment that substantially limits a major life activity.28 Id. at 5. They argue that because Thomson's claims were administered through Sedgwick, Thomson has not demonstrated that defendants had a record of Thomson's alleged condition. They also argue Thomson's evidence is conclusory. Finally, defendants dispute that the "record" cited by Thomson (consisting primarily of his medical history) proves substantial limitation of a major life activity. Id. at 6-7.
Thomson is entitled to a finding that he is disabled as a matter of law only if no reasonable jury could agree with defendants that he does not have a physical impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities. Ulcerative colitis qualifies as an impairment under the applicable statutes and regulations. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(h) (defining a physical impairment as "[a]ny physiological disorder or condition . . . affecting one or more body systems, such as . . . digestive."). It is also undisputed that the "operation of a major bodily function" including "digestive" and "bowel" functions constitute major life activities. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(i). The issue comes down to whether Thomson was substantially [*88]  limited in these activities. In determining whether an individual is substantially limited in a major life activity, the regulations provide that it may be useful to consider, "as compared to most people in the general population, the condition under which the individual performs the major life activity; the manner in which the individual performs the major life activity; and/or the duration of time it takes the individual to perform the major life activity." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(4).
While Thomson has presented a strong record on this issue, I conclude that the question of whether his impairment reaches the threshold of "substantially limiting" a major life activity is an issue of fact that must be determined by a jury. See Lewis v. University of Penn., 779 F. App'x 920, 925 (3d Cir. 2019) ("The question of whether an individual is substantially limited in a major life activity is a question of fact."); Sanchez v. Vilsack, 695 F.3d 1174, 1178 (10th Cir. 2012) ("Whether a plaintiff has met the first two requirements are questions of law for the court. But whether the impairment substantially limits a major life activity is ordinarily a question of fact for the jury." (quoting Carter v. Pathfinder Energy Servs., Inc., 662 F.3d 1134, 1142 (10th Cir. 2011)). Thomson's motion for partial summary judgment is denied.

VI. CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated herein:
1. Defendants' motion (Doc. 36) for summary judgment [*89]  is granted in part and denied in part. The motion is granted as to:
a. Thomson's claims of constructive discharge, retaliation and less favorable treatment in Counts I and II
b. Thomson's claims against Hospodarsky in Counts I, II and III
The motion is denied as to:
a. Thomson's claims of disability discrimination based on failure to promote in Counts I and II against IP
b. Thomson's claim of FMLA discrimination in Count III against IP
c. Thomson's claim of defamation in Count IV against both defendants
2. Plaintiff's motion (Doc. 32) for partial summary judgment is denied.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
DATED this 22nd day of April, 2021.
/s/ Leonard T. Strand
Leonard T. Strand, Chief Judge
Table1 ()
Table1 ()


End of Document

