Thompson v. Midcontinent Indep. Sys.
United States District Court for the Southern District of Indiana, Indianapolis Division
March 30, 2018, Decided; March 30, 2018, Filed
Cause No. 1:15-cv-1930-WTL-DML

Reporter
2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 240508 *; 2018 WL 11191633
BRANDON THOMPSON, Plaintiff, vs. MIDCONTINENT INDEPENDENT SYSTEM OPERATOR, INC., Defendant.
Prior History: Thompson v. Midcontinent Indep. Sys. Operator, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 116236, 2016 WL 4528463 (S.D. Ind., Aug. 29, 2016)
Counsel:  [*1] For BRANDON THOMPSON, Plaintiff: Richard L. Darst, COHEN GARELICK & GLAZIER, Indianapolis, IN.
For MIDCONTINENT INDEPENDENT SYSTEM OPERATOR, INC., Defendant: Anthony Kyle Glenn, R. Anthony Prather, BARNES & THORNBURG, LLP (Indianapolis), Indianapolis, IN.
Judges: Hon. William T. Lawrence, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: William T. Lawrence
Opinion



ENTRY ON DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
This cause is before the Court on the Defendant's motion for summary judgment (Dkt. No. 56). This motion is fully briefed, and the Court, being duly advised, GRANTS the motion for the reasons set forth below.

I. PRELIMINARY MATTERS
Before turning to the merits of the Defendant's motion for summary judgment, the Court must resolve two preliminary matters.

A. Defendant's Objection to Plaintiff's Surreply
The Court considers MISO's motion to strike portions of Plaintiff Brandon Thompson's surreply (Dkt. No. 80). MISO argues that it did not introduce new evidence in its reply brief, but only objected to evidence Thompson cited in his response and challenged the sufficiency of other evidence. See Dkt. No. 80 at 1. MISO asks the Court to strike all of the surreply except for Thompson's response to the evidentiary objections [*2]  MISO made in section III of its reply. Id. at 3. The portions of the surreply MISO seeks to strike, it argues, either "re-hash[] arguments [Thompson] made in his Response, or set[] forth new arguments he should have made in his Response, but failed to [make]." Id. at 2.
As MISO correctly points out, Local Rule 56-1(d) permits the filing of a surreply "'only if the movant cites new evidence in the reply or objects to the admissibility of the evidence cited in the response.'" Id. (quoting L.R. 56-1(d)) (emphasis in quotation). MISO concedes that it made "a number of evidentiary objections, which [Thompson] is permitted to address in his Surreply." Dkt. No. 80 at 2. Thompson, however, argues that these objections were not confined to section III of MISO's reply. See Dkt. No. 81 at 2. He argues that MISO objected throughout its reply. As just one example, he states that "MISO continued to object on pages [seven] through [nine] to Plaintiff's evidence of 'Plaintiff's Assessment of His Own Job Performance,' as 'self-serving testimony,' as 'self-interested,' and as 'not relevant,'" and he argues that he is allowed to respond. Id. at 2. The Court rejects Thompson's argument. MISO did not raise any evidentiary objections on pages seven through [*3]  nine of its reply. It did not object to Thompson's testimony because it was self-serving. Rather, it concluded an argument regarding the insufficiency of Thompson's evidence as compared with its own, stating as follows: "Thus, Plaintiff's self-serving testimony that he did not have tardiness problems is false and refuted by admissible, undisputed evidence." Dkt. No. 77 at 8. MISO did not make the other two statements that Thompson claims MISO made ̶ calling his assessment of his job performance "self-interested" and "not relevant." Arguing again that Thompson's own assessment of his job performance did not support his legal claim, MISO quoted an opinion, Karazanos v. Navistar International Transportation Corporation, 948 F.2d 332, 337-338 (7th Cir. 1991), that said "[t]he employee must do more than challenge the judgment of his superiors through his own self-interested assertions . . . The employee's perception of himself . . . is not relevant." Dkt. No. 77 at 9 (emphasis added).
Thompson also claims that "[a]t page 11, MISO objected to all of Plaintiff's evidence as 'conclusory' and not 'admissible evidence.'" Dkt. No. 81 at 2. What MISO actually said follows:
Plaintiff also cites to fourteen of his exhibits to support his conclusory statement that he "was treated differently from [*4]  all of his coworkers." [Dkt. No. 75 at 26.] This conclusory statement, with no cite to specific admissible evidence, does not demonstrate that others similarly situated were treated more favorably. Zayas v. Rockford Mem. Hosp., 740 F.3d 1154, 1158 (7th Cir. 2014) ("Zayas makes broad assertions that she was treated differently because other ultrasound technicians were not 'subject to similar harassment,' 'singled out,' and 'subjected to unwarranted discipline.' Such broad conclusions are insufficient to satisfy this prong of the test[.]").
Dkt. No. 77 at 11. This, again, is not an objection to the admissibility of Thompson's evidence; it is an argument regarding the sufficiency of Thompson's evidence supporting his statement that he was treated differently from all of his coworkers. The Court cautions Thompson's counsel from engaging in hyperbole and outright fabrication.
Contrary to Thompson's argument, MISO made objections to specific pieces of evidence,1 see Dkt. No. 77 at 5-7, and otherwise explained why it believed Thompson's evidence was either insufficient to support the conclusions he drew or did not tell the story that Thompson said it does. See, e.g., id. at 8-9 n.3 (describing Thompson's characterization of an email exchange with a co-worker and arguing [*5]  that "the email exchange . . . , which is in evidence, contradicts [Thompson's] affidavit"). Admissibility and sufficiency are distinctly different concepts, and Thompson is not permitted to address sufficiency in a surreply filed without leave of Court. The Court thus GRANTS MISO's motion to strike (Dkt. No. 80) to the extent that it strikes the portions of Thompson's surreply that do not address MISO's specific evidentiary objections. Specifically, the Court strikes Sections I, II, and IV of Plaintiff's Surreply in Opposition to Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment (Dkt. No. 79).

B. Thompson's Objection to Roth's Notes
In support of the instant motion, MISO cites as evidence notes made by one of its employees, Christopher Roth. Thompson argues that Roth surreptitiously created these detailed notes after Thompson filed his complaint in this lawsuit and that the notes contain false information. These arguments are found throughout Thompson's briefs:
Roth claims in some notes, that he made long after the fact, that he made some verbal statements to Thompson, but his later voluminous notes are not consistent with the very short personnel documents that he wrote during the time of the [*6]  discrimination and retaliation, they are not believable, and they are disputed by Thompson. (Dkt. No. 74-1 at 8-9, ¶¶81-83). The circumstantial evidence shows that his voluminous notes that he did not show anyone are lies.
Dkt. No. 75 at 22.
In fact, Roth has now in the lawsuit provided voluminous later notes in which he repeatedly lies about Thompson and that are contrary to his own short documents that he wrote about Thompson during the discrimination and retaliation. . . . MISO's own documents show that it was Roth, not Thompson, who was not doing his job, not completing personnel documents fully (contrary to his later voluminous cover-up notes).
Id. at 23-24.
MISO objects to plaintiff's testimony that he did not see any of the notes by Roth until his lawsuit and that the surrounding circumstances show that they were written after his complaints of discrimination. Plaintiff's testimony that he did not see any notes by Roth until his lawsuit is admissible for the above reasons. Also, MISO does not claim that Roth's notes were made contemporaneously with the events. In fact, MISO does not raise any fact or issue that Roth's notes were contemporaneous with the events. Facts and issues not raised by [*7]  the moving party in a motion for summary judgment cannot be the basis of a summary judgment decision. U.S. v. King-Vassel, 728 F.3d 707, 716 (7th Cir. 2013). Furthermore, an employer's failure to offer evidence about when the notes were made raises an inference that the evidence is not favorable to the employer. Duncan v. Fleetwood Motor Homes of Indiana, Inc., 518 F.3d 486, 492-493 (7th Cir. 2008); Simple v. Walgreen Co., 511 F.3d 668, 671 (7th Cir. 2007); U.S. EEOC v. Target Corp., 460 F.3d 946, 958-959 (7th Cir. 2006); Dunn v. Nordstrom, Inc., 260 F.3d 778, 785-786 (7th Cir. 2001).
Dkt. No. 79 at 6.
Also, the circumstantial evidence shows that the notes were made after the events. Roth's notes are voluminous, whereas his contemporaneous documents, such as the mid-term review that he gave Thompson, are not even completed with performance ratings. (Dkt. No. 58-6; Dkt. No. 58-7 at 1-3; Dkt. No. 74-11). The voluminous notes are not signed or dated.2 Id. The dates in the titles of the notes indicate that they are notes describing past events, not notes written on those dates. Id. The notes are not on any business form. Id. The notes have the same look, indicating that they were all written about the same time. Id. MISO does not claim that Roth's notes were shown to Thompson or to anyone else or sent to anyone, including [human resources] or Roth's manager. MISO did not produce any emails to Thompson or anyone else to show that Roth communicated his concerns about these matters.
Id. (footnote added).
• Plaintiff's [*8]  testimony disputing Roth's statements show that Roth's statements are lies. Also, the circumstantial evidence shows that Roth's statements are lies. For example, Roth's notes for August 27, 2014 mention ratings, but there are no ratings in the mid-year review that he gave Thompson on that date. (Dkt. No. 58-6 at 1-8; Dkt. No. 74-11). Roth's notes also include statements about work hours, but Roth did not mention work hours in the review. Id. On September 18, 2014, Thompson emailed Roth at 9:10 AM to ask if he missed a meeting because Thompson and another engineer were the only employees in their area. (Dkt. No. 74-4 at 5). Roth replied that one engineer was in a meeting, one emailed that he would be late, and he "[d]id not see or hear from others." Id. Roth's later notes claim that he met with Thompson to discuss work hours, when in fact, Thompson emailed Roth about other employees not being in the office.
Id. See also Dkt. No. 75 at 34 ("Roth lied about the numerous disputed facts in this case and lied extensively in his voluminous cover-up notes that he wrote after the complaints were filed."); id. at 35 ([T]he lies of Roth during the discrimination and in his cover-up notes are all strong [*9]  evidence of retaliation and not a lawful honest belief.").
Although Thompson does not identify in his response brief which notes form the basis for his claims, he cites to docket numbers 58-6; 58-7 at 1-3; and 74-11 in his surreply.3 See Dkt. No. 79 at 6. He also states for the first time in his surreply that MISO "does not raise any fact or issue that Roth's notes were contemporaneous with the events" and surmises that this "raises an inference that the evidence is not favorable to [MISO]." Dkt. No. 79 at 6 (citations omitted).
MISO counters that, although Thompson cites his declaration to support his claims, he "provides no foundation for knowledge of when these notes were written, and more importantly, no specifics or citations for his declaration that [the notes] are 'not believable' and 'lies.'" Dkt. No. 77 at 6. It further argues that Thompson "claims that 'circumstantial evidence' supports these conclusory claims, but fails to cite to any of this alleged circumstantial evidence, or explain it." Id. It concludes that "'[t]hese are exactly the type of conclusory allegations that Rule 56 counsels should be disregarded on summary judgment.'" Id. (quoting Drake v. Minnesota Min. & Mfg. Co., 134 F.3d 878, 887 (7th Cir. 1998)).
The Court agrees. Thompson has [*10]  "presented only vague, conclusory assertions about incidents outside h[is] personal knowledge." Simpson v. Franciscan All., Inc., 827 F.3d 656, 662 (7th Cir. 2016). First, he has not shown that he has personal knowledge of when the notes were written. He merely speculates in his declaration that "the surrounding circumstances show that [the notes] were written after my complaints of discrimination." Dkt. No. 74-1 at 9. Thompson supports his claim with the following statements: "I did not see any of the notes until after I filed my lawsuit;" and "After I filed my lawsuit, MISO produced long notes by Roth for some meetings with me, but Roth did not take any notes during our meetings, [and] he did not show me any notes." Id. at 8-9. That Thompson did not see the notes prior to discovery in this case or that Roth did not take notes during meetings with Thompson does not show that Roth's notes were written after the lawsuit was filed. Thompson has provided no foundation of personal knowledge on which to base his assertion that the notes were created after he filed his lawsuit.
Second, even if Thompson had shown that the notes were later drafted, he has provided no evidence that they contain lies. He does not identify whether he claims the notes' entire contents are [*11]  untruthful or whether he claims only portions of the notes are untruthful and which those might be. This alone is reason to find that his assertion is too ambiguous and speculative to merit this Court's review. Nonetheless, the Court has examined Thompson's supporting evidence and found that he has not given the Court reason to conclude that the notes contain lies. Thompson's declaration includes the following statements regarding his assertion: "[T]he notes produced after my lawsuit contain false statements. By Roth," Dkt. No. 74-1 at 9, and "The notes contain false statements that are not consistent with Roth's actions of not responding to my emails, not having regular meetings before I complained about discrimination, not having set hours, not giving me any direction or work, and giving me a mid-year review without ratings," id. Neither these statements, nor any other evidence presented by Thompson, show that Roth's notes contain false statements. Moreover, Roth possesses personal knowledge relating to the notes' context and content and has declared that they are both "true and accurate." See, e.g., Dkt. No. 58-5 at 4-5. Roth's declaration also specifically contains many of the [*12]  same facts found in the notes and is made with personal knowledge of those facts. Id. For all of these reasons, Thompson has not sufficiently raised an issue regarding the truthfulness of Roth's notes. Roth's notes, therefore, have been considered as evidence by the Court in reviewing the instant motion for summary judgment.

II. SUMMARY JUDGMENT STANDARD
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56(a) provides that summary judgment is appropriate "if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." In ruling on a motion for summary judgment, the admissible evidence presented by the non-moving party must be believed, and all reasonable inferences must be drawn in the non-movant's favor. Zerante v. DeLuca, 555 F.3d 582, 584 (7th Cir. 2009) ("We view the record in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party and draw all reasonable inferences in that party's favor."). However, a party who bears the burden of proof on a particular issue may not rest on its pleadings, but must show what evidence it has that there is a genuine issue of material fact that requires trial. Johnson v. Cambridge Indus., Inc., 325 F.3d 892, 901 (7th Cir. 2003). The non-moving party bears the burden of specifically identifying the relevant evidence of record, and "the court is not required [*13]  to scour the record in search of evidence to defeat a motion for summary judgment." Ritchie v. Glidden Co., 242 F.3d 713, 723 (7th Cir. 2001) (internal quotation omitted). The Seventh Circuit has recently provided the following helpful guidance in these cases:
We must resist the trap of assessing the credibility of witnesses, choosing between competing inferences or balancing the relative weight of conflicting evidence. Orton-Bell v. Indiana, 759 F.3d 768, 773 (7th Cir. 2014). Sometimes a party makes that task difficult either by lodging speculative claims or engaging in a pattern of behavior that suggests dishonesty. Payne v. Pauley, 337 F.3d 767, 771 (7th Cir. 2003). Nevertheless we must remain true to our task on summary judgment and take the facts in the light most favorable to [the non-movant]. Id.
Khan v. Midwestern Univ., 879 F.3d 838, 840 (7th Cir. 2018), as amended on denial of reh'g (Feb. 26, 2018). Finally, it is MISO's burden to demonstrate that there are no genuine disputes as to any facts that are material to Thompson's claims. Id.

III. BACKGROUND
The Court notes at the outset that, in ruling on MISO's summary judgment motion, it has been hindered by Thompson's factual presentation. The Court has had to expend entirely too much of its limited resources sorting through both facts and argument. Many of the facts contained in Thompson's Factual Background and Statement of Material Facts in Dispute [*14]  section are not supported by the evidence of record to which Thompson cites. In other instances, Thompson cites so broadly to evidence, referring to entire exhibits without specific pinpoint citations or providing pinpoint citations to several exhibits, some of which do not say what Thompson says they say,4 that the Court cannot readily discern whether supporting evidence actually exists. As previously stated, "the court is not required to scour the record in search of evidence to defeat a motion for summary judgment." Ritchie, 242 F.3d at 723 (internal quotation omitted).
The facts that follow are those that, despite the shortcomings of Thompson's briefing, the Court has been able to determine are supported by the record, and they are viewed in the light most favorable to Thompson.
Thompson has a hearing disability, with permanent hearing loss in both ears, but can hear better in his left ear.5
Thompson began working as an Engineer I for the Market Administration Engineering ("MAE") department at MISO on July 15, 2013. His direct supervisor was Christopher Roth, Senior Manager in the MAE department. Prior to his start with MISO, Thompson asked a MISO recruiter about the weekly schedule. Dkt. No. 74-4 [*15]  at 2. Roth explained to the recruiter, who passed the information along to Thompson, that "[t]he hours are somewhat flexible. They are not a hard 8-5. Some of the guys come in around 7 and others around 9." Id. at 1. He further explained that "[t]he only time the engineers have some more restrictive hours are when they are on call . . . or they are working with a Business Area that has morning meetings." Id. In those instances, the engineers had to be at work earlier rather than later.
Thompson received a generally favorable annual performance review in 2013, after working for MISO for six months. See Dkt. No. 74-5. In each competency category, Roth indicated that Thompson "meets expectations," while Thompson evaluated himself as "exceeds expectations" or "far exceeds expectations" in each of the same categories. Id. at 1-6. Roth noted that Thompson "[h]as had issues talking too softly which [he] notes is caused by inner ear damage he is recovering from. So this should improve in time, but meanwhile needs to consciously make an effort to speak louder so others can hear him." Id. at 2. He also indicated that Thompson "has done a good job coming up to speed in the time frame . . . and building his knowledge to [*16]  the level he has especially while we have been short[-]handed and in the middle of the southern integration." Id. at 12.
On March 7, 2014, Roth and Thompson exchanged emails regarding a timesheet error. In an email Roth sent to Thompson, copying DeWayne Johnsonbaugh, a senior engineer, Roth described that "many managers . . . , other than myself, expect you to be in the office between 8 and 5 and if you are not, then you are expected to take personal time." Dkt. No. 74-4 at 3. Roth explained that he "allow[s] some flexibility, but this needs to be done with [Johnsonbaugh's] or my approval." Id.
On or before July 18, 2014, Roth and Thompson discussed the hours that Thompson was working. Dkt. No. 75 at 10 (citing Dkt. No. 74-1 at 4-6).6 Roth wanted Thompson to be in the office forty hours each week. Dkt. No. 74-6 at 4 (July 18, 2014, email from Roth to Johnsonbaugh saying that he and Thompson "discussed earlier . . . wanting 40 hrs 'in the office'"). On July 18, 2014, Thompson emailed Roth asking for a set of core hours for the team. See id. Roth emailed Johnsonbaugh that same day asking for "initial thoughts and reactions" regarding establishing a formal core hours period. Id. Roth explained to [*17]  Johnsonbaugh that he "had noted [to Thompson that he] was more comfortable with folks flexing hours [than working remotely] but 'normally' being here between 9-4, but 9[:]30-3[:]30 was pushing it." Id.
Thompson had an appendectomy on July 21, 2014. On July 23, 2014, Thompson contacted Yolanda Yoesoep, an Employee Relations Advisor at MISO, and told her about his surgery. See Dkt. No. 58-4 at 13. He asked "if this surgery would be something that is eligible for a medical leave or a different program to not use all [of his] vacation?" Dkt. No. 58-4 at 13. Sara Pratt, another human resources employee, sent Thompson FMLA and short-term disability paperwork that same day. See Dkt. No. 58-4 at 14-15. Thompson was approved for leave under the FMLA, beginning July 21, 2014. His leave was extended through August 24, 2014, due to complications following his surgery. Thompson also received short-term disability benefits during his leave. He returned to work on August 25, 2014.
On August 27, 2014, Thompson received his mid-year performance review from Roth. His mid-year review provided him with feedback in a number of areas. Roth commented on the following competencies in the review: "Effective [*18]  Communication," "Customer Service," "Operational Excellence," "Results Orientation," and "Teamwork." Dkt. No. 74-11 at 1-3.
In the "Effective Communication" competency, the review noted that "[v]erbal and written communication are generally appropriate for their context and purpose," but described that Thompson "[n]eed[ed] to increase effectiveness as a dialogue partner." Id. at 1. To do this, it suggested that he "[s]hould work to consider the listener more and respond to cues given by others during dialogue." Id. It further explained that Thompson "often [spoke] too softly where others cannot hear so [he] needs to make a conscious effort to speak louder so [he] can easily be heard" and that he "[n]eed[ed] to ensure [he was] providing the appropriate level of detail and answering questions in a direct manner." Id. It recognized that he "[e]ffectively considers the reader" in written documentation, "but can come off as superfluous which may in part be due to lack of detailed knowledge in area or practice in keeping documents focused on relevant key facts." Id.
In addressing Thompson's "Customer Service" competency, the review noted that Thompson "[e]xhibits a desire to provide customer service" [*19]  and that he "[i]s perceived as customer service oriented by customers." Id. at 2. It also noted that he is courteous, polite, and "[n]ormally[] demonstrates awareness and respect for others, but occasionally can take things too personally." Id. It further suggested that Thompson "more reliably follow-up, complete tasks, be available, be on time and get work done"; "focus on problem resolution, take responsibility and keep commitments"; and "be accountable for actions and do whatever is needed to perform job competently." Id. It further indicated that he "[c]ould better and more consistently understand, influence, track, and report on customer needs, requirements, and goals." Id.
In the "Teamwork" competency, the review indicated that Thompson "[u]sually works productively in a team"; "[u]nderstands and works towards team goals"; and "[g]enerally supports the group and other team members." Id. at 4. It recommended, however, that he "[n]eed[ed] to more reliably respond to and follow up on open tasks, opportunities, requests, questions, [and] communications" and "to consistently respect others opinions and accept feedback and suggestions without taking it personally." Id. It also noted that feedback provided [*20]  by Thompson "is generally timely and actionable, but has not come across constructively on multiple occasions," that he needed "to be aware of and better read and apply verbal and nonverbal cues when interacting with others." Id. Along that same line, it also suggested that he "more readily and consistently win the trust and respect of others," "do more to create an open, trusting environment," and "consistently respect others['] opinions and accept feedback and suggestions without taking it personally." Id.
The review also contained several very specific tasks and development goals in the following areas: "Project Management and Programmatic Skills"; "Personal and Professional Competency Development"; "Self-Development"; "Process Improvement/Risk"; "Process Improvement/Risk — Improve effectiveness and efficiency of Forward Operations functions"; "Operations — Quarterly Model Update Maintenance and Support"; "Operations"; and "Operations — MAE Team Goals." See id. at 4-10.
At the meeting, Thompson objected to the review's content and asked Roth where he received the information contained in the review. Dkt. No. 74-1 at 7. During the course of their conversation, Roth told Thompson that Kevin Vannoy, [*21]  Director of Thompson's group, when referring to his leave, said that Roth's "vacation was over." Id. Thompson then asked Roth if Thompson was the only person Vannoy had said that about, and Roth said yes. Id. at 8.
Around September 12, 2014, Roth and Thompson began meeting weekly to discuss Thompson's performance. Gavin Kiser, a human resources employee, attended some of the weekly meetings as well. Dkt. No. 74-1 at 10; see also Dkt. No. 58-1 at 3, 5 & 6. At the September 12, 2014, weekly meeting, Thompson requested permission to work from home, but Roth denied his request because he "first wanted to see a sustained record of established 8[-]hour work days in the office and that his performance needed to be up to par and without issue."7 Dkt No. 58-5 at 4 (citing Dkt. No. 58-6 at 10); see also Dkt. No. 74-1 at 10. Around this same time, Roth asked four of Thompson's team members to provide Roth and Thompson with weekly feedback. Dkt. No. 74-1 at 10.
Roth met with Thompson again on September 18, 2014.8 They discussed work and favorable feedback Thompson had received on a project. Dkt. No. 58-7 at 1. Roth "again shared with [Thompson his] opinion that he was not working the required 40 hours [*22]  per week in the office." Dkt. No. 58-5 at 4 (citing Dkt. No. 58-7 at 1). Thompson told Roth that he felt like he was being singled out. Id.
On September 29, 2014, Thompson emailed Roth asking him to stop having team members provide feedback on his performance. Dkt. No. 74-16 at 1-2. He said that it created for him "a negative work environment and caus[ed] tension." Id. at 1. He also complained that feedback provided to him did not have "specific examples . . . to allow understanding and interpretation of any opinions." Id.
On October 3, 2014, Thompson met with Roth and Kiser from human resources. They provided him with performance feedback. Thompson asked to see the feedback that came from his co-workers, but Roth refused to show it to him. Dkt. No. 75 at 13. On October 9, 2014, Roth sent to Vannoy and Shawna Lake, a human resources employee, examples of the types of feedback "that were provided to and discussed with [Thompson] at the meeting with [Kiser]" on October 3, 2014. Dkt. No. 74-16 at 3.
In a series of emails on October 8 and 9, 2014, between Thompson and Johnsonbaugh, they discussed documentation of feedback that Johnsonbaugh had given to Thompson regarding a mistake Thompson had [*23]  made while on call the prior afternoon. See Dkt. No. 58-7 at 5-8. The documentation was to be submitted jointly by Thompson and Johnsonbaugh to Roth, as Roth had asked Johnsonbaugh for formal documentation of the feedback Johnsonbaugh had given to Thompson regarding the mistake. Id. at 7. Johnsonbaugh requested that Thompson review the feedback documentation that he had drafted since it was to be a joint submission. Id. Thompson initially responded by telling Johnsonbaugh that he "always appreciate[s] [Johnsonbaugh's] feedback as [he] respect[s] that [he is] the most knowledgeable and technical team member" and outlined a number of issues outside of his control that may have contributed to the mistake. Id. at 6-7. Johnsonbaugh replied to Thompson with a revised version of the documentation in which he attempted to incorporate the issues that Thompson raised. Id. at 6. The entirety of Thompson's response follows:
DeWayne,
Lets [sic] take a different approach. Using your words[,] "We should be able to figure things out between both of us without having to go to management[,]" I would like to be able to say that we worked well together before you leave our group.
If you like[,] I could easily write about your behavior, [*24]  specific situations that have arose [sic], lack of management ability, and discuss in great detail your work hours every[ ]day at the office coming in at 10:30-11:00 while everyone in the company is here and required to be here much earlier.
If you like[,] I could write this into an email in detail and print it out and send it to [human resources] Management, Senior Managers in the company and the President and that way you can be put under a microscope and evaluated with every minute your [sic] in the office.
If this doesn't sound fair then maybe we can work together instead of having you try to constantly make me look bad toward the group. Please make the choice and let me know. I will have the document written up today and ready to send to upper management if this is how you like to handle situations.
My choice would be to work with you and drive forward. Putting things in writing in detail over one circumstance is unprofessional and if someone is trying to have you do this[,] I would recommend you think about what the consequences that could result be [sic] if you were involved in a situation like this after being asked not to as it is causing a hostile work environment and having [*25]  it brought to the companies [sic] attention.
Thanks,
Brandon
Dkt. No. 58-7 at 5.
On October 13, 2014, Thompson sent an email to Roth, copying Johnsonbaugh, containing the following message:
I would like to work from home today to be able to focus without the distractions from work and the constant scrutiny of the current work environment. I feel this is fair based on the fact that brand new employees to the group are working from home and the work I am doing is stepping through code step by step as [Johnsonbaugh] has showed me and learning about each process.
I need to be able to work without feeling like I am being constantly viewed. Of course I am online as well.
Dkt. No. 74-18 at 5-6.
Roth responded that he wanted Thompson to come in and work in the office "so that [he would] have resources available to [him] to answer questions and guide [him] as needed." Id. at 5. He explained that they "had discussed the value of this before on several occasions." Id. Thompson responded as follows:
Chris,
Your actions are making me uncomfortable in the work place [sic] and not allowing me to work normally in the workplace. I am having to take sick and vacation because of your behavior. This is unprofessional and [*26]  will not be tolerated in the workplace. I am the only team member you are having reviewed constantly.
I have mentioned to you several times that you are causing a work environment that is completely uncomfortable and unprofessional.
I have said this in person to try to not put it in writing and have been forced to put it in writing to give you the opportunity to change this behavior on your end.
I will have a discussion with upper management and [human resources] management at this point. I will not be forced to take sick time or work in an environment that you have caused to be uncomfortable while have [sic] constant scrutiny by [four] different team members analyze [sic] everything I do as this is causing anxiety and stress that is not productive and leading to a good team work environment.
I have gone out of my way to allow you the chance to fix this without moving above you.
Every other team member is afforded the opportunity to work from home if they are only documenting items etc.
Id.
Roth replied as follows:
Brandon,
I have talked with Shawna [Lake] and she is available today between 12 and 2 if you are available for us to discuss your concerns. Let us know if you will come in to meet [*27]  with us and when.
Additionally, below is information on the employee assistance program you may want to consider utilizing.
MISO provides an employee assistance program for its employees to assist with such issues as stress, addictions, parenting, financial, legal, etc. The program is voluntary and confidential, and provides professional advice for employees and their eligible family members at no cost. Employees may contact Lincoln's Beneficiary Connect . . .
Id. at 4.
Thompson wrote the following message to Shawna Lake:
Good Morning Shawna,
Can I call you at noon? I am not comfortable at this time trying to communicate with my manager again.
I tried to work from home this morning due to the work conditions as other team members are allowed to do. I would like to call you to discuss the ongoing issues with my manager and topics that have led to me having to take time off as I am now being sick from this situation.
I would gladly be willing to talk with you on the current work environment and stress being caused by my manager. I don't mind utilizing the [employee assistance program] link that was provided, but the stress is by my manager and has been going on for a month ever since I got back from [*28]  surgery and is not a good work environment as I am the only one on his team having these weekly reviews.
If you would have time to talk any sooner to express my concerns and see if maybe there is another desk area I can sit in etc. or additional options I am not aware of[,] I would gladly like to have feedback or guidance from you and be able to see if my managers [sic] behavior is appropriate and if a different approach can be taken.
I appreciate your time,
Brandon
Id. at 4.
After he wrote to Shawna Lake, Thompson responded to Roth as follows:
Hi Chris,
I appreciate the link you provided, but my stress and anxiety is due to your actions. I would like to gain perspective from a mediator (Shawna [Lake]) first to gain perspective and see what options I have and how some of the approaches can be changed to help me continue to drive forward and make a difference with the company.
I will call her today due to being sick and out of the office.
Id. at 1.
That same day, Thompson reached out to Vannoy as well.9 See Dkt. No. 74-18 at 8. In his message to Vannoy, Thompson complained about Roth putting him "under constant scrutiny" by having his team members monitor his work. Dkt. No. 74-18 at 9. He stated that the situation [*29]  "has led to a work environment that is completely uncomfortable for [him]" and that he has "been forced to take numerous sick days and vacation days because of the constant scrutiny and false accusations on my managers [sic] side." Id. He asked Vannoy to "[p]lease note that this is not due to work but rather the stress of being constantly evaluated and having [Roth] threaten [him] to meet a grey and unknown target by the year end or he will have you make me leave the department or make it hard for me to be able to switch departments." Id. Vannoy contacted Shawna Lake to let her know that he received a message from Thompson. See id. at 8.
Shawna Lake took the information to Kiser, and Kiser investigated Thompson's complaints. He interviewed both Thompson and Johnsonbaugh.10
Thompson did not go to work on October 13 or October 14, 2014.
On October 15, 2014, Thompson attended a mental health counseling session from 7:00 p.m. to 7:50 p.m. See Dkt. No. 74-19 at 1. He explained that he was "having 'some trouble' at work," with his supervisor "'singling him out'" and "having peers 'report' on him." Id.
On October 16, 2014, Roth and Shawna Lake met with Thompson. At the meeting, MISO issued Thompson written [*30]  discipline for insubordinate and threatening behavior. See Dkt. No. 58-7 at 9-10. Specifically, Thompson was disciplined for two separate actions: insubordination for telling Kiser during a performance discussion on October 3, 2014, that Roth falsified performance feedback provided to him11 and threatening behavior for his October 9, 2014, email to Johnsonbaugh "threatening to report [his] behavior" to management if he submitted a report that was requested of him regarding Thompson's mistake when he was on-call. Id. at 9. Thompson spoke with Shawna Lake on October 16, 2014, and requested a transfer.12 Dkt. No. 75 at 7 (citing Dkt. No. 74-1 at 17). She told him that it would not be a good idea to move to another position. Id.
On about October 20, 2014, Kiser reported to Thompson about his investigation. He told Thompson that Johnsonbaugh did not do anything wrong. Dkt. No. 74-1 at 18.
Thompson attended another mental health counseling session on October 22, 2014, from 8:00 p.m. to 8:50 p.m. See Dkt. No. 74-19 at 3. Thompson claims he "was unable to follow the plan to meet with (the counselor) twice a month because [he] was out of vacation time." Dkt. No. 74-1 at 20; see also Dkt. No. 75 [*31]  at 3. There is no documentation of other counseling sessions.
On October 27, 2014, Thompson received an automated notice from MISO's timekeeping system that he exceeded his annual allotted paid time off. See Dkt. No. 74-13 at 7. He missed work on October 13 and 14, 2014, after he had requested to work from home those days but was denied approval. See Dkt. No. 74-13 at 8. After learning of his paid-time-off deficit, Thompson "told Roth that [he] had heard of other employees running out of time and 'somehow working it out,' but Roth did not respond to [his] message." Dkt. No. 74-1 at 20 (citing Dkt. No. 74-13 at 2-7).13 Thompson then contacted Kiser about having the negative time balance and explained that "[his] concern is that all other team mates [sic] are allowed for [sic] some sort of flex time[ ]/ working from home" and that "others also have a negative vacation balance and there has been an arrangement worked out with my manager." Dkt. No. 74-13 at 5. Kiser responded, in part, as follows:
Hi Brandon,
Thanks for reaching out, and I am aware of the situation and looking into it. I think [Roth's] delayed response is simply due to him trying to seek direction and explore what options are [*32]  available.
As far as the "flex time" you reference, if you recall we already discussed the business justification and reasoning for and why some of the more senior individuals are permitted to work from home as part of their regularly scheduled hours.
That being said, I am in the process of looking into the details of this negative balance to see what our options are. My concern is that what makes this situation unique, is that [that] negative balance may be due to those two days in which you didn't come into work a couple weeks ago despite not being approved to working [sic] from home. If that's the case, and you have no remaining paid time off, then it may have to be taken unpaid. However, let me first do a little more research to confirm and explore options.
Dkt. No. 74-13 at 4-5.
In response, Thompson told Kiser that he was sick on those days. See Dkt. No. 74-13 at 4. Kiser explained that "even if [the time off] was due to being sick, all of your paid time off has been exhausted." Id. at 3.
The next day, Kiser informed Thompson, Roth, and Vannoy that the two days would need to be designated as unpaid time off and that "any additional future time taken off in 2014 would also be unpaid (with [*33]  the possible exception of certain time qualifying for other benefits as defined within the Employee Handbook . . .)." Dkt. No. 74-13 at 11.
On November 13, 2014, Thompson was placed on a performance improvement plan ("PIP"). See Dkt. No. 58-7 at 11-12. In the PIP, Roth explained that "[d]uring the past several months, [Thompson's] performance has not met the expectation of work required of an Engineer I." Id. at 11. The PIP required Thompson to be on time to work and in the office reliably between 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.; work as a part of a team without disruptive or inappropriate behavior toward others; perform essential on-call duties or demonstrate an ability to perform such duties; and demonstrate technical competence and knowledge through the successful completion of five specific projects, which were deemed to be Engineer 1-level projects that "should not require training or assistance from other team members." Id. The PIP also explained that Roth would review Thompson's progress with him each week. Id. at 12. Thompson initially refused to sign the PIP. Dkt. No. 74-1 at 22.14
On November 14, 2014, Thompson explained to Kiser in an email that he believed that, apart from the PIP's first project [*34]  item, which included "a ton of work not typical of Engineer 1s or 2s unless they have very extensive programming knowledge," the other [four] projects in the PIP "seem[ed] achievable." Dkt. No. 74-21 at 3. Kiser responded, indicating that Thompson should immediately begin work on the other project items and asked him for more detail regarding the issues with the first project. Id. He asked Thompson whether the first project was "beyond [his] capability," whether there were parts he thought he could not complete, or whether he believed he could complete all parts, "but not within the 5 days assigned to it." Id. He also asked Thompson, "[i]f either of the latter two [circumstances existed]," to provide alternative solutions and a proposed project completion date. Id. Kiser explained that the PIP would be in "immediate effect" for the other four projects and that they would "finalize the details of the first project over the next few days." Id. He also reiterated that, "despite your objections, the plan requirements surrounding attendance and teamwork (first two bullet points) are expected, and not up for further debate." Id.
On December 19, 2014, Roth and Kiser met with Thompson to discuss [*35]  the progress on the PIP. At that time, Roth extended Thompson's PIP into January 2015, "based on [Thompson's] marginal performance and commitment demonstrated over [the original PIP] time period." Dkt. No. 58-7 at 13. Roth and Kiser reiterated the areas in which Thompson needed to demonstrate improvement and indicated the status of the five project items he was supposed to have completed as part of the PIP. See id. at 13-14. The first two projects were deemed "incomplete; not submitted for review." Id. at 13. The remaining projects were submitted, but one was "non-functional on submission" and another "did not meet all of the requirements." Id. at 13-14. Only one project "met minimum requirements." Id. at 14. Roth and Kiser reiterated that the other PIP requirements, including those regarding punctuality and teamwork, were still in effect. See id. at 13. During the original PIP term, Thompson arrived to work after 8:30 a.m. 71% of the time.15 Dkt. No. 57 at 11 (citing Dkt. No. 58-5 at 7). His arrival times, which averaged 21 minutes late, "were independently verified based upon his security badge swipes to enter the building." Id. Thompson "complained to Roth again that [the extension of the PIP] was discriminatory and retaliatory treatment." [*36]  Dkt. No. 74-1 at 25.
Around that same time, Thompson completed a six-month lean practitioner training, about which "Roth complimented Thompson on his good performance." Dkt. No. 74 at 4 (citing Dkt. Nos. 74-1 at 24-25; 74-3 at 22).
During the extension of the PIP, from December 20, 2014, to January 20, 2015, Thompson was late to work 73% of the time, averaging 22 minutes late. Dkt. No. 57 at 12 (citing Dkt. No. 58-5 at 7-8). On January 20, 2015, in an email entitled "Brandon Thompson Attendance Progress Summary," Kiser emailed Shawna Lake, describing Thompson's failure to meet the PIP and extended PIP's attendance requirements. See Dkt. No. 58-1 at 30-31. It provided details about Thompson's failure to arrive at work by 8:30 a.m. and asked for her thoughts regarding his tardiness. Id.
Based on Thompson's continued attendance issues and performance deficiencies, Roth made the decision to terminate Thompson. Dkt. No. 57 at 13 (citing Dkt. No. 58-5 at 8). He intended to terminate Thompson on February 2, 2015. Id.; see also Dkt. No. 74-25 at 1-2 (email from Kiser to Roth and Vannoy, discussing whether they should move the termination date from February 2, 2015, saying, "I assume he has [*37]  a MISO laptop with him? We could notify him at home, but then we'd have [to have] him bring the laptop back. Would you prefer to go that route, or move the date until tomorrow?"). Thompson, however, did not show up for work that day, stating he was "[o]ut of [the] office on a personal day." Dkt. No. 74-25 at 1. On February 3, 2015, he emailed Roth saying, "I have a few personal things [I] have to take care of today. Will be out [o]f the office." Dkt. No. 58-7 at 16. Roth responded to Thompson's message, copying Vannoy and Kiser, stating, "Brandon, this is the second day in a row where you are taking a day off without getting prior approval. I would prefer you come in to the office today and not take the day off." Id. Thompson came to the office. He explained in an email reply to Roth, copying Vannoy and Kiser, "I am in the office, but I do have personal events going on today that are very important . . . I thought that personal days were for unscheduled events that need time taken[,] and if I am not sick[,] I would not take sick time for those events. I may be confused though[] and hope to gain some feedback from you." Id.
Thompson went to Michelle Lake's (another human resources employee) [*38]  office to complain. Dkt. No. 75 at 19 (citing Dkt. Nos. 74-3 at 22-23 & 74-25 at 4).16 When Thompson was on his way back to his desk, he was told to go to a conference room, where Kiser told him that he was "terminated for marginal work performance and tardiness." Dkt. No. 75 at 5 (citing Dkt. Nos. 74-1 at 26-27 & 74-3 at 22-23). Thompson called Michelle Lake and left a voice message. See Dkt. No. 74-26 at 4. He complained that, after he told Shawna Lake that he was working in a hostile environment, "she left [him] in that work environment for over a month and a half" after he had requested to move. Id. He stated that he "was interested in moving out of the department because [he] felt like it was a management and employee issue where for some reason [he] felt like [Roth] had it out for [him]." Id. He also stated that he would like to have it in writing that he could still apply for other positions at MISO. Id. Kiser sent an email to Thompson to confirm that they had received his voicemail to Michelle Lake complaining about Shawna Lake. See id. at 3. Kiser explained that, because his complaint was about a human resources employee, MISO's outside counsel would conduct an investigation into the [*39]  complaint. Id. The message instructed that outside counsel would contact him and also asked Thompson to confirm his contact information to ensure that outside counsel could reach him. Id.
On April 10, 2015, Thompson filed a charge of discrimination with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, alleging that he was discriminated against based on his sex and disability and retaliated against for his use of FMLA. See Dkt. No. 74-3 at 22. Thompson filed this lawsuit on December 8, 2015.

IV. DISCUSSION
Thompson brings several claims in his second amended complaint. He alleges sex discrimination under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act, disability discrimination and failure to accommodate claims under the ADA, and FMLA interference and retaliation claims. The Defendant moves for summary judgment on all claims.
As an initial matter, in his response to the Defendant's motion for summary judgment, Thompson clarifies that he is not pursuing his sex discrimination claim. See Dkt. No. 75 at 21. Because Thompson is not pursuing this claim, the Court DISMISSES the claim and, accordingly, DENIES AS MOOT Defendant's motion for summary judgment regarding this claim.

A. ADA Claims
In his second amended [*40]  complaint, Thompson identifies his disabilities as "hearing loss, multiple surgeries on both ears, ruptured appendix, and complication from surgery and infection."17 2d Am. Compl. ¶ 8. He alleges both that MISO failed to accommodate his hearing disability and also discriminated against him because of it. The two claims are discussed, in turn, below.

1. Failure to Accommodate Claim
Thompson argues that MISO failed to accommodate his hearing disability "by not speaking into [his] left ear, not allowing [him] to speak softly, denying [him] the opportunity to work from home, not allowing [him] to work a flexible schedule, denying [his] requests for leave, denying [his] requests to be transferred, denying [him] training, not allowing [him] to ask questions, failing to engage in the interactive process, and terminating [him]." 2d Am. Compl. P 99.
A plaintiff claiming that his employer failed to reasonably accommodate him must show: "(1) he is a qualified individual with a disability; (2) the employer was aware of his disability; and (3) the employer failed to reasonably accommodate the disability." Curtis v. Costco Wholesale Corp., 807 F.3d 215, 224-25 (7th Cir. 2015) (citations and quotations omitted). A qualified individual with a disability is someone [*41]  who is disabled under the ADA and who can perform the essential functions of the job, with or without reasonable accommodation. Garg v. Potter, 521 F.3d 731, 736 (7th Cir. 2008) (citations omitted). For purposes of this Entry, the Court assumes that Thompson is a qualified individual with a hearing disability and that MISO was aware of this disability, leaving the Court to decide whether Thompson has pointed to sufficient evidence from which a reasonable jury could determine that MISO failed to reasonably accommodate Thompson's disability.
MISO argues that "most of the accommodations [Thompson] claims MISO should have made are either not accommodations or are unrelated to his alleged hearing disability." Dkt. No. 57 at 28. Regarding Thompson's particular requests that his teammates speak into his left ear and allow him to speak softly, MISO similarly argues that "there is no evidence that [Thompson] needed any accommodation related to his alleged hearing loss to perform the essential functions of his job." Dkt. No. 57 at 26. It argues that Thompson did not allege that he "could not hear or understand his assignments, do the work required of an Engineer I, or show up [to work] on time because of his alleged hearing loss." Id. at 26. Furthermore, [*42]  MISO contends that there is "no indication that any failure [to speak into Thompson's left ear or allow him to speak softly] rendered him incapable of performing the essential functions of his job." Id.
Thompson argues in his response that MISO "admonished him for the trouble he was having communicating at work." Dkt. No. 75 at 30. To support his argument, he points to evidence that MISO indicated in his performance reviews that he needed "to make a conscious effort to speak louder" so that he could be heard and also offered the following comments: "[v]erbal communications could better achieve their goals by spending a little more time planning and organizing thoughts;" "[n]eeds to increase effectiveness as a dialogue partner;" "[s]hould work to consider the listener more and respond to cues given by others during dialogue;" and "[n]eeds to ensure providing the appropriate level of detail and answering questions in a direct manner." Id. at 29 (citing Dkt. Nos. 74-5 & 74-11 generally). Thompson is correct that MISO was admonishing him, or at least counseling him, regarding the trouble he had communicating, but apart from MISO suggesting that Thompson make an effort to speak louder, in recognition [*43]  of his hearing limitations, its other comments do not relate to Thompson's capacity to hear. Rather, they concern the substance of Thompson's communications and his attitude, asking that he spend time planning and organizing his thoughts; consider his listener or audience; respond to cues given by others; provide the appropriate level of detail in answers; and answer questions in a direct manner. Furthermore, MISO discussed Thompson's attitude directly, stating that it "[w]ould like to see development regarding taking constructive criticism or suggestions less personally" and suggesting he "pay more attention to what is said and how it is said to avoid coming across negatively." Dkt. No. 74-11 at 6 and 4, respectively.18
Reasonable accommodations are those "modifications or adjustments to the work environment, or to the manner or circumstances under which the position held or desired is customarily performed, that enable an individual with a disability who is qualified to perform the essential functions of that position." 29 C.F.R. 1630.2(o)(ii) (2012) (emphasis added). MISO did not fail to accommodate Thompson's hearing disability by "denying [him] the opportunity to work from home, not allowing [*44]  [him] to work a flexible schedule, denying [his] requests for leave, denying [his] requests to be transferred, denying [him] training, not allowing [him] to ask questions, failing to engage in the interactive process, and terminating [him]." 2d Am. Compl. P 99. Thompson has offered no evidence that any of these proposed accommodations would have effectively accommodated his hearing disability, allowing him to perform the essential functions of his job, thus mitigating any performance shortcomings caused by "hearing loss[ ] [or] multiple surgeries on both ears." 2d Am. Compl. ¶ 8.
Thompson also has not shown that the accommodations that he requested, including asking his teammates to speak in his left ear and permit him to speak softly, would have allowed him to perform the essential functions of his job. It appears, instead, that his hearing disability had no impact on his ability to conduct the work required of him, thus not obligating MISO to provide him accommodation.19 See Brumfield v. City of Chicago, 735 F.3d 619, 633-34 (7th Cir. 2013) ("[T]he ADA does not require an employer to accommodate disabilities that have no bearing on an employee's ability to perform the essential functions of [his] job.").
With respect to his failure-to-accommodate claim, [*45]  Thompson has failed to meet his burden. No reasonable jury could find that MISO failed to accommodate his hearing disability. Accordingly, MISO is entitled to summary judgment on this claim.

2. Discrimination Claim
The ADA prohibits employers from "discriminat[ing] against a qualified individual on the basis of disability . . . ." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). Thompson alleges that MISO discriminated against him because of his hearing disability by "referring to [his] FMLA leave as vacation, telling [his] coworkers to scrutinize [him], writing [him] up for discriminatory reasons, denying [him] the opportunity to work from home, not allowing [him] to work a flexible schedule, denying [his] request for leave, denying [his] requests to be transferred, giving [him] difficult assignments, denying [him] proper training, not allowing [him] to ask questions, failing to give [him] an award he qualified for,20 and terminating [him]." 2d. Am. Compl. ¶ 97.
To survive summary judgment on this claim, Thompson must point to evidence from which a reasonable jury could conclude that: (1) he is disabled; (2) he is otherwise qualified to perform the essential functions of the job with or without reasonable accommodation; (3) MISO [*46]  took an adverse action against him; and (4) the adverse action was caused by his disability. See, e.g., Roberts v. City of Chicago, 817 F.3d 561, 565 (7th Cir. 2016). The fundamental inquiry is, "has the non-moving party produced sufficient evidence to support a jury verdict of intentional discrimination?" David v. Bd. of Trs. of Cmty. Coll. Dist. No. 508, 846 F.3d 216, 224 (7th Cir. 2017) (citing Morgan v. SVT, LLC, 724 F.3d 990, 997 (7th Cir. 2013) ("The central question at issue is whether the employer acted on account of the plaintiff's . . . disability . . . .")).
Although the Seventh Circuit suggests "look[ing] past the 'ossified direct/indirect paradigm,'" Cole v. Bd. of Tr. of N. Ill. Univ., 838 F.3d 888, 899 (7th Cir. 2016) (quoting Hitchcock v. Angel Corps, Inc., 718 F.3d 733, 737 (7th Cir. 2013)), Thompson pursues his disability discrimination claim using the burden-shifting framework developed in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). See Dkt. No. 75 at 21-28. To avoid summary judgment under this framework, Thompson must establish that (1) he is disabled under the ADA, (2) he met his employer's legitimate performance expectations, (3) he suffered an adverse employment action, and (4) similarly situated employees without a disability were treated more favorably. Bunn v. Khoury Enters., Inc., 753 F.3d 676, 685 (7th Cir. 2014) (citation omitted). "If the employee is able to establish a prima facie case, the burden shifts to the employer to produce a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the adverse employment action. Id. (citing Dickerson v. Bd. of Trs. of Cmty. Coll. Dist. No. 522, 657 F.3d 595, 601 (7th Cir. 2011)). On such a showing, the burden then shifts back to the plaintiff to [*47]  show that the employer's proffered reason for the action is a lie. Id.
In this case, Thompson argues that his disability discrimination claim is based on five potentially material adverse actions: (1) his mid-year review; (2) the discipline for insubordination and threatening behavior dated October 13, 2014;21 (3) the failure to transfer him; (4) the extension of the PIP; and (5) his termination. See Dkt. No. 75 at 25. Before proceeding further into the McDonnell Douglas analysis, the Court examines whether each of these actions constitutes an adverse employment action.
Thompson's termination is unquestionably a material adverse action. The other four actions, however, are not. "Although we define adverse employment action broadly, not everything that makes an employee unhappy is an actionable adverse action." Lewis v. City of Chi., 496 F.3d 645, 653 (7th Cir. 2007) (quotation and citations omitted). A material adverse action results in "a significant change in employment status, such as hiring, firing, failing to promote, reassignment with significantly different responsibility, or a decision causing a significant change in benefits." Id.
Thompson argues that his mid-year review, October 2014 discipline, and PIP extension constitute adverse [*48]  employment actions. These events, themselves, are not adverse employment actions. See, e.g., Volovsek v. Wis. Dep't of Agric. Trade and Consumer Prot., 344 F.3d 680, 688 (7th Cir. 2003) ("highly disputed performance reviews," and allegedly inadequate training, among other things, did not "amount to the kind of adverse action that constitutes discrimination or retaliation"); Lloyd v. Swifty Transp., Inc., 552 F.3d 594, 602 (7th Cir. 2009) ("[W]ritten reprimands without any changes in the terms or conditions of [] employment are not adverse employment actions."); Boss v. Castro, 816 F.3d 910, 918 (7th Cir. 2016) (placement on performance improvement plan "is simply not materially adverse in the discrimination context") (citing Langenbach v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 761 F.3d 792, 799 (7th Cir. 2014); and Cole v. Illinois, 562 F.3d 812, 816 (7th Cir. 2009)). They, however, may be evidence that support the claim that Thompson's termination was the result of discrimination, because each of these facts relates to his job performance, which was, in part, the reason for his termination.
Thompson also claims that his denial of a transfer was an adverse action. Thompson has discussed as transfers both moving to a different desk, see Dkt. No. 74-26 at 4, and "moving out of the department," id., which the Court assumes means transferring to a different position. A denial of a move to a different desk is not an adverse action. Here, again, there is no change in employment status or benefits. A denial of a transfer to a [*49]  different position, however, could be an adverse action, "provided the transfer would have resulted in higher pay or benefits." Brown v. Advocate S. Suburban Hosp., 700 F.3d 1101, 1108 (7th Cir. 2012) (citing Johnson, 325 F.3d at 900) ("the denial of an opportunity to move to [a higher paying] position, unlike the mere denial of a lateral transfer, constitutes a materially adverse employment action"); and Dandy v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 388 F.3d 272, 275 (7th Cir. 2004) ("[B]ecause her request was for a lateral transfer offering parallel pay, benefits, and responsibilities, UPS's refusal to grant that request does not constitute an adverse employment action.")). It is Thompson's burden to establish that he suffered a materially adverse action. Lewis, 496 F.3d at 652-53. He has not provided evidence that transferring to a different position would have resulted in higher pay or benefits. Rather, he merely states that he "requested a transfer due to his problems with Roth." Dkt. No. 75 at 5 (citing Dkt. Nos. 74-1 at 27 ("I requested a transfer due to my problems with Roth"); 74-26 at 3-4 ("I was interested in moving out of the department because I felt like it was a management and employee issue where for some reason I felt like he had it out for me."). He does not claim that he was denied a transfer to a position with better pay or changed benefits. Therefore, the denial [*50]  of a request to transfer is not, by itself, an adverse action. Like the midyear review, discipline and PIP extension, the transfer denial can be used as evidence to support the claim that his termination was discriminatory. Only Thompson's termination is an adverse employment action.
For purposes of this entry, the Court assumes that Thompson has established a prima facie case of discrimination based on his termination. The Court, therefore, examines whether MISO provided a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for his termination and whether Thompson can show that MISO's reason for his termination is a pretext for discrimination.22 Hooper v. Proctor Health Care, Inc., 804 F.3d 846, 853 (7th Cir. 2015).
A pretextual decision "'involves more than just faulty reasoning or mistaken judgment on the part of the employer; it is [a] lie, specifically a phony reason for some action.'" Harden v. Marion Cty. Sheriff's Dep't, 799 F.3d 857, 864 (7th Cir. 2015) (quoting Argyropoulos v. City of Alton, 539 F.3d 724, 736 (7th Cir. 2008)). The Court must evaluate "'whether the employer honestly believed the reason it has offered to explain the discharge.'" Id. (quoting Harper v. C.R. England, Inc., 687 F.3d 297, 311 (7th Cir. 2012)); see also Burks v. Wisconsin Dep't. of Transp., 464 F.3d 744, 754 (7th Cir. 2006). "To demonstrate a material issue of fact as to pretext, [a plaintiff] must show that 'either 1) it is more likely that a discriminatory reason motivated the employer than the proffered non-discriminatory reason or 2) that [*51]  an employer's explanation is not credible.'" Mullin v. Temco Mach., Inc., 732 F.3d 772, 778 (7th Cir. 2013) (quoting Hudson v. Chi. Transit Auth., 375 F.3d 552, 561 (7th Cir. 2004)). "To meet this burden, [Thompson] must 'identify such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, or contradictions' in [MISO's] asserted reason 'that a reasonable person could find it unworthy of credence.'" Coleman v. Donahoe, 667 F.3d 835, 852 (7th Cir. 2012) (quoting Boumehdi v Plastag Holdings, LLC, 489 F.3d 781, 792 (7th Cir. 2007)). On the other hand, if a reasonable fact finder would be compelled to believe MISO's explanation, then it is entitled to summary judgment. Argyropoulos, 539 F.3d at 736 (citation omitted).
MISO contends that it terminated Thompson "due to his marginal performance improvement and lack of commitment demonstrated through his attendance over the period of the PIP (and its continuation)." Dkt. No. 57 at 21 (citing Dkt. No. 58-5 at 7-8 (which refers to Dkt. No. 58-7 at 15-16)). To support its position, MISO has pointed to a number of performance deficiencies occurring after it extended Thompson's PIP. It has indicated that "[b]etween December 20, 2014, and January 20, 2015, [Thompson] was late 73% of his work days. His average arrival time during this period - again independently verified based upon his security badge swipes to enter the building - was [22] minutes after his start time." Dkt. No. 57 at 12 (citing Dkt. No. 58-5 at 7-8). Roth also [*52]  prepared an outline containing detailed information regarding several reasons for his decision to terminate Thompson. Dkt. No. 57 at 13 (citing Dkt. Nos. 58-5 at 8; 58-7 at 15) (indicating deficiencies in Thompson's weekly project updates and remaining incomplete corrections to projects). The final line of the document states as follows: "We are therefore terminating your employment for Attendance reasons with the other issues being secondary drivers." Dkt. No. 58-7 at 15 (emphases in original). MISO has satisfied its burden, providing legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons for Thompson's termination.
Thompson maintains that "MISO ignores evidence that Thompson did not have tardiness problems because MISO had flexible work schedules."23 Dkt. No. 75 at 21 (citing Dkt. Nos. 74-1 at 2; 74-3 at 4; 74-4 at 1-4; 74-6). Thompson cites to a number of facts confirming that MISO had flexible work arrangements, but none of those facts show that Thompson did not have tardiness problems.24 The extended PIP documentation explicitly required Thompson to be in the office by 8:30 a.m. See Dkt. No. 58-7 at 13. MISO has indicated that Thompson was late to work 73% of the time during the pendency of the extended [*53]  PIP. See Dkt. No. 57 at 12 (citing Dkt. No. 58-5 at 7-8). Thompson has not provided evidence refuting this fact, nor has he provided evidence that MISO's reasons for his termination were a lie. Thompson, therefore, has not established a material factual issue with regard to pretext.
Returning to the Seventh Circuit's suggestion to "look past the 'ossified direct/indirect paradigm,'" Cole, 838 F.3d at 899 (citation omitted), the test "is simply whether the evidence would permit a reasonable factfinder to conclude that the plaintiff's [disability] caused the discharge or other adverse employment action," Ortiz v. Werner Enters., Inc., 834 F.3d 760, 765 (7th Cir. 2016). Thompson has failed to identify sufficient evidence establishing that an adverse employment action occurred as a result of discriminatory animus. Cole, 838 F.3d at 899 ("Different treatment can be circumstantial evidence of discrimination, but the experiences [the plaintiff] has identified do not 'point directly to a discriminatory reason for the employer's action.'") (quoting Adams v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 324 F.3d 935, 939 (7th Cir. 2003)). While Thompson lists a number of actions that he considers adverse, a reasonable jury could not find that he was terminated because of his hearing disability. "Simply being a member of a protected class, without something more to link that status [*54]  to the action in question, is not enough to raise a reasonable inference of discriminatory animus." Id. at 900. Thompson has not met his burden. He has failed to demonstrate that his termination was the result of discriminatory animus as opposed to his continued performance deficiencies, principally, his repeated failure to come to work by a specified time. As a result, MISO is entitled to summary judgment on Thompson's disability discrimination claim.

C. FMLA Claims
Thompson asserts that he did not receive FMLA leave to which he was entitled and also that he was retaliated against for using FMLA leave. An employer may not interfere with an eligible employee's rights under the FMLA or discriminate against an eligible employee who needs FMLA leave. 29 U.S.C. § 2615. The statute also prohibits employers from retaliating against an eligible employee for opposing any practice made unlawful by the FMLA. Id.

1. FMLA Interference
To prevail on his FMLA interference claim, Thompson must establish that "'(1) he was eligible for [] FMLA protections; (2) his employer was covered by FMLA; (3) he was entitled to take leave under FMLA; (4) he provided sufficient notice of [his] intent to take leave; and (5) [his] employer denied [*55]  [him] FMLA benefits to which he was entitled.'" Curtis, 807 F.3d 215 at 223 (quoting James v. Hyatt Regency Chicago, 707 F.3d 775, 780 (7th Cir. 2103) (internal quotation omitted)). The Court's inquiry focuses on elements four and five. First, Thompson has failed to show that he provided sufficient notice of his intent to take leave for any alleged leave other than the medical leave he took for his appendectomy beginning in July 2014. For that leave, he asked one of MISO's human resources employee whether "this surgery would be something that is eligible for a medical leave or a different program that would not use all [his] vacation." Dkt. No. 74-10 at 2. Another MISO human resources employee responded the same morning, providing him with "the FMLA physician certification form and notice" and the company's short term disability policy information. See Dkt. No. 74-10 at 3. Thompson further informed MISO that he would need to extend his FMLA leave due to complications he experienced after surgery. MISO approved the extension of his leave.
Setting that leave aside, Thompson has not shown that he intended to take FMLA leave at any other time. Thompson argues that "MISO did not give him a Certification Of Health Care Provider," Dkt. No. 75 at 3, and that "[he] was not told that [*56]  [he] could apply for FMLA leave for [his] stress and anxiety," Dkt. No. 74-1 at 10; see also Dkt. No. 75 at 3.
MISO counters that, apart from notice related to his appendectomy, Thompson never notified it of his need for additional FMLA-qualifying leave and did not follow MISO's internal notice procedures for requesting FMLA leave. "An employer may require an employee to comply with the employer's usual and customary notice and procedural requirements for requesting leave, absent unusual circumstances." 29 C.F.R. § 825.302(d). Thompson had contacted a human resources employee to request FMLA leave for his appendectomy and related complications in the past and had been approved for that FMLA leave. He clearly knew how to request FMLA leave, but did not follow this procedure again. Thompson also has not shown any unusual circumstance that would have prevented him from complying with MISO's FMLA policy.
Thompson makes another argument regarding his interference claim. In the section of his brief entitled "There Is Evidence [t]hat MISO Interfered with Plaintiff's FMLA Leave," Thompson argues as follows: "[T]he Defendant did not produce a copy of the complete employee handbook in this case. When the Defendant [*57]  could not find and produce all of the policies, it is understandable how employees could not locate, read, compare, and understand the policies." Dkt. No. 75 at 31. The Court notes that, during Thompson's deposition, which is clearly a part of the discovery process, MISO provided Thompson with a copy of many of its policies, including its Family and Medical Leave policy, the policy relevant to this claim. See Dkt. No. 74-3 at 7 (referencing MISO's Family and Medical Leave policy as "Exhibit 12"); see also Dkt. No. 58-1 at 21-25 (the policy itself). Even if MISO had not produced to Thompson the relevant policy during discovery, Thompson has failed to develop his argument by not explaining how that failure would support his claim that MISO interfered with his FMLA rights.
Accordingly, Thompson's FMLA interference claim fails, both because he has not shown that he provided notice of his intent to take leave, and because he has not shown that he was denied any benefit to which he was entitled. See Nicholson v. Pulte Homes Corp., 690 F.3d 819, 825-26 (7th Cir. 2012) (affirming summary judgment for employer where employee failed to put employer on notice that she wanted FMLA-qualifying leave); see also Curtis, 807 F.3d at 223 (affirming summary judgment for employer where employee [*58]  sought and received two different FMLA leaves of absence and did not show that his employer interfered with his use of FMLA benefits). MISO is entitled to summary judgment on Thompson's FMLA interference claim.

2. FMLA Retaliation
Employers are also prohibited from retaliating against an employee that exercises or attempts to exercise FMLA rights. 29 U.S.C. § 2615(a)(2). "We evaluate a claim of FMLA retaliation the same way that we would evaluate a claim of retaliation under other employment statutes." Buie v. Quad/Graphics, Inc., 366 F.3d 496, 503 (7th Cir. 2004). To survive summary judgment on a claim of retaliation under the FMLA, the plaintiff must "point to evidence supporting a reasonable inference that []he was fired because []he took protected leave." Tibbs v. Admin. Office of the Ill. Courts, 860 F.3d 502, 505-06 (7th Cir. 2017) (citing Preddie v. Bartholomew Consol. School Corp., 799 F.3d 806, 819 (7th Cir. 2015)).
In the retaliation section of his brief, Thompson argues as follows:
In this case, MISO dissuaded Thompson from taking FMLA leave after his Director [Vannoy] told his Supervisor [Roth] that his vacation was over after his first FMLA; gave him a vague mid-year review; required him to have weekly assessments from coworkers; gave him a discipline for complaining about the assessments; gave him a PIP for complaining to the Director and HR; extended his PIP when he asked for more leave; refused to tell him [*59]  about leave for stress, anxiety, and depression; and terminated him when he requested a day of personal leave.
Dkt. No. 75 at 31-32 (emphasis added).
Instead of making a coherent argument regarding retaliation, Thompson discusses MISO "dissuad[ing]" him from taking FMLA. Id. That is a claim for FMLA interference, not one for retaliation. Thompson, however, also points to Vannoy's comment referring to Thompson's FMLA leave as "vacation" as evidence of retaliation. See Dkt. No. 75 at 33-34. As MISO notes, this "was a single instance of a reference to his FMLA leave as vacation several months prior and unrelated to the termination decision." Dkt. No. 57 at 33. The comment was an isolated one "not probative of [retaliation]" because it was not "contemporaneous with the discharge or causally related to the discharge decision-making process." Fleishman v. Cont'l Cas. Co., 698 F.3d 598, 605 (7th Cir. 2012).
Thompson further points to evidence of timing to support his retaliation claim. He received his mid-year review two days after returning from his FMLA leave and argues that his PIP was extended "shortly after he requested leave because of numerous sick and vacation days for stress and anxiety."25 Dkt. No. 75 at 32. "Suspicious timing alone is rarely enough [*60]  by itself." Tibbs, 860 F.3d at 505. "A plaintiff must ordinarily present other evidence that the employer's explanation for the adverse action was pretext for retaliation." Id. (citing Harden, 799 F.3d at 864-65; Simpson v. Office of Chief Judge of Circuit Court of Will Cty., 559 F.3d 706, 713-14 (7th Cir. 2009)). In addressing pretext in the FMLA retaliation context, Thompson refers to his arguments related to disability discrimination. See Dkt. No. 75 at 34-35. These arguments fail for the same reason that they failed in the disability discrimination context: Thompson fails to show that the reasons MISO provided for terminating him were a lie. MISO introduced evidence that Thompson was terminated for legitimate, non-retaliatory reasons, namely that, while he was on a PIP, 73% of the time, he did not show up for work when he was supposed to, and he otherwise continued to have performance deficiencies. "A plaintiff must point to 'evidence tending to prove that the employer's proffered reasons are factually baseless, were not the actual motivation for the discharge in question, or were insufficient to motivate' the termination." Tibbs, 860 F.3 at 506 (quoting Carter v. Chicago State Univ., 778 F.3d 651, 659 (7th Cir. 2015)). "Merely disagreeing with an employer's reasons does not meet this standard." Id. Although it is clear that Thompson disagrees with MISO's reasons for terminating him, he has not produced evidence [*61]  to show that these reasons were false. Accordingly, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to Thompson, there is no material issue of fact with respect to Thompson's FMLA retaliation claim. Accordingly, MISO is entitled to summary judgment on this claim.

IV. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, the Defendant's Motion to Strike Portions of the Plaintiff's Surreply (Dkt. No. 80) is GRANTED as described in Section I.A. of this Entry, and the Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment (Dkt. No. 56) is GRANTED with respect to all claims other than his sex discrimination claim, which is DENIED AS MOOT. Copies to all counsel of record via electronic notification
SO ORDERED: 3/30/18
/s/ William T. Lawrence
Hon. William T. Lawrence, Judge
United States District Court
Southern District of Indiana

JUDGMENT
The Court having this date made its Entry, judgment is hereby ENTERED in favor of Defendant Midcontinent Independent System Operator, Inc. and against Plaintiff Brandon Thompson.
SO ORDERED: 3/30/18
/s/ William T. Lawrence
Hon. William T. Lawrence, Judge
United States District Court
Southern District of Indiana


End of Document

