Tinsley v. Caterpillar Fin. Servs. Corp.
United States District Court for the Middle District of Tennessee, Nashville Division
February 26, 2018, Decided
Case No. 3:16-cv-01350

Reporter
2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 248465 *; 2018 WL 11468775
CINDY R. TINSLEY, Plaintiff, v. CATERPILLAR FINANCIAL SERVICES CORPORATION, Defendant.
Subsequent History: Affirmed by, Remanded by Tinsley v. Caterpillar Fin. Servs., Corp., 766 Fed. Appx. 337, 2019 U.S. App. LEXIS 8252 (6th Cir. Tenn., Mar. 20, 2019)
Counsel:  [*1] For Caterpillar Financial Services Corporation, Defendant: Joseph S. Turner, LEAD ATTORNEY, Seyfarth Shaw LLP (Chicago Office), Chicago, IL; Lawrence Slade Eastwood Jr., Megan M. Sutton, LEAD ATTORNEY, Baker Donelson Bearman Caldwell & Berkowitz PC (Nash), Nashville, TN.
For Cindy R. Tinsley, Plaintiff: R. Patrick Parker, Parker & Associates, Gallatin, TN.
Judges: ALETA A. TRAUGER, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: ALETA A. TRAUGER
Opinion



MEMORANDUM & ORDER
Pending before the court is a Motion for Summary Judgment filed by the defendant (Doc. No. 23), Caterpillar Financial Services Corporation ("CFS"), to which the plaintiff, Cindy R. Tinsley, has filed a Response (Doc. No. 30), and CFS has filed a Reply (Doc. No. 31). For the reasons discussed herein, the motion will be granted, and Tinsley's claims will be dismissed.

BACKGROUND
Tinsley is a former employee of CFS. She started at the company as a paralegal in 1997, eventually working her way up to the position of Business System Analyst III, which she assumed in October 2013. In that role, Tinsley worked on the "Four Pillars Project" with a team of seven other business analysts under the supervision of a Global Process Track Manager, Paul Kaikaris, and a Team [*2]  Lead, Amy Clendenon. Kaikaris provided overall leadership, while Clendenon was responsible for direct guidance and supervision of the team. The Four Pillars Project consisted of developing, testing, and deploying new software platforms for CFS's various business functions. Each team member had background experience and specialization in different functional areas. Tinsley's specialization was in Special Accounts, mainly dealing with collections.
The team spent the project's first seven months familiarizing themselves with the new software systems' capabilities. They then reviewed those capabilities with the software's eventual users to identify gaps between the capabilities and the users' needs. The business analysts were tasked with identifying solutions to these gaps. If a software fix was deemed necessary, the business analysts would draft a "Functional Design Document" ("FDD") documenting the required changes. Initially, business analysts worked primarily to develop software solutions for gaps within their realm of specialization. In April 2015, the team began to test the solutions in a major test event, Systems Validation Event 1 ("SVE1"). Due to the high volume of testing and [*3]  the potential for long periods of idle waiting time, Kaikaris and Clendenon shifted tacks. They had each business analyst train the rest of the team on his or her area of specialization, allowing each business analyst to run any test scheduled on a given day.
Tinsley disagreed with this decision, believing that team members should only conduct tests within their realm of specialization. It was not the only source of stress for Tinsley. Another business analyst on the team, John Wallace, had left the team some months prior, and his job duties and responsibilities were transferred to Tinsley. In addition, Tinsley was handling increased responsibilities at home related to after school care for her grandchildren. On April 15, 2015, Tinsley emailed Kaikaris to outline her concerns. She noted that her change in family obligations restricted her ability to work more than 50 hours per week and stated that her responsibilities at work—particularly those beyond her specialization—were negatively impacting her work, sleep, and health. She requested that she be transferred off of the Four Pillars Project and placed back in a collections-related role.
Upon receiving the email, Kaikaris met with Tinsley [*4]  and agreed to lighten her workload and otherwise support her as needed. On April 21, 2015, Tinsley submitted a doctor's note from her personal physician, excusing her from work for a confidential medical condition. She took four days of leave pursuant to the Family Medical Leave Act ("FMLA") and returned the following Monday, April 27, 2015. On May 4, 2015, Tinsley met with Kaikaris and Clendenon, who reassigned three FDDs from Tinsley's workload in an effort to ease her workload burden. In a later email to Human Resources Generalist Chinh Brown, Tinsley stated that this "greatly reduced" her stress level. (Doc. No. 26-1, Ex. 10.) Tinsley proceeded with the rest of the team into the SVE1 testing event. In an attempt to ameliorate the stressful conditions surrounding the event, Kaikaris distributed stress balls to the business analysts. Some business analysts and other employees—and, on at least one occasion, Kaikaris himself—took to bouncing the balls on the floor and other surfaces, a source of great distraction to Tinsley. Tinsley was similarly frustrated by various other downtime behaviors on the part of her co-workers, which included physical activities such as headstand push-ups and arm-wrestling. On July 2, [*5]  2015, at a daily team meeting, Kaikaris opened the floor to team members, and Tinsley voiced her concerns. She described the work environment as a "kindergarten" and explained that such behavior prevented her from concentrating and completing her work. (Doc. No. 26-1, Ex. 9.) Kaikaris addressed the issue, and team members subsequently stopped bouncing the balls around Tinsley.
The following week, Kaikaris and Clendenon met with Tinsley to discuss her performance during the SVE1. Kaikaris and Clendenon raised several issues related to Tinsley's testing methods, pointing to accounting tests that indicated that Tinsley's work was deficient. They also expressed concern that Tinsley had left work early without permission on more than one occasion. Tinsley denied both charges, insisting that she was performing adequately and complying with team attendance requirements. Later that month, Kaikaris and Clendenon again met with Tinsley to deliver her mid-year performance review. It was uncommon but not unprecedented for multiple supervisors to deliver a review. Kaikaris and Clendenon informed Tinsley that she would receive a "Did Not Meet Performance Expectations" rating, based on some of the [*6]  same concerns they had communicated in their previous meeting. Specifically, the review stated that Tinsley was not following the established testing process/methodology, putting test quality at risk.
On August 14, 2015, Kaikaris again met with Tinsley and provided her with a Performance Improvement Plan ("PIP"), as stipulated by company policy when an employee receives a "Did Not Meet Performance Expectations" review rating. The PIP outlined the disputed deficiencies Kaikaris and Clendenon identified in their previous meeting and prescribed a process for monitoring Tinsley's performance for the remainder of the year. The document stated that Tinsley needed to follow proper protocol related to testing and improve certain "value-based competencies" in dealing with uncertainty. In protest, Tinsley refused to sign the document, maintaining that it was inaccurate on all accounts. On August 17, 2015, Tinsley met with Chinh Brown, the H.R. representative, to discuss the review. Tinsley told Brown that she was concerned about her workload and stress levels and again complained about business analysts bouncing the stress balls. Tinsley followed up the meeting by sending Brown a letter outlining [*7]  her perceived successes on the Four Pillars Project (some of which, she stated, were not acknowledged during her review), complaining about her workload, and accusing Kaikaris of retaliating against her via the review process for her complaints about the team work environment. She concluded the letter with the following request:
It is because of all of the above that I do not agree with his assessment or feel comfortable continuing to work under his supervision and am herein requesting the "Did Not Meet Expectation" (sic) rating be changed and that I be restored to my former support manager role in the NABC Special Accounts group at the earliest opportunity.
(Doc. No. 26-1, Ex. 9.) Tinsley followed up with an email to Brown two days later, in which she detailed her interactions up to that point with Kaikaris and further documented her achievements on the Four Pillars Project. She explained that her April FMLA absence was the result of being "placed under the care of [her] physician for complete mental and emotional exhaustion." (Doc. No. 26-1, Ex. 10.) After acknowledging that the reassignment of the three FDDs greatly reduced her stress level, she elaborated: "Please understand that [*8]  the work itself was not the primary issue. It was the unrealistic deadlines that pushed me to the point of mental and emotional exhaustion." (Id.)
In response to Tinsley's correspondences, Brown and Global Employee Relations Manager, Terry Cook, met with Kaikaris, Clendenon, Kaikaris's supervisor Mary Clements, and Chief Information Officer Jerry Brown to investigate Tinsley's allegations that her performance review was inaccurate and retaliatory and that her workload was excessive. Upon review, Brown and Cook concluded that Tinsley's review and workload were both appropriate. Two weeks after her contact with Brown, Tinsley submitted a letter from her physician excusing her from work from September 2, 2015 to September 8, 2015. While on FMLA leave, Tinsley submitted another letter to the Human Resources department, dated September 7, 2015, meant to further clarify her situation. She again stated that her initial FMLA leave was necessitated by "extreme emotional and mental duress due to the over-excessive workload that was now growing and the unrealistic deadlines that [she] was expected to meet." (Doc. No. 26-1, Ex. 12.) Tinsley reiterated that the reassignment of the three FDDs provided [*9]  "some relief" and explained that, with medication, she was able to function, despite an increasing workload thereafter until Kaikaris distributed the stress balls. (Id.) Tinsley noted that she did not believe that the bouncing of the stress balls and other behavior which, in her description, collectively constituted a hostile work environment, were done out of "intentional malice" but, rather, were a result of "reckless indifference" to her mental and emotional well-being. (Id.) She again requested reassignment to a position not under the supervision of Kaikaris.
Two days later, on September 9, 2015, Tinsley submitted a letter from her physician further excusing her from work through September 22, 2015, for an unspecified condition. Tinsley requested and received FMLA leave for the period spanning from September 2, 2015 through October 8, 2015. On October 6, 2015, Tinsley submitted another letter from her physician, this one medically clearing her to return to work. Her physician wrote:
At this time, [Tinsley] has stabilized medically. In my opinion, she is able to return to work effective October 7, 2015 and function at full capacity. However, I strongly recommend her working in a different [*10]  environment and specifically under a different manager. She describes a work environment and management style that was insensitive and at times hostile.
(Doc. No. 26-1, Ex. 19.) Tinsley returned to work on October 7, 2015, and met with Norma Hawk, a Compensation and Benefits Consultant. Tinsley got the impression from Hawk that CFS commonly reassigned people for disability-related reasons. (Doc. No. 26-1, pg. 129.) Tinsley understood Hawk as saying that such an accommodation could be available to Tinsley, although they did not have an in-depth discussion, and Tinsley knew that Hawk did not have authority to approve such an accommodation. (Id.) Tinsley also met with Cook, reiterating to him that she could not work with Kaikaris as her supervisor. She told Cook that she would be able to work in her same position as a Business Analyst III on the Four Pillars Project under the supervision of another manager, Drew Rosenboro. Tinsley explained in her deposition:
I said that that would be something that I could do. It would keep me involved in the projects so they wouldn't lose my knowledge. But I had enough familiarity with Drew to know that he would not overload me the way I had been overloaded. [*11] 
(Doc. No. 26-1, pp. 131-32.) Cook also asked Tinsley if she would feel more comfortable working under Kaikaris if a third party—Mary Clements, Kaikaris's supervisor—oversaw their working relationship, to which Tinsley said no. Tinsley did not have faith in that process working because she thought Kaikaris had convinced Clements that Tinsley deserved a poor performance rating at her mid-year review. Tinsley told Cook that, if she was required to continue working under Kaikaris, she would accept CFS's Voluntary Retirement Enhancement Program ("VREP") and retire early.1 Cook sought approval for Tinsley to transfer to Rosenboro's team, but the request was denied. Tinsley did not report to work the following day, using accrued vacation days for absences on October 8 and 9.
On October 8, Tinsley emailed Cook and Brown to inform them that she had been released to return to work. She wrote:
My doctor has released me to work, under a different manager, as of 10/7/2015. . . . the early retirement option will be one that is only taken if Cat Financial continues to insist that I go back to work under the same manager and continues to uphold the "did not meet expectations rating (sic).
(Doc. No. 26-1, [*12]  Ex. 21.) Tinsley was scheduled to report back to work on October 12, 2015, but did not return until October 14. Upon return, she met with Cook and Brown and followed up later that day via email with a point of clarification. She wrote:
I do want to ensure that you understand the reason that both my physician and my counselor are strongly recommending that I not go back to the same role under the same manager is not because of the mid-year rating but, because of the severe mental and emotional duress brought on by months of an over-excessive workload, unrealistic deadlines, a hostile work environment and a managers (sic) reckless indifference to my mental and emotional well-being. The rating itself is a separate issue.
(Doc. No. 26-1, Ex. 23) (emphasis in original). Cook gave Tinsley the option of seeking additional medical leave if she did not feel ready to return to work, which Tinsley accepted. Tinsley forwarded an email from her counselor the following day, which stated that Tinsley should continue receiving therapy for the following eight weeks with a minimum of one session per week. The email did not state that Tinsley was medically unable to work or restricted from working in any [*13]  way. However, Tinsley requested and received an additional eight weeks of FMLA leave. Hawk informed Tinsley via email that her twelve weeks of FMLA-entitled leave would be expended on November 25, 2015. Cook followed up to note that CFS would extend her leave unpaid through December 11, 2015, with the expectation that she return to work the following Monday.
On December 11, Tinsley requested eight more weeks of leave and forwarded another email from her counselor outlining a similar eight-week plan. Brown responded that CFS was willing to grant one additional week of unpaid medical leave, which Tinsley accepted. Tinsley reported back to work the following week, on December 21, 2015. Within two hours, she told Brown and Cook that she was unable to work. She stated in her deposition that she "fell apart" due to "the environment, just knowing the workload that I was going to be expected to handle." (Doc. No. 26-1, pg. 155.) One week later, Tinsley submitted a document from her physician and requested leave from December 28, 2015 to February 14, 2016, due to a "confidential medical condition" later identified as Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder ("PTSD"). (Doc. No 26-1, Ex. 29.) This request [*14]  was denied. Cook emailed Tinsley on January 7, 2016, explaining that he understood Tinsley to be seeking additional leave due to stress caused by working for Kaikaris, which was not reasonable grounds for further leave, given the amount of work Tinsley had already missed. In total, Tinsley received 18 weeks of leave. Tinsley responded two days later, again requesting additional leave. Cook responded the next day that Tinsley was expected to return to work the following day, January 11, 2016. Tinsley responded as follows: "Since you have given me no other alternative, please process my retirement effective 1/11/2016." (Doc. No. 26-1, Ex. 31.) Brown met with Tinsley the following day to process her retirement. Tinsley stated that she retired because she "could not handle the overburdened workload." (Doc. No. 26-1, pg. 173.)
On December 23, 2015—prior to her retirement—Tinsley filed a Charge of Discrimination with the EEOC. On July 16, 2016, Tinsley filed suit, alleging failure to accommodate under the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") and retaliation under the FMLA. (Doc. No. 1.)

LEGAL STANDARD
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56 requires the court to grant a motion for summary judgment if "the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material [*15]  fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). If a moving defendant shows that there is no genuine issue of material fact as to at least one essential element of the plaintiff's claim, the burden shifts to the plaintiff to provide evidence beyond the pleadings, "set[ting] forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." Moldowan v. City of Warren, 578 F.3d 351, 374 (6th Cir. 2009); see also Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). "In evaluating the evidence, the court must draw all inferences in the light most favorable to the non-moving party." Moldowan, 578 F.3d at 374 (citing Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 587, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986)).
At this stage, "'the judge's function is not . . . to weigh the evidence and determine the truth of the matter, but to determine whether there is a genuine issue for trial.'" Id. (quoting Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 249, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986)). But "[t]he mere existence of a scintilla of evidence in support of the [non-moving party's] position will be insufficient," and the party's proof must be more than "merely colorable." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 252. An issue of fact is "genuine" only if a reasonable jury could find for the non-moving party. Moldowan, 578 F.3d at 374 (citing Anderson, 477 U.S. at 252).

ANALYSIS
I. ADA Reasonable Accommodation
Tinsley alleges that CFS failed to reasonably accommodate her PTSD pursuant to the ADA. Under the ADA, an individual is disabled if he has "(1) a physical or mental impairment [*16]  that substantially limits one or more major life activities of such individual; [or] (2) a record of such an impairment; [or] (3) [been] regarded as having such an impairment." 42 U.S.C. § 12102(1); Morales v. Bellsouth Telcoms. Inc., No. 3:08-0032, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 40246, 2009 WL 1322577, *6 (M.D. Tenn. May 11, 2009). To qualify as disabled under the first prong, a plaintiff must do more than allege a physical or mental impairment. Verhoff v. Time Warner Cable, Inc., 299 Fed. App'x. 488, 491-92 (6th Cir. 2008). Rather, to qualify as disabled, a physical or mental impairment must have a "substantially limit[ing]" effect on a major life activity. Id. An impairment meets this test if it "substantially limits the ability of an individual to perform a major life activity as compared to most people in the general population." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(ii). The ADA Amendments Act of 2008, Pub. L. No. 110-325, Sept. 25, 2008, 122 Stat. 3553 ("ADAAA Amendments"), relaxed the definition of "substantially limited" from that previously utilized by many courts and noted that this analysis does not normally require scientific analysis vis a vis comparators in the general population. 29 C.F.R. § 16390.2(j)(iii)-(v). Subsequent to enactment of the ADAAA Amendments, a substantial limitation need not prevent or severely restrict an individual from performing a major life activity. Id. However, not every impairment constitutes a disability within the meaning of the ADA—the ADAAA Amendments retained the requirement that the "substantially limits" standard demands a marked [*17]  functional limitation compared to most people in the general population. Id. Furthermore, an impairment that only moderately or intermittently prevents an individual from performing a major life activity only substantially limits that activity if the impairment would do so when active. Id. at § 1630.2(j)(vii); see also Morales, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 40246, 2009 WL 1322577 at *7.
As relevant here, "major life activities" include "working." Id. at 314 & n.5 (citing Sutton v. United Air Lines, 527 U.S. 471, 119 S. Ct. 2139, 144 L. Ed. 2d 450 (1999), superseded on other grounds by statute as stated in Verhoff, 299 F. App'x. at 492). Where the "major life activity" at issue is "working," the statutory phrase "substantially limits" requires, at a minimum, that the plaintiff show that he is restricted from working in a broad class of jobs, or a broad range of jobs in various classes. Morales, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 40246, 2009 WL 1322577 (citing Salim v. MGM Grand Detroit LLC, 106 F. App'x. 454, 459 (6th Cir. 2004)); see also Swanson v. Univ. of Cincinnati, 268 F.3d 307, 317 (6th Cir. 2001) (holding "substantial limitation" as to working further means "significantly restricted in the ability to perform either a class of jobs or a broad range of jobs in various classes as compared to the average person having comparable training, skills and abilities"). The inability to perform a single, particular job does not constitute a substantial limitation in the major life activity of working. See, e.g., Sutton, 527 U .S. at 492-93; Murphy v. United Parcel Service, Inc., 527 U.S. 516, 525, 119 S. Ct. 2133, 144 L. Ed. 2d 484 (1999); Salim, 106 F. App'x. at 459; Swanson, 268 F.3d at 317.
Tinsley cannot establish that she is disabled under the ADA. The record [*18]  makes clear that Tinsley was not restricted from working a broad class of jobs, but rather, at most, the single, particular job of Business Analyst III on the Four Pillars Project under Kaikaris. Tinsley acknowledged that she could continue working as a Business Analyst III on the Four Pillars Project under another manager, Drew Rosenboro. See Doc. No. 26-1, pp. 131-32 ("I said that that would be something that I could do. It would keep me involved in the projects so they wouldn't lose my knowledge. But I had enough familiarity with Drew to know that he would not overload me the way I had been overloaded."). In another instance, Tinsley stated that it was not the work that her position entailed, but pressures caused by Kaikaris's management style and expectations, that aggravated her health problems. See Doc. No. 26-1, Ex. 10 ("Please understand that the work itself was not the primary issue. It was the unrealistic deadlines that pushed me to the point of mental and emotional exhaustion."). Tinsley was medically cleared by her physician to return to work, with a recommendation—not a requirement—that she work in a different role under a different supervisor. See Doc. 26-1, Ex. 19 ("At [*19]  this time, [Tinsley] has stabilized medically. In my opinion, she is able to return to work effective October 7, 2015 and function at full capacity. However, I strongly recommend her working in a different environment and specifically under a different manager.").
Taking the facts in the light most favorable to Tinsley, she was unable to work as a Business Analyst III with Kaikaris as her manager. Without showing restriction from a broader class of jobs, Tinsley cannot establish that she was substantially limited from working. See, e.g., Salim, 106 F. App'x at 460 (finding no substantial limitation where a diabetic casino dealer could not perform a dealer job during a particular shift but could perform the job otherwise); Cotter v. Ajilon Services, Inc., 287 F.3d 593, 598 (6th Cir. 2002) (rejecting argument that doctor's order that the plaintiff needed to avoid stress in the workplace demonstrated a substantial impairment of the plaintiff's ability to work), abrogated on other grounds by Lewis v. Humboldt Acquisition Corp., Inc., 681 F.3d 312 (6th Cir. 2012); Minnix v. City of Chillicothe, 205 F.3d 1341, 2000 U.S. App. LEXIS 7980, 2000 WL 191828, *5-6 (6th Cir. Feb. 10, 2000) (finding that plaintiff failed to establish a genuine dispute of material fact as to substantial limitation of ability to work, where the plaintiff testified that he was able to work in other positions but could not work in a particular position that would expose him to diesel fumes).
Tinsley [*20]  does not materially dispute this point. Her sole argument with regard to her ADA-disabled status is as follows: "The uncontroverted facts above show that when Plaintiff's stress and anxiety rise to a level it triggers her PTSD to the point she has a breakdown and cannot work. As such Plaintiff is an individual with a disability [under the ADA]."2 See Doc. No. 29, pp. 10-11. Tinsley does not contend that other jobs besides her role under Kaikaris's management would similarly trigger her PTSD. Rather, the record shows that she believed that her problems stemmed from problems specific to her role under Kaikaris. See Doc. No. 26-1, Ex. 23 ("I do want to ensure that you understand the reason that both my physician and my counselor are strongly recommending that I not go back to the same role under the same manager is . . . because of the severe mental and emotional duress brought on by months of an over-excessive workload, unrealistic deadlines, a hostile work environment and a managers (sic) reckless indifference to my mental and emotional well-being."). She is thus not substantially limited from the major activity of working, and, because she was therefore not disabled for ADA purposes, [*21]  was not entitled to a reasonable accommodation from CFS.
A. FMLA Retaliation
Tinsley also alleges that the FMLA makes it illegal for an employer "to discharge or in any other manner discriminate against any individual for opposing any practice made unlawful by [the FMLA.]" 29 U.S.C. § 2615(a)(2). In order to make out a prima facie case of retaliation, the plaintiff must show that: (1) she availed herself of a protected right under the FMLA, (2) she was adversely affected by an employment decision, and (3) there was a causal connection between the exercise of the right and the adverse employment decision. Skrjanc v. Great Lakes Power Serv., 272 F.3d 309, 314 (6th Cir. 2001). As is the case with an FMLA interference claim, employers may not "use the taking of FMLA leave as a negative factor in employment actions." Daugherty v. Sajar Plastics, Inc., 544 F.3d 696, 707 (6th Cir. 2008).
Tinsley alleges for the first time in her response that her negative performance review was retaliation for her exercise of four days of FMLA leave in April 2015. See Doc. No. 20, pg. 15 ("Upon her use of FMLA, Plaintiff was subjected to a negative performance evaluation which negatively impacts the conditions of her employment such as compensation. Furthermore it was used to formulate a performance improvement plan that could lead to termination."). There is no record [*22]  evidence in support of this newfound theory. Tinsley herself repeatedly expounded a different theory of retaliation with regard to her negative performance review: that it was retaliation for her voicing her concerns over her work environment in the July 2, 2015 team meeting. See, e.g., Doc. No. 26-1, Ex. 9 ("As we went further through the mid-year review it became more and more evident that the issues stated and rating given were retaliation for my speaking out during the team meeting on July 2nd. I explained to my manager that I viewed it as retaliation. . . .").
Tinsley received the negative performance review in July, several months after her April FMLA leave. Although temporal proximity between protected conduct and an adverse employment action may "be coupled with other indicia of retaliatory conduct" to prove causation, temporal proximity, by itself, "is insufficient to find a causal connection," and, here, a strong argument can be made that the events were not close in time. See Randolph v. Ohio Dep't of Youth Servs., 453 F.3d 724, 736 (6th Cir. 2006). The only other evidence indicating that that the review was in any way irregular was that two supervisors rather than one attended the review. But Tinsley in no way explains how the presence of an [*23]  additional supervisor suggests a retaliatory motive related to her prior FMLA leave. And although uncommon, it was not unprecedented at CFS for multiple supervisors to attend a performance review. The circumstances surrounding the performance review do not support an FMLA retaliation theory. Tinsley herself is on record as believing that the negative performance review was retaliation for non-FMLA related activity. The court thus finds that there is no genuine dispute of fact as to whether Tinsley received a negative performance review in retaliation for her exercise of four days of FMLA leave in April 2015.
Tinsley also argues that she was forced into retirement because of her exercise of FMLA leave. According to Tinsley, she was forced to retire because CFS refused to accommodate her by transferring her to another supervisor, leaving her vulnerable to the stressful work conditions that triggered her PTSD. She argues that her forced retirement amounts to a constructive discharge, which constitutes an adverse action for purposes of her FMLA retaliation claim. The Sixth Circuit has held that a failure to accommodate can suffice to show the deliberateness necessary for constructive discharge. [*24]  See Talley v. Family Dollar Stores of Ohio, Inc., 542 F.3d 1099, 1109 (6th Cir. 2008) ("[W]hen an employee makes a repeated request for an accommodation and that request is both denied and no other reasonable alternative is offered, a jury may conclude that the employee's resignation was both intended and foreseeable.").
But Tinsley was not disabled under the ADA, and was not otherwise entitled to an ADA reasonable accommodation. Even if Tinsley were disabled for ADA purposes, the court is skeptical that she could prevail on a failure to accommodate argument. Tinsley cites Talley in support of her position, but Talley is readily distinguishable. The plaintiff in Talley was promised a meeting to discuss her proposed accommodation, but the meeting never happened, despite plaintiff's repeated attempts to arrange it. The court found a genuine issue of material fact as to who was to blame for the breakdown in the interactive process. There is no such lack of clarity here. CFS actively and consistently engaged with Tinsley from the time she first reported her medical issues to the time she retired. She received eighteen weeks of FMLA leave—six more than required by law. Terry Cook raised the option of Kaikaris's supervisor, Mary Clements, overseeing Kaikaris and Tinsleys' working relationship [*25]  to help alleviate Tinsley's concerns. Tinsley dismissed the idea out of hand because she did not have faith in Clements, and then retired. Based on these facts, the court is unconvinced that CFS acted unreasonably with regard to Tinsley. But the court need not make that determination, because Tinsley was not disabled under the ADA and was not entitled to a reasonable accommodation. Tinsley thus cannot establish that she was constructively discharged and, therefore, cannot establish the adverse action necessary to prove a prima facie case of FMLA retaliation.

CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, CFS's Motion for Summary Judgment will be GRANTED.
It is so ORDERED.
ENTER this 26th day of February 2018.
/s/ ALETA A. TRAUGER
ALETA A. TRAUGER
United States District Judge


End of Document

