Urdy v. Tex. Mut. Ins. Co.
United States District Court for the Western District of Texas, Austin Division
July 16, 2020, Decided; July 16, 2020, Filed
CAUSE NO. 1:18-CV-1048-LY

Reporter
2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 255280 *; 2020 WL 9809988
LA QUINTA URDY, PLAINTIFF, v. TEXAS MUTUAL INSURANCE COMPANY, DEFENDANT.
Counsel:  [*1] La Quinta Urdy, Plaintiff, Pro se.
For Texas Mutual Insurance Company, Defendant: Shafeeqa Watkins Giarratani, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart PC, Austin, TX.
Judges: LEE YEAKEL, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: LEE YEAKEL
Opinion



ORDER ON DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
Before the court in the above-styled and numbered cause are Defendant Texas Mutual Insurance Company's ("Texas Mutual") Motion for Summary Judgment filed May 29,2020 (Doc. #21), Plaintiff La Quinta Urdy's response filed June 19, 2020 (Doc. #26), and Texas Mutual's reply filed June 26, 2020 (Doc. #27).
This case arises out of Urdy's allegations that Texas Mutual "harassed, demoted, and ultimately fired [her] for discriminatory and retaliatory reasons." Specifically, Urdy alleges the following against Texas Mutual (1) discrimination due to her disability, (2) retaliation for raising complaints of discrimination or requesting accommodation, and (3) racial discrimination. Urdy brings her claims pursuant to the Texas Labor Code (the "Code"), the Americans with Disabilities Act (the "Act"), and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 ("Title VII"). Tex. Lab. Code Ann. § 21.001-556; 42 U.S.C. § 12111; 42 U.S.C. §§2000e-2(a)(l). Urdy prays for a permanent injunction that would require Texas Mutual to reinstate Urdy to her former position with all of the benefits and emoluments of her position [*2]  that she would have received, back pay, compensatory damages for future pecuniary losses, exemplary damages, reasonable attorney's fees and litigation costs, pre-judgment interest, and post-judgment interest. Having reviewed the filings, exhibits, and the governing caselaw, the court now renders the following opinion and order.

Background
Urdy is an African American and former soldier that performed human-resources duties for the Army Reserve. Beginning in 1995, Urdy was an at-will employee at Texas Mutual. Her final position at Texas Mutual, starting in 2014, was as a Process Analyst responsible for assisting internal business units improve efficiency. The position required "strong interpersonal skills, regular attendance and punctuality, and excellent customer service to internal business partners."
Urdy enlisted in the Army in 1998. During her time as a servicemember in the Army Reserve, Urdy was called for active duty twice. At some point in 2010 or 2011, while on her second tour of active duty, Urdy's job performance was criticized and she was placed in a separate office. Urdy claims to have been diagnosed with "depression, anxiety, stress disorder and resulting insomnia" during [*3]  her second tour—disabilities that she claims affect major life activities such as sleeping, working, and daily living. Urdy points to the negative feedback and being "isolated" in a separate office as causing Urdy's claimed disability of post-traumatic stress disorder. Texas Mutual notes that the name of the diagnosing physician or the timing of any diagnosis has not been provided and contends that Urdy does not have a disability as defined by the Act.
In 2017, Urdy received a raise and good review but was not selected to be the supervisor of her process analyst team—a position she applied for but was filled by her peer Margaret Ball in April 2017. Amy Green-Hinojosa, Texas Mutual's Vice President of the Project Management Office and Urdy's second-level supervisor, made the employment decision. According to Texas Mutual, Urdy frequently resisted and rejected Ball's authority, was insubordinate, and failed to adhere to directives regarding job performance. In June 2017, Ball consulted with Stacie Gonzalez, a human-resources consultant, regarding Urdy's failure to clearly communicate her schedule or properly designate whether certain absences were for Family Medical Leave Act leave.
Shortly [*4]  after the meeting with Gonzalez, Texas Mutual claims that more concerns about Urdy's attitude and job performance began to surface. One instance was when Urdy arrived late without advance notice to a mandatory training. Ball, Green-Hinojosa, and Gonzalez all met with Urdy on August 1, 2017 to clarify attendance expectations and provided coaching. Urdy does not deny that she was told on multiple occasions to provide sufficient information and notice regarding her schedule and absences. Following the meeting on August 1, 2017, Urdy wrote a list of twenty-two "expectations" she had—as the subordinate—for Ball to improve her performance as a supervisor. The list included an expectation that a leader would not "be stressing her out" and that she should be able to arrive to work thirty minutes late without Ball making it a "big deal."
In January 2018, Tracie Davis, an employee at Texas Mutual, reported a security concern to Human Resources stating that Urdy exhibited paranoid, angry behavior, and expressed a deep-rooted and irrational hatred of Ball. Also in January 2018, Urdy sent Ball a text message stating that she was sick and would work from home. Ball instructed Urdy to not work if [*5]  she felt sick and simply take the day off. Urdy refused, insisting on coding the day as working from home.
Jessica Tubbs, a Texas Mutual business partner to whom Urdy was assigned to provide process improvements for a claims-correspondence project, complained about Urdy's lack of progress on the project. Tubbs was upset that the project had not moved forward despite directives articulated in September 2017. Urdy had not been responsive to Tubbs's attempts to learn the status of the project and had failed to incorporate a number of edits into the claims-correspondence documents at the center of the project. On February 15, 2018, Ball met with Urdy and Tubbs to develop an improvement action plan and move the project forward. Texas Mutual alleges that Urdy refused to improve, failed to follow through with the plan, and did not timely respond to Ball's requests for a status update. Urdy replied she would "look into" her work.
Urdy had previously informed Green-Hinojosa of her disabilities and had applied for and received Family Medical Leave Act leave without issue on multiple occasions. On March 5,2018, Urdy spoke to Green-Hinojosa to convey that her disabilities were no longer in remission. [*6]  Urdy explained that her condition was worsening and that she needed to request a reasonable accommodation and may need some time off due to her condition. As a result of Urdy's disclosure, Texas Mutual's human resources department gave her a packet of documents related to the accommodation request. In the packet turned back in on or about March 21, 2018, Urdy's physician confirmed that she suffers from depression, anxiety, and stress disorder.
The day before, on March 20, 2018, Ball met with Gonzalez to discuss their concerns about Urdy. They decided to move forward with a final written warning and began drafting a "Stage Two Performance Notification" (the "Notification") regarding Urdy's performance issues, including her failure to timely complete assignments, to provide appropriate status updates to her supervisor, to follow directives, and to maintain a professional demeanor, among others.
On March 23, 2018, while they were still preparing the Notification, Peggy Wilson, another employee at Texas Mutual to whom Urdy was assigned to provide process improvements, complained that Urdy had failed to attend meetings regarding an output-governance project in November, December, and January. [*7]  Wilson also stated that Urdy failed to provide a status update regarding project progress in response to her request. When Urdy eventually responded with a status update, it was Wilson, the internal customer, who had to execute the next steps of the project herself, even though Urdy was supposed to do this, due to Urdy's ongoing timeliness issues.
Texas Mutual asserts that on the same day, when Urdy and Ball met for a routine one-on-one coaching meeting, Urdy became confrontational when asked for a copy of a presentation that should have been completed and physically blocked the doorway to stop Ball from leaving.
Gonzalez, Ball, and Green-Hinojosa discussed Urdy's latest conduct by telephone, determined they could not tolerate it moving forward, and the incidents were added to the Notification. On or about March 28, 2018, Ball, Gonzalez, and Green-Hinojosa met with Urdy to deliver the Notification. Urdy allegedly laughed in response.
As a result of the Notification, Urdy was told she needed immediate and sustained improvement, denied her 2017 bonus (estimated to be $3,000-$4,000) and told that previous job-flexibility accommodations, such as being able to work remotely or take her laptop [*8]  home, would be removed. Urdy claims that the Notification was pretextual and that she was treated harshly and with hostility by Ball following her conversations with Green-Hinojosa.
On April 23, 2018, Urdy followed up with Green to check in on the status of the paperwork she submitted. On April 26, 2018, Urdy was told by human resources that her request for accommodation was denied. No alternatives for her request were offered no flexible interactive process for an alternative accommodation was undertaken. Lynette Caldwell, Senior Vice President of Human Resources, in consultation with Texas Mutual's legal department, determined that Urdy's request to transfer to a different position, team, or department was not reasonable on or about April 28, 2018. Neither Ball, Green-Hinojosa, or Gonzalez were involved in this decision and Texas Mutual maintains that Ball was unaware that Urdy had requested an accommodation.
On or about May 21, 2018, Urdy filed a charge of discrimination with Texas agencies and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC"). Urdy contends that afterwards she was targeted for worse treatment and Texas Mutual refused to discuss alternative accommodations. Urdy [*9]  maintains that she was scrutinized and harassed with hostile, belittling treatment, and was disciplined for activity that her white counterparts were not. Urdy alleges that the disparate treatment was due to her disability, being an African American, or having filed a charge.
Texas Mutual contends that Urdy's performance and attitude did not improve after receiving the Notification and that other Texas Mutual employees who worked with Urdy on process improvements continued to complain about her work. Specifically, Tubbs, Martin Leifker, and Erika Sanchez reported that Urdy exhibited poor meeting-facilitation skills, failed to properly communicate, and was not well-prepared for meetings. Texas Mutual argues that Urdy flouted her supervisor's authority. Examples include Urdy delegating the claims-correspondence project to a co-worker without approval and continuing to disregard Ball's directives to communicate sufficient information regarding Family Medical Leave Act-related absences, requiring Ball and Gonzalez to meet with Urdy to discuss these expectations on more than one occasion.
Ultimately, Urdy was terminated on or about July 18, 2018. The decision was made by Ball and Green-Hinojosa [*10]  in conjunction with human resources and was reviewed by upper management. According to Texas Mutual, the basis for Urdy's termination was her failure to improve performance deficiencies after receiving the Notification and that Ball was not informed of Urdy's internal allegations of retaliation or her EEOC charge prior to terminating her employment. Texas Mutual asserts there was no unlawful animus in the decision-making process.

Analysis

I. Texas Mutual's Motion for Summary Judgment
A party is entitled to summary judgment on all or any part of a claim as to which there is no genuine issue of material fact and as to which the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). A party moving for summary judgment "must 'demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact,' but need not negate the elements of the nonmovant's case." Little v. Liquid Air Corp., 37 F.3d 1069, 1075 (5th Cir. 1994) (en banc) (quoting Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, All U.S. 317, 323-25 (1986)).
If the moving party meets its burden, the nonmovant is required to go beyond the pleadings and show admissible evidence that specific facts over which there is a genuine issue exist for trial. Wallace v. Tex. Tech Univ., 80 F.3d 1042, 1046-47 (5th Cir. 1996). An issue is "genuine" if the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., All U.S. 242, 248 (1986). When ruling [*11]  on a motion for summary judgment, all inferences drawn from the factual record must be viewed in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio, 475 U.S. 574, 587, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986). Further, a court "may not make credibility determinations or weigh the evidence" in ruling on a motion for summary judgment. Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 150, 120 S. Ct. 2097, 147 L. Ed. 2d 105 (2000).
Mere conclusory allegations are not competent summary judgment evidence, and thus are insufficient to defeat a motion for summary judgment. Turner v. Baylor Richardson Med. Ctr., 476 F.3d 337, 343 (5th Cir. 2007). Unsubstantiated assertions, improbable inferences, and unsupported speculation are not competent summary judgment evidence. Id. The party opposing summary judgment is required to identify specific evidence in the record and articulate the precise way that evidence supports her claim. Adams v. Travelers Indem. Co. of Conn., 465 F.3d 156, 164 (5th Cir. 2006). Rule 56 does not impose a duty on the court to "sift through the record in search of evidence" to support the nonmovant's opposition to the summary judgment motion. Id.
"Only disputes over facts that might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing laws will properly preclude the entry of summary judgment." Anderson, All U.S. at 248. Disputed fact issues that are "irrelevant and unnecessary" will not be considered by a court in ruling on a summary judgment motion. Id. If the nonmoving party fails to make a showing sufficient [*12]  to establish the existence of an element essential to its case and on which it will bear the burden of proof at trial, courts must grant summary judgment. Celotex, 477 U.S. at 322-23.

A. Race Discrimination and Retaliation under the Title VII and the Code
Urdy indicates in her response to Texas Mutual's portion of its motion for summary judgment dealing with race discrimination that she "does not oppose this portion of the motion." The court construes this language to also apply to the race retaliation claims under Title VII and the Code. The court will therefore grant summary judgment to Texas Mutual on both Urdy's race-discrimination and race-retaliation claims under Title VII and the Code. See, e.g., Hargrove v. Fibreboard Corp., 710 F.2d 1154,1164 (5th Cir. 1983) (upholding dismissal of claims abandoned in party's opposition to motion for summary judgment).

B. Disability Discrimination and Retaliation under the Act and the Code
1. Disability Discrimination Claims (42 U.S.C. § 12112 and Tex. Lab. Code $21.051)
A plaintiff may establish a claim of discrimination under the Act by presenting direct evidence or by using the indirect method of proof set out in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 800-05, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668(1973).
For an employer's comment to be considered direct evidence of discrimination, it must be "direct and unambiguous, allowing a reasonable juror to conclude without [*13]  any inferences or presumptions" that disability was an impermissible factor in the employer's decision. See EEOC v. Tex. Instruments Inc., 100 F.3d 1173,1181 (5th Cir. 1996) (comments allegedly made to plaintiff by managers and personnel director about age, seniority, and retirement were not direct evidence of age bias). To be considered direct evidence, the comment must (1) be related to the protected class (2) proximate in time to the adverse decision (3) made by an individual with authority over that decision, and (4) be related to the decision at issue. Auguster v. Vermillion Par. Sch. Bd., 249 F.3d 400, 405-06 (5th Cir. 2001).
Inferences are impermissible as direct evidence. Tex. Instruments Inc., 100 F.3d at 1181. Without more, Urdy's subjective belief of animus is insufficient to create a question for a jury. Baltazor v. Holmes, 162 F.3d 368, 377 n.11 (5th Cir. 1998).
With no direct evidence of disability discrimination, Urdy relies on circumstantial evidence. To survive summary judgment, Urdy must satisfy the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting test. Reeves, 530 U.S. at 138. First, the plaintiff must establish a. prima facie case of discrimination. Id. at 142. The court need not reach the subsequent McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting analysis where the plaintiff fails to establish a prima facie case. Nguyen v. Univ. of Tex. Sch. of Law, 542 Fed. App'x 320, 325 (5th Cir. 2013). Once a prima facie case is made, an inference of intentional discrimination is raised. LaPierre v. Benson Nissan, 86 F.3d 444, 448 (5th Cir. 1996). The burden of production then shifts to the employer, [*14]  who must articulate an alternative, legitimate, and non-discriminatory explanation for its adverse employment action. Reeves, 530 U.S. at 142. If the employer produces a legitimate and non-discriminatory explanation, then the inference of discrimination vanishes, and the burden shifts back to the employee to demonstrate that the explanation is pretextual. Tex. Dep 't of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 255-56, 101 S. Ct. 1089, 67 L. Ed. 2d 207 (1981). At the pretext stage, the issue is not whether the employer's reason was correct or fair, but whether the decisionmakers honestly believed the reason. Harville v. City of Houston, Miss., No. 18-60117, 2019 U.S. App. LEXIS 37711, 2009 WL 6906099, at *4 (5th Cir. Dec. 19, 2019).
To establish a prima facie claim under the Act, an employee must demonstrate that (1) that she has a disability, (2) she was qualified for the position at issue, and (3) she was the subject of an adverse employment action due to her disability. EEOC v. LHC Grp., Inc., 773 F.3d 688, 697 (5th Cir. 2014). The Code is modeled on federal law, but also requires a plaintiff to show that she was replaced by someone outside of the protected class, or that she was treated less favorably than similarly situated members of the opposite class. See Alviar v. Macy's, Inc., 784 Fed. App'x 213, 218 (5th Cir. 2019) (citing to Michael v. City of Dall, 314 S.W.3d 687, 690-91 (Tex. App.—Dallas 2010, no pet.)).

a. Urdy can demonstrate that she is disabled
Texas Mutual asserts that Urdy failed to establish that she has a disability. Texas Mutual claims that her alleged disability only prevents her from working under Ball. [*15]  Urdy argues that she is disabled with depression and insomnia. She then alleges that these illnesses substantially limit her sleeping, working, and brain function.
Under circumstances in which an employee claims "working" as a life activity that is substantially limited, other courts have determined that the plaintiff was not disabled when the disability only interfered with their ability to work under a specific supervisor. See Tinsley v. Caterpillar Fin. Servs., Corp., 766 Fed. App'x 337, 342-43 (6th Cir. 2019). However, this rule has been applied when the only life activity that was substantially limited was "working." The standard for a substantial limit on "working" is a showing that the plaintiff's impairment limits her ability to "perform a class of jobs or broad range of goals." Id. (citing Mancini v. City of Providence, 909 F.3d 32, 40, 42 n.6 (1st Cir. 2018)). Urdy does not claim that "working" is the only major life activity that is substantially limited. Major depressive disorder is presumed to substantially limit brain function under the Act's regulations. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(3)(iii). Additionally, sleeping is a major life activity under the regulations, and insomnia substantially limits Urdy in the act of sleeping. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(i)(l)(i). As such, a jury could reasonably conclude that Urdy is disabled.

b. Urdy was not qualified for the position
Texas Mutual argues that [*16]  Urdy was not qualified for her position since she failed to follow her supervisor's directives and received negative feedback from internal business partners. Urdy asserts that she was qualified for her position as her 2017 annual review determined that she was meeting expectations.
Employees that fail to meet performance expectations are not qualified for their position. See Arensdorf v. Geithner, 329 Fed. App'x 514, 516 (5th Cir. 2009). Texas Mutual notes complaints from four internal business partners that Urdy failed to perform her work or communicate on the projects she was working on. She also blocked the doorway in a coaching meeting, becoming aggressive after Ball asked for a copy of a presentation she was supposed to have completed. This indicates that Urdy failed to meet performance expectations, which led to the Notification. Even after the Notification was given, internal customers continued to complain that Urdy was not performing the work she was assigned. Urdy presents no evidence to refute the complaints or the other noted issues with her performance. As such, a reasonable jury could not find that Urdy was qualified for her position.

c. The court does not address whether Urdy is able to prove that her termination was decided by [*17]  one with knowledge of her alleged disability and request for accommodation
Urdy asserts that she suffered adverse employment actions in the removal of her ability to telecommute, the denial of her bonus, the Notification, and her termination. Texas Mutual does not dispute that these are adverse employment actions.
The parties dispute whether Urdy can prove that her termination was due to her disability. Texas Mutual claims that Ball and Gonzalez, who prepared the Notification, were not aware of her specific medical conditions or of her request for accommodations until after the process of preparing the Notification had begun. Texas Mutual goes on to argue that, as Ball did not have knowledge of Urdy's request or condition, there can be no causal connection between Urdy's disability and the Notification. See Ramirez v. Gonzales, 225 Fed. App'x 203, 210 (5th Cir. 2007) ("Fifth Circuit precedent requires evidence of knowledge of the protected activity on the part of the decisionmaker and temporal proximity between the protected activity and the adverse employment action"). Texas Mutual also asserts that there is no evidence that Urdy's internal business partners had knowledge of Urdy's medical conditions. Urdy claims that Gonzalez learned that Urdy's [*18]  doctor said that her working conditions were adversely impacting her health and that her doctor recommended accommodations prior to the meeting in which Ball and Gonzalez decided to discipline Urdy. Urdy also asserts that Gonzalez spearheaded the Notification against Urdy two weeks later and that this temporal proximity creates an inference of causation.
Urdy presents no evidence showing that Ball was aware of her request for accommodations or her doctor's statement that her working conditions were adversely impacting her health. However, while Urdy does not put forward evidence that Gonzalez was aware of Urdy's specific medical condition, she was able to put on evidence that Gonzalez knew the Urdy claimed to have a medical condition and had requested accommodations. It is unclear whether Ball or Gonzalez was the decisionmaker to discipline Urdy, but the court need not address this question because it is unnecessary to the disposition of the motion for summary judgment.

d. Texas Mutual had legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons for its termination decision
Even if Urdy could establish a prima facie case, Texas Mutual had legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons for the adverse employment [*19]  actions. Poor job performance is a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for adverse employment actions. Assariathu v. Lone Star Health Mgmt., 516 Fed. App'x 315, 319 (5th Cir. 2013) (citing Little v. Republic Ref. Co., 924 F.2d 93, 96 (5th Cir. 1991)). Urdy's poor performance is documented by Texas Mutual. Urdy puts forward no argument or evidence in her response to dispute the evidence of poor performance that Texas Mutual presents.

e. Urdy is unable to prove pretext
As Texas Mutual was able to show a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for its adverse employment actions, Urdy bears the burden of establishing that Texas Mutual's reasons were pretextual. LHC Grp., Inc., 773 F.3d at 694. To prove pretext, a plaintiff must "offer sufficient evidence to create a genuine issue of material fact either (1) that the defendant's reason is not true, but is instead pretext for discrimination; or (2) that the defendant's reason, while true, is only one of the reasons for its conduct, and another motivating factor is the plaintiff's protected characteristic." Id.
Urdy argues that she has evidence of pretext due to alleged dishonesty on the part of Ball. The alleged dishonesty includes lying about Urdy's work performance, claiming to have never learned about Urdy's health issues, and claiming to not have known about Urdy's request for accommodations until after [*20]  Urdy was fired. "In appropriate circumstances, the trier of fact can reasonably infer from the falsity of the explanation that the employer is dissembling to cover up a discriminatory purpose." Reeves, 530 U.S. at 147. This is not an appropriate circumstance for such an inference because Urdy's arguments rely on mischaracterizations of Ball's and Gonzalez's depositions and conclusory statements that Ball engaged in dishonesty without presenting evidence to that issue.
Urdy claims that Ball represented that Urdy was on the verge of termination based on her 2017 evaluation. Urdy argues that Ball made a "180" and said that she would not characterize the evaluation in such a way. This is an inaccurate representation of Ball's deposition. Ball repeatedly stated that Urdy did not demonstrate "continuous and sustained improvement." She did not state that the evaluation made it clear that Urdy was on the verge of termination.
Additionally, Urdy argues that Ball made a second "180." She alleges that Ball first claimed to never have known of Urdy's health issues and then admit that she had been made aware of them. Ball clarified that she did not know of Urdy's health issues until after her termination.
Finally, Urdy [*21]  claims that Ball was forwarded the email in which Urdy requested an accommodation and described her health issues. However, Urdy presents no evidence to support this argument other than the fact that similar or exact phrases from the email in which Urdy requested the accommodation were also in the Notification. Texas Mutual states that the relevant disputes regarding her performance that Urdy had listed in the email were reviewed and included by human resources in the Notification. Urdy lacks evidence against this argument.
Further, Urdy does not dispute the performance concerns raised by her business partners, nor does she dispute the prior issues with her performance raised by Ball. These concerns existed both before and after Urdy made her request for accommodations. As such, pretext cannot be inferred from the fact that Urdy received the Notification after her request for accommodation. See LHC Grp., Inc., 773 F.3d at 702. Urdy only argues that Ball's statements were dishonest in her attempt to show pretext and does not claim to be able to prove that the "employment decision was 'based on a mixture of legitimate and illegitimate motives... [and that] the illegitimate motive was a motivating factor in the decision.'" [*22]  Id. (quoting Pinkerton v. Spellings, 529 F.3d 513, 519 (5th Cir. 2014)). As Urdy is unable to prove pretext, summary judgment will be granted to Texas Mutual as to the disability-discrimination claims under the Act.

f. Urdy does not present evidence of failure to accommodate
Assuming Texas Mutual asserts that Urdy is unable to prove that Texas Mutual failed to accommodate her medical conditions. Texas Mutual argues that Urdy's requested accommodations were unreasonable. In addition, Texas Mutual claims that since Urdy was not a qualified employee under the Act, she was not entitled to accommodations. In her response, Urdy does not claim that her requests for accommodation were reasonable. Instead, she asserts that Texas Mutual failed to engage in the interactive process as Texas Mutual did not offer any other possible accommodations. Texas Mutual argues that it was not required to propose alternative accommodations.
The first accommodation that Urdy requested was to be transferred to a different supervisor. A request for a transfer to avoid personal difficulties in the workplace is not a reasonable accommodation. Saenz-Holt v. Nicholson, No. A-06-CA-259-LY, 2007 WL 9709994, * 12 (W.D. Tex. Nov. 9, 2007) (citations omitted). Urdy requested to be transferred to a supervisor other than Ball due to personal difficulties in working for [*23]  her. As a matter of law, this accommodation was unreasonable.
Urdy also requested to be allowed to work from home as an accommodation. Texas Mutual denied this accommodation as unreasonable as Urdy's telecommuting privileges were revoked when she received the Notification. The Telecommuting Agreement that Urdy signed allowed for the company to discontinue the agreement at any time for any reason, including a decrease in production, which Urdy demonstrated. The EEOC's regulations do not require employers to ignore past misconduct or to not discipline employees for violation of a uniformly-applied conduct rule. See U.S. Equal Opportunity Emp't Comm'n, Enf t Guidance: Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under the Ams. with Disabilities Act of No. 35 & No. 36. As such, Texas Mutual was not required to avoid punishing Urdy for her violation of conduct rules.
Urdy's assertion that Texas Mutual failed to engage in the interactive process is not legally viable. Though Texas Mutual did not present alternatives to the accommodation requests that Urdy made, Texas Mutual was not required to do so. The interactive process is "not one that ends with 'the first attempt at accommodation,' but [*24]  one that 'continues when the employee asks for a different accommodation.'" Dillard v. City of Austin, 837 F.3d 557, 562-63 (5th Cir. 2016). Continuing the interactive process with further requests for accommodation is the employee's responsibility. Employers are not required to formulate accommodations on their own. Urdy requested two unreasonable accommodations, both of which Texas Mutual considered before rejecting. She had the opportunity to make further requests for accommodations afterwards but failed to do so. Thus, Texas Mutual did not fail to engage in the interactive process.

g. Urdy cannot show she was treated less favorably than similarly situated members of the opposite class
As Urdy does not allege that she was replaced by someone outside of the protected class, she must prove disparate treatment. See Michael, 314 S.W.3d at 690-91. To establish a prima facie case based upon disparate treatment under the Code, a plaintiff must show that she was treated less favorably than "similarly situated" non-protected class members. Id. at 691 (citing to Ysleta ISD v. Monarrez, 177 S.W. 915, 917 (Tex. 2005)). "Similarly situated" in the context of discrimination based upon disparate discipline means requires for "the disciplined and undisciplined employees' misconduct must be of comparable seriousness." Id. Urdy presents no evidence that [*25]  an employee committed misconduct of comparable seriousness. As such, summary judgment is proper to the disability-discrimination claim under the Code.
2. Disability Retaliation Claims (42 U.S.C. § 12203 and Tex. Lab. Code §21.055)
Retaliation claims under the Act are also analyzed under the McDonell Douglas burden sifting framework. Vincent v. Coll. of the Mainland, 703 Fed. App'x 233, 239 (5th Cir. 2017) (citing Wheat v. Fla. Par. Juv. Justice Comm 'n, 811 F.3d 702, 705 (5th Cir. 2016)). To establish a prima facie case of retaliation, a plaintiff must satisfy three elements: (1) the employee engaged in protected activity; (2) she suffered an adverse employment action; (3) a causal link exists between the protected activity and the adverse employment action. Id. If she is able to prove a prima facie case, the burden of production then shifts to the employer, who must articulate an alternative, legitimate, and non-discriminatory explanation for its adverse employment action. Reeves, 530 U.S. at 142. If the employer produces a legitimate and non-discriminatory explanation, then the inference of discrimination vanishes, and the burden shifts back to the employee to demonstrate that the explanation is pretextual. Tex. Dep 't of Cmty. Affairs, 450 U.S. at 255-56. Since the Code "parallels the language of the [Act]," Texas courts follow federal law in evaluating retaliation claims under the Code. Williams v. Tarrant Cty. Coll. Dist., 717 Fed. App'x 440, 445 (5th Cir. 2018) (citing to Pegram v. Honeywell, Inc., 361 F.3d 272, 285-87 (5th Cir. 2004)).

a. Urdy can establish that she [*26]  engaged in protected activities and suffered adverse employment actions, but the court need not address whether a causal connection exists
While Urdy can establish that she engaged in protected activities and suffered adverse employment actions, it is unclear if a causal connection existed between the adverse employment actions, the Notification and her termination, and the protected activities.
Urdy contends that her protected activities were (1) requesting an accommodation and (2) filing a charge of discrimination with the EEOC. Texas Mutual does not dispute that these are protected activities. Texas Mutual also does not dispute that Urdy was subject to adverse employment actions.
Texas Mutual argues that there is no causal connection between the decision to terminate Urdy for an activity the decisionmakers were unaware of. See Lee v. Kan. City S. Ry. Co., 574 F.3d 253, 258 (5th Cir. 2009) (upholding summary judgment on retaliation claim where there was no evidence decisionmaker was aware of EEOC filings). Urdy claims that temporal proximity between Gonzalez learning that Urdy's doctor recommended accommodations and Gonzalez "spearheading" the Notification creates an inference of causation.
Temporal proximity can serve as "evidence of causality [*27]  to establish a prima facie case" of retaliation alone if the temporal proximity is very close. Strong, 482 F.3d at 808 (citing to Clark Cty. Sch. Dist. v. Breeden, 532 U.S. 268, 273, 121 S. Ct. 1508, 149 L. Ed. 2d 509, (2001)). Urdy asserts that after learning of the recommendation for accommodations, Gonzalez spearheaded disciplinary action against Urdy two weeks later. While periods longer than three months have been determined to not be very close, two weeks demonstrates a very close temporal proximity. See Breeden, 532 U.S. at 273 (internal citations omitted).
It is unclear if Urdy would be able to show causation between her request for accommodations and the Notification. Texas Mutual alleges that Ball had no knowledge of the request for an accommodation until after the preparation of the Notification had begun. Texas Mutual goes on to argue that, due to Ball's lack of knowledge, there can be no causal connection between the accommodation request and the Notification as a matter of law. See Ramirez, 225 Fed. App'x at 210. However, Gonzalez was aware of the request for accommodation and it is unclear whether Gonzalez or Ball was the decisionmaker to discipline Urdy with the Notification. As summary judgment succeeds on this claim for other reasons, the court need not address this issue.
Urdy also argues that temporal proximity shows causation between [*28]  the filing of the EEOC complaint and her termination. About a month after Urdy filed her EEOC complaint she was terminated. Urdy claims that temporal proximity is also present between her complaint and her termination. It is unclear if a month meets the very close standard. Again, the court need not address this issue as summary judgment will be granted on other grounds.

b. Texas Mutual has a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse employment actions
As discussed above, assuming arguendo that Urdy could establish a prima facie case, Texas Mutual has a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse employment actions. Poor job performance is a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for termination. Assariathu, 516 Fed. App'x at 319 (citing Little, 924 F.2d 96). Urdy's poor performance was documented by Texas Mutual. This provides a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse employment actions that Urdy alleges.

c. Urdy cannot show pretext
As Texas Mutual established a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the adverse employment actions, the burden shifts to Urdy to prove pretext. Tex. Dep't of Cmty. Affairs, 450 U.S. at 255-56. The standard for proving pretext to a retaliation claim is that "but for" the retaliatory purpose, the adverse employment action [*29]  would not have occurred. Strong, 482 F.3d at 806.
Urdy mistakenly relies on temporal proximity as proof of causation. "Without more than timing allegations" after the employer presented a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for an adverse employment action, summary judgment in favor of the employer is proper. Roberson v. Alltel Info. Servs., 373 F.3d 647, 656 (5th Cir. 2004). While close timing between a protected activity and adverse action may provide a causal connection, "once the employer offers a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason that explains both the adverse action and the timing, the plaintiff must offer some evidence from which the jury may infer that retaliation was the real motive." McCoy v. Shreveport, 492 F.3d 551, 562 (5th Cir. 2007). As Urdy has not presented any evidence other than timing to prove causation, Texas Mutual is entitled to summary judgment.1

Conclusion
For the reasons explained above, the court will grant Texas Mutual's motion for summary judgment against the Urdy. Accordingly,
IT IS ORDERED that Texas Mutual's Motion for Summary Judgment filed May 29, 2020 (Doc. #21) is GRANTED. Urdy's race-discrimination and race-retaliation claims under the Code and Title VII, and her disability-discrimination and disability-retaliation claims under the Code and the Act are DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE [*30] .
A final judgment shall be filed subsequently.
SIGNED this 16th day of July, 2020.
/s/ Lee Yeakel
LEE YEAKEL
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

FINAL JUDGMENT
Before the court is the above-styled and numbered cause. On this date, the court rendered an order dismissing this cause with prejudice against Defendant Texas Mutual Insurance Company ("Texas Mutual"). As nothing remains to resolve, the court renders the following Final Judgment pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 58.
IT IS ORDERED that Defendant Texas Mutual is awarded its costs of court.
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the case is hereby CLOSED.
SIGNED this 16th day of July, 2020.
/s/ Lee Yeakel
LEE YEAKEL
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

