VanSlyck v. GoJet Airlines, LLC
United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois, Eastern Division
April 3, 2018, Decided; April 3, 2018, Filed
No. 16 C 11000

Reporter
2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 240901 *; 2018 WL 11216393
JOSH VANSLYCK, Plaintiff, v. GOJET AIRLINES, LLC, TRANS STATES HOLDINGS, INC., and RANDY BRATCHER, Defendants.
Prior History: Vanslyck v. GoJet Airlines, LLC, 323 F.R.D. 266, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 5078, 2018 WL 372173 (N.D. Ill., Jan. 11, 2018)
Counsel:  [*1] For Trans States Holdings Inc., Defendant: John Lawrence Hayes, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart P.C., Chicago, IL; Leslie Ellen Cavender, Trans States Holdings Inc., Bridgeton, MO; Rodney A. Harrison, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart PC, St. Louis, MO; David J.A. Hayes III, LEAD ATTORNEY, Trans States Holdings Inc., St. Louis, MO.
For Gojet Airlines LLC, Defendant: Leslie Ellen Cavender, Trans States Holdings Inc., Bridgeton, MO; John Lawrence Hayes, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart P.C., Chicago, IL; Rodney A. Harrison, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart PC, St. Louis, MO; David J.A. Hayes III, LEAD ATTORNEY, Trans States Holdings Inc., St. Louis, MO.
For Randy Bratcher, Defendant: David J.A. Hayes III, LEAD ATTORNEY, Trans States Holdings Inc., St. Louis, MO; Leslie Ellen Cavender, Trans States Holdings Inc., Bridgeton, MO; John Lawrence Hayes, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart P.C., Chicago, IL; Rodney A. Harrison, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart PC, St. Louis, MO.
For Josh Vanslyck, Plaintiff: Josh Michael Friedman, Law Offices of Josh Friedman, Chicago, IL.
Judges: SHEILA FINNEGAN, United States Magistrate Judge.
Opinion by: SHEILA FINNEGAN
Opinion



ORDER
Plaintiff Josh VanSlyck brought [*2]  this two-count action against his former employer, Defendant GoJet Airlines, LLC ("GoJet") and related Defendants, alleging claims under the Family and Medical Leave Act, 29 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq. ("FMLA") and Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. § 1201 et seq. ("ADA"). Plaintiff, a former GoJet pilot, alleged that Defendants' violated the FMLA and ADA by unlawfully (1) refusing him a modified flying schedule to accommodate his claimed disability (anxiety); (2) withdrawing a promised promotion; (3) refusing to return him to work when requested; and (4) terminating his employment.1 By Memorandum Opinion and Order dated January 11, 2018, this Court held that certain of Plaintiff's claims are subject to mandatory arbitration under the Railway Labor Act, 45 U.S.C. § 151 et seq. ("RLA") and stayed the remaining claims while that arbitration is conducted. (Doc. 44). Now before the Court is Plaintiff's motion to certify that ruling for immediate appeal pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1292(b) and Fed. R. App. P. 5(a)(3). (Doc. 45). That motion is denied for the following reasons.

DISCUSSION
As explained in the Court's January 11 Opinion, when Plaintiff was a GoJet pilot, he was a member of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters Airline Division ("IBT"), and the terms of his employment was thus governed [*3]  by a Collective Bargaining Agreement ("CBA") between GoJet and the IBT. (Doc. 44, at 2). Based on certain provisions in the CBA, Defendants moved for summary judgment in this action asserting that at least some of Plaintiff's claims require interpretation and/or application of the CBA, and are therefore subject to mandatory arbitration under the RLA, and that the remaining claims are sufficiently related to warrant arbitration also, or should be stayed while the required arbitration proceeds. (Id.).2 The Court's January 11 Opinion agreed that Plaintiff's claims that Defendants violated the ADA and FMLA by refusing to grant him a modified flying schedule (the "interference" and "failure-to-accommodate" claims) and refusing to return him to work (the "return-to-work" claim) are subject to mandatory arbitration under the RLA, and that Plaintiff's remaining claims should be stayed while the foregoing claims are arbitrated. (Id. at 24). Plaintiff's current motion argues that this ruling should be certified for immediate appeal pursuant to § 1292(b) and Federal Appellate Rule 5(a), because it "involves a controlling question of law that is subject to substantial debate." (Doc. 46, at 2). The Court disagrees for several [*4]  reasons.

A. Plaintiff's Motion Improperly Seeks to Certify a Ruling that the Court Did Not Issue.
First and foremost, the ruling that Plaintiff argues is subject to substantial debate is not a ruling that the Court made. According to Plaintiff, the "controlling question" he would like to appeal immediately is "whether statutory employment discrimination claims not founded on a collective bargaining agreement are precluded by the RLA." (Id. at 3). But this Court did not hold that statutory employment discrimination claims "not founded on a collective bargaining agreement" are precluded by the RLA, and instead held just the opposite. Contrary to Plaintiff's contention, the Court's January 11 Opinion held only that Plaintiff's claims that are dependent on the controlling CBA are precluded by the RLA, and that his remaining claims are not precluded by the RLA. (Doc. 44, at 7-10, 17-23).
Specifically, the Court explained in its January 11 Opinion that Plaintiff's interference and failure-to-accommodate claims under the FMLA and ADA, and his return-to-work claim under the FMLA, each require interpretation and application of several provisions in the parties' controlling CBA. (Id. at 9-10, 17-19). That is because Plaintiff's [*5]  interference and failure-to-accommodate claims raise disputed issues regarding whether the CBA's seniority, schedule-bidding, and eligibility-for-bidding provisions prevented Defendants from granting Plaintiff the year-long schedule of limited-duration flying trips that he requested, and which he claims Defendants violated the FMLA and ADA by denying him. (Id. at 7-12). Similarly, Plaintiff's return-to-work claim raises disputed issues regarding whether the CBA's fitness-for-duty and return-to-work provisions required Defendants to allow Plaintiff to resume his pilot position before receiving the additional medical information they requested. (Id. at 15-19).
Because resolution of these claims depends on provisions of the controlling CBA that each side disputed, this Court held (consistent with well settled Seventh Circuit precedent) that Plaintiff's interference, failure-to-accommodate, and return-to-work claims are subject to mandatory arbitration under the RLA. (Id. at 7-19, citing Carlson v. CSX Transp., Inc., 758 F.3d 819 (7th Cir. 2014); Brown v. Ill. Central R.R. Co., 254 F.3d 654 (7th Cir. 2001)). And because Plaintiff's remaining claims did not depend for their resolution on the parties' CBA, the Court further held (again consistent with well settled Seventh Circuit precedent) that those claims will be stayed while the foregoing [*6]  claims are arbitrated. (Id. at 19-23, citing Tice v. American Airlines, Inc., 288 F.3d 313, 318 (7th Cir. 2002) (a stay of non-arbitrable claims is "the normal procedure when an arbitrable issue arises in the course of a federal suit")). Plaintiff has identified no debatable issues in these rulings, and the Court sees none. Accordingly, the Court's January 11 Opinion espoused no "controlling issue of law as to which there is a substantial ground for difference of opinion" warranting certification under § 1292(b).

B. Plaintiff Has Identified no Debatable Question under the Seventh Circuit's Decisions in Brown and Carlson.
Having failed to identify a controlling issue subject to debate in the Court's January 11 Opinion, Plaintiff's reply memorandum offers the fallback position that the Seventh Circuit's decisions in Brown v. Ill. Central R.R. Co., 254 F.3d 654 (7th Cir. 2001), and Carlson v. CSX Transp., Inc., 758 F.3d 819 (7th Cir. 2014), "present a difference of opinion as to the scope of RLA preemption . . . that is ripe for resolution by the Seventh Circuit." (Doc. 51, at 2-3). According to Plaintiff, "Carlson clearly holds that the 'RLA does not require arbitration of claims asserting rights established by state or federal law independent of a collective bargaining agreement," whereas the Seventh Circuit's prior decision in Brown purportedly "rejects" that proposition. (Id.). Plaintiff [*7]  fails to explain how this supposed "difference" matters to his claims, but presumably contends that Carlson would allow his federal statutory claims to proceed in federal court regardless of the controlling CBA provisions, whereas Brown would not support that result. But as this Court explained at length in its January 11 Opinion, there is no such conflict between Carlson and Brown, and neither decision supports Plaintiff's position here.
Although Carlson did hold in the language Plaintiff quotes that the RLA does not require arbitration of claims that are truly "independent of a collective bargaining agreement," it went on to emphasize in language Plaintiff overlooks that this principle has no application where (as here) "a nominally independent claim" nevertheless depends upon "the interpretation of collective bargaining agreement." Carlson, 758 F.3d at 832-33. Brown held no differently. See 254 F.3d at 667 (preclusion applies where "the federal claim asserted by the plaintiff depends for its resolution on the interpretation of a CBA. Such claims are not 'independent' of the CBA regardless of their source, and are therefore precluded by the RLA."). And proof of the fact that Carlson and Brown are in perfect harmony on this [*8]  point lies in the fact that Carlson cited Brown to make it:
[S]ometimes a nominally independent claim can be "conclusively resolved" by interpreting a collective bargaining agreement because the claim's success depends entirely on the agreement's meaning. See Brown, 254 F.3d at 660-61. In Brown, the plaintiff's accommodation request under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) "might very well violate the seniority system established by the CBA," and the ADA does not require accommodations that interfere with the seniority rights of other employees. Id. at 661; see Eckles v. Consolidated Rail Corp., 94 F.3d 1041, 1046 (7th Cir. 1996). The "heart of the dispute" in Brown, we explained, was "a disagreement over the interpretation" of a collective bargaining agreement. 254 F.3d at 664.
Carlson, 758 F.3d at 832-33.
This Court's January 11 Opinion similarly concluded that Plaintiff's interference, failure-to-accommodate, and return-to-work claims, while "nominally independent," nevertheless depend on the interpretation of several provisions in the parties' CBA, including its seniority provisions, among others. (Doc. 144, at 7-19). While the outcome in Carlson was different, the claims in Carlson were different. Unlike the present case, the plaintiff in Carlson abandoned any argument under the CBA at issue, and so her claims were [*9]  not precluded. See 758 F.3d at 833 ("Carlson does not claim that she was entitled to a particular job under the collective bargaining agreement."). Conversely, the plaintiff in Brown did dispute the seniority provisions of the CBA at issue and their impact on his ADA claims, and so his claims were precluded, although the court cautioned that the result would have been otherwise had he not done so. See 254 F.3d at 668 ("Brown's claim would not have been precluded if either the parties did not dispute the interpretation of the relevant CBA provisions (and Brown had merely argued that he was entitled to a certain reasonable accommodation under the ADA notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the CBA") (emphasis in original)).
Similarly here, Plaintiff's interference, failure-to-accommodate, and return-to-work claims dispute that the seniority and other provisions of the controlling CBA precluded the accommodation and return to work that he is now suing Defendants for having denied him. As long as those disputes over the meaning of the CBA remain, those claims depend on an interpretation of the CBA and are therefore subject to mandatory arbitration under the RLA. That ruling is fully consistent with the language [*10]  and holdings in both Carlson and Brown, and this Court sees no "difference of opinion as to the scope of RLA preemption" in those decisions or the Court's January 11 Opinion requiring certification under § 1292(b).3

C. The Court's Citation of Union Pacific and Kwasnik Created no Issue Worthy of Certification
Having failed to identify any contradiction between Carlson and Brown, Plaintiff next attempts to salvage a certifiable issue from the Court's citation of two other decisions: Bhd. of Maint. of Way Employees v. Union Pacific R.R. Co., No. 03 C 1639, 2003 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 12138, 2003 WL 21673930, at *12 (N.D. Ill. Jul. 16, 2003), and Kwasnik v. Nat'l R.R. Passenger Corp., No. 96-1933, 1997 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 2541, 1997 WL 109977, at *4 (N.D. Ill. Mar. 7, 1997). According to Plaintiff, these decisions "directly contradict Carlson" because they purportedly "expand the scope of RLA preclusion and look beyond the explicit provisions of a CBA, and rely on past practices, in order to resolve RLA preclusion claims." (Doc. 51, at 3). To the contrary, both Union Pacific and Kwasnik adhered to the well-established rule rearticulated in Brown and Carlson that claims are subject to mandatory arbitration under the RLA when they require interpretation of a collective bargaining agreement.4 And neither decision purported to expand this rule by relying "on past practices, in order to resolve RLA preclusion claims," as Plaintiff now suggests.
Rather, Union Pacific and Kwasnik merely [*11]  observed that a party's reliance upon past practices to overcome a CBA provision does not obviate the need to interpret that provision or avoid the mandatory arbitration required to do so; instead, such practices must be considered - if at all - in the context of interpreting the CBA provision at issue.5 This Court's January 11 Opinion similarly acknowledged Plaintiff's reliance upon past practices to argue that the CBA at issue here did not preclude the accommodation he requested of Defendants. (Doc. 44, at 9-10, citing Doc. 36, at 11). While the Court doubted that any such past practices might be relevant or dispositive here, it cited various decisions, including Union Pacific and Kwasnik, in agreeing with Defendants that "it is for the System Board to evaluate this past practice in the context of CBA interpretation; not the Court." (Doc. 44, at 10 an n.4, citing Doc. 37, at 6 and Bhd. of Maint. of Way Employees v. Burlington N. Santa Fe R.R., 270 F.3d 637, 639 (8th Cir. 2001) ("Although the Railroad's past practice is relevant to the merits of interpreting the contested CBA provision, it does not alter the minor nature of the dispute")). Nothing about that observation contradicted Carlson or otherwise gave rise to an issue worthy of certification under § 1292(b).

D. Plaintiff Failed to [*12]  Demonstrate that Interlocutory Appeal Would be More Efficient.
Finally, Plaintiff argues that an interlocutory appeal of the Court's January 11 ruling would materially shorten this litigation because arbitration of the issues required under the RLA would cause the litigation to be "much longer than if this matter simply remained before this Court." (Doc. 46, at 5). As Plaintiff has failed to identify any debatable issue warranting an interlocutory appeal, this factor is moot. But the Court nevertheless notes that Plaintiff's argument regarding delay fails to account for the time that would be consumed by the appeal Plaintiff seeks, which may well require more time than the arbitration Plaintiff seeks to avoid and yet still require that arbitration to proceed in any event. On the other hand, as Defendants argue, rather than prolong this litigation, the arbitration ordered by the Court might require no additional time or even expedite these proceedings, since it stands to narrow the issues to be litigated, and any discovery conducted during the arbitration should obviate the same discovery in this forum.
The Court also notes that Defendants have long stood ready to "promptly schedule a [*13]  System Board hearing with Plaintiff" (Doc. 37, at 1 n.1), whereas Plaintiff has continually resisted that effort and has now further delayed that proceeding by pursuing a facially deficient motion to certify the Court's ruling for an interlocutory appeal four weeks after the Court ordered the arbitration. At this point, the best way to expedite these proceedings would be for Plaintiff to proceed to arbitrate at least the issues the Court has required to be arbitrated (if not voluntarily arbitrate all issues between the parties), after which Plaintiff remains free (with likely no time lost) to litigate any remaining issues.

CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, Plaintiff's Motion to Certify Order of January 11, 2018 for Interlocutory Appeal and to Stay Arbitration Proceedings (Doc. 45) is denied.
Dated: April 3, 2018
ENTER:
/s/ Sheila Finnegan
SHEILA FINNEGAN
United States Magistrate Judge


End of Document

