Waring v. Geodis Logistics LLC
United States District Court for the Central District of California
December 1, 2020, Decided; December 1, 2020, Filed
CV 19-4415-GW-KSx

Reporter
2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 248161 *
Michael Waring v. Geodis Logistics LLC, et al.
Prior History: Waring v. Geodis Logistics LLC, 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 127067, 2019 WL 3424955 (C.D. Cal., July 29, 2019)
Counsel:  [*1] For Geodis Logistics LLC, a Tennessee limited liability company, Defendant: Deanna L Ballesteros, James Allen Goodman, William O Stein, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Epstein Becker and Green PC, Los Angeles CA.
For Michael Waring, an individual, Plaintiff: Justin Hanassab, Steven Isaac Azizi, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Miracle Mile Law Group LLP, Los Angeles CA; David Clay Washington, Barbara Faye Enloe Hadsell, Dan Stormer, Hadsell Stormer Renick and Dai LLP, Pasadena CA.
For Michael H Leb, Mediator (ADR Panel): Michael H Leb, LEAD ATTORNEY, LEB Dispute Resolution, Pasadena CA.
Judges: GEORGE H. WU, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: GEORGE H. WU
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES - GENERAL

PROCEEDINGS: IN CHAMBERS - RULING ON DEFENDANT GEODIS LOGISTICS LLC'S MOTION TO RECONSIDER THE COURT'S FINAL RULING DENYING SUMMARY JUDGMENT ON PLAINTIFF'S FIFTH AND SIXTH CLAIMS [145]
Attached hereto is the Court's Ruling. Defendant's Motion is DENIED.
Waring v. Geodis Logistics LLC; Case No. 2:19-cr-04415-GW-(KSx)
Ruling on Motion to Reconsider the Court's Final Ruling Denying Summary Judgment on Plaintiff's Fifth and Sixth Claims
On October 6, 2020, the Court issued a final ruling on a motion for summary judgment filed in this case by defendant Geodis Logistics, [*2]  LLC ("Defendant"), see Docket No. 140, confirming (with a slight adjustment not relevant here) a tentative ruling filed the previous day,1 which was the day of the hearing on the motion, see Docket No. 139. Defendant now seeks the Court's reconsideration of its ruling insofar as the fifth and sixth claims of plaintiff Michael Waring ("Plaintiff") - California Fair Employment and Housing Act claims for failure to provide reasonable accommodation and failure to engage in the interactive process — are concerned. The Court finds that it can rule on the motion without further oral argument from the parties. Therefore, pursuant to C.D. Cal. L.R. 7-15, the December 3, 2020 hearing is take off-calendar.
Defendant's reconsideration motion is based on a contention that the Court committed clear legal error — and that there is "a material difference in . . . law from that presented to the Court before such decision that in the exercise of reasonable diligence could not have been known to the party moving for reconsideration at the time of such decision," C.D. Cal. L.R. 7-18 - because it concluded that there was no triable issue of fact with regard to the fact that Defendant reached a decision to terminate Plaintiff [*3]  before it learned of Plaintiff's own personal mental disability. Defendant argues that it is "settled law in the Ninth Circuit" that employers:
have no duty or obligation under the FEHA to provide an accommodation or engage in the interactive process where the employer decided to terminate the employee's employment before learning that the employee had any disability. Further, the case law makes clear that any request for reinstatement or a "second chance" to make amends for past performance failures would not constitute a reasonable accommodation.
Docket No. 145, at ii:23-iii:2.
In opposing Defendant's summary judgment motion on the fifth and sixth claims, Plaintiff argued in part that "it is undisputed that at least as of December 9, 2018, Defendant was on notice of [Plaintiff's] disability." Docket No. 37, at 22:3-4. He later continued:
Even if Defendant is to be believed that it decided to terminate Plaintiff before he took leave based on a wholly inadequate (and likely pretextual) assessment of his work competence, it nevertheless failed to consider whether these alleged deficiencies resulted from his disability. Indeed, immediately upon Plaintiff's return from medical leave, Defendant [*4]  terminated him without giving any consideration to whether supposed performance issues were related to the disabilities it clearly was aware of. And despite the acknowledged company policy to immediately initiate the interactive process upon learning of a potential disability and/or that it might be affecting job performance, Defendant took no efforts to do this for Plaintiff . . . . Plaintiff returned to work prepared to discuss accommodations moving forward. However, he never got a chance to do so, because within hours of his return he was terminated . . . .
Id. at 22:13-23:6 (omitting internal citations and parentheticals). It is plain from these contentions, at least to the Court, that Plaintiff was arguing in part that Defendant's accommodation and interactive process duties continued past December 9, 2018. Defendant's Reply brief failed to respond to this theory, holding fast to its view that Defendant had no notice of any disability on Plaintiff's part until he filed this lawsuit (along with other sub-arguments not relevant to the foregoing segments of Plaintiff's Opposition brief). See Docket No. 42, at 27:1-28:28.
Defendant cites six decisions in support of its "clear legal [*5]  error" argument. Four of them are unpublished memoranda dispositions issued by the Ninth Circuit. Defendant asserts that it cites those decisions "in accordance with Ninth Circuit Rule 36-3 and FRAP 32.1" Docket No. 145, at 5-8 nn. 2-5; see also id. at 4:25-26 (referring to "the correct and settled line of Ninth Circuit cases described below"); Docket No. 149, at 1:19-24 (Defendant referring to the proposition it believes it has identified as "black letter law in the Ninth Circuit" and "the settled law of the Ninth Circuit"); id. at 5:3 (referencing "the settled law of the Ninth Circuit"); id. at 8:6-7 (referencing "the clear and settled rule of law"); id. at 8:26 ("clear legal error under the well-established law of the Ninth Circuit"). Rule 32.1 of the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure says that a court cannot prohibit citation of unpublished written dispositions issued after January 1, 2007. Ninth Circuit Rule 36-3(a), however, makes clear that such dispositions are "not precedent," except in circumstances obviously not applicable here. The other two cases Defendant now relies upon - Brundage v. Hahn, 57 Cal.App.4th 228, 66 Cal. Rptr. 2d 830 (1997) and Alamillo v. BNSF Railway Company, 869 F.3d 916 (9th Cir. 2017) - are cases that the Court actually cited, quoted from, and/or discussed in its summary judgment ruling, and one of them is a case that Defendant itself relied upon in its Reply brief, but only in connection [*6]  with Plaintiff's claim for disability discrimination. See Docket No. 42, at 9-11. In other words, Defendant has relied upon cases that either establish no law or upon cases that, given the tenor of Plaintiff's summary judgment Opposition brief, quoted above, Defendant had no reason to omit from its Reply brief. As such, Defendant has not brought a proper motion for reconsideration, and it can be denied on that basis alone. For sake of completeness, however, the Court has reviewed the six cases in question, and discusses them briefly below.
Parker v. Comcast Cable Communs. Mgmt., LLC, 747 Fed. Appx. 565 (9th Cir. 2018), involved an appeal on a claim for wrongful termination in violation of public policy, not an appeal of a claim for violation of statutory reasonable accommodation or interactive process duties. See id. at 565. The Ninth Circuit's only mention of those claims (which is odd enough considering the appeal — at least according to the opening lines of the decision — only involved the wrongful termination claim2 ) was to state that the district court had properly rejected those claims "based on the finding that Comcast had not been put on notice of any need to act." Id. at 566. The Ninth Circuit's decision quite simply does not stand for — nor could it stand for, given its [*7]  unpublished status — the rule that Defendant argues was such a clear error of law on this Court's part that it should cause the Court to reconsider its summary judgment ruling.
In Simpson v. Computer Sciences Corporation, 735 Fed. Appx. 339 (9th Cir. 2018), the Ninth Circuit's entire discussion of the plaintiff's reasonable accommodation and interactive process claims was as follows: "Because CSC laid Simpson off for a legitimate, nondiscriminatory, and non-pretextual reason, it had no obligation to accommodate Simpson's condition or undertake an interactive process to identify a potential accommodation." Id. at 340. The Ninth Circuit's decision cited no decision of the California courts, nor any statutory provision in California's Government Code, in support of this conclusion. It is true, insofar as the unpublished memoranda disposition reveals, that the plaintiff in that case was identified for a reduction-in-force well before the plaintiff's cancer diagnosis. See id. at 339. As such, there surely were facts — a decision to lay the plaintiff off, followed by a delay in implementation of that decision — that would allow a court, interested in doing so, to establish the rule that Defendant believes it has identified here. But Simpson is not a published opinion, cited no law in [*8]  support of its conclusion, and reveals no effort to explain in any detail the thinking that led it to its conclusion.
At least of the cases the Court and/or the parties did not already cite or consider in connection with the summary judgment motion, Wong v. Pape Machinery, Inc., 370 Fed. Appx. 871 (9th Cir. 2010), and Charles v. Nike, Inc., 255 Fed. Appx. 127 (9th Cir. 2007), come closest to "carrying the water" for Defendant's theory of law. In Wong, the Ninth Circuit announced that "[n]o authority appears to support Wong's contention that Pape should have continued to accommodate her after its non-discriminatory decision to terminate her." Wong, 370 Fed. Appx. at 873. The Ninth Circuit provided a "Cf." citation to Nidds v. Schindler Elevator Corp., 113 F.3d 912, 916-19 (9th Cir. 1997), after making that statement. See Wong, 370 Fed. Appx. at 873. Defendant does not rely upon or cite Nidds here. This was for good reason, because Nidds did not involve either a reasonable accommodation or an interactive process claim, so the contours and extent of those duties obviously were not outlined by that case. Nor is there anything on pages 916-919 of the Nidds opinion that obviously relates to such a claim, or to the proposition Wong (and, through Wong, Defendant) wishes to establish.
Here is the difficulty the Court has with the Ninth Circuit's "[n]o authority appears to support" statement in Wong (and it is one the Court expects the [*9]  Ninth Circuit might have confronted had the decision been a published, precedential, opinion): The reasonable accommodation obligation — like the interactive process obligation — is a statutory obligation. "It is an unlawful employment practice . . . [f]or an employer . . . to fail to make reasonable accommodation for the known . . . mental disability of an . . . employee." Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(m)(1). There is a statutory defense where an accommodation would "produce undue hardship" to the employer's "operation." Id. As with the interactive process obligation created by Section 12940(n), there is nothing in the statute that even suggests the obligation only applies to an employee while the employee is in the good graces of the employer. These obligations appear to apply while the employee is an employee. In other words, the "authority" that appears to "support" Plaintiff's position here is the statute itself.
As to the interactive process claim in Wong, the Ninth Circuit affirmed the district court's pro-employer ruling "because FEHA does not require an employer to reasonably accommodate an employee after termination for a non-discriminatory reason, there is no evidence that Wong requested Pape to engage in the interactive [*10]  process prior to her termination, and she failed to set forth her interactive process claim prior to summary judgment." Id. Defendant's argument here is of course based on the first of those three reasons (though here the issue is not a duty to engage in the interactive process "after termination," but instead whether such a duty exists in between a decision to terminate and the effectuation of that termination). The Ninth Circuit cited two decisions as supporting these three reasons for its affirmance: Nadaf—Rahrov v. Neiman Marcus Group, Inc., 166 Cal.App.4th 952, 983-84, 83 Cal. Rptr. 3d 190 (2008), and Wysinger v. Automobile Club of Southern California, 157 Cal.App.4th 413, 424-25, 69 Cal. Rptr. 3d 1 (2007). See Wong, 370 Fed. Appx. at 873. Again, the Court fails to see anything on the cited pages of Nadaf-Rahrov or Wysinger that support the first of the three reasons Wong gave for affirming the interactive process ruling, at least where the hope is to apply that reasoning to a situation where the plaintiff is actually still employed at the time the defendant argues no reasonable accommodation/interactive process obligation is due.
In Charles, the Ninth Circuit stated that "[t]he undisputed facts establish that Nike had suspended Charles with pay and decided to terminate her for a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason before Charles requested two months of medical leave as disability accommodation. Reasonable [*11]  accommodation does not include reinstatement after termination for a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason." 255 Fed. Appx. at 129. The Ninth Circuit cited Brundage, 57 Cal.App.4th at 239, immediately after this sentence. See Charles, 255 Fed. Appx. at 129. Again, as noted above with respect to Wong, the question is not what the rule is "after termination" - it is whether the accommodation and interactive process obligations apply in between the time a decision to terminate or lay-off is reached and when that decision is implemented.
As a reading of the facts underlying the decision makes clear, Brundage was a reinstatement "after termination" case. See 57 Cal.App.4th at 231, 233. As such, that the plaintiff "want[ing] her position back" was not a reasonable accommodation in that case is neither here nor there for purposes of this case.
Brundage does make clear that "'[r]easonable accommodation' does not include excusing a failure to control a controllable disability or giving an employee a 'second chance' to control the disability in the future." 57 Cal.App.4th at 239. The same comment is revealed in Alamillo, a case with a fact pattern that is much closer to the situation involved here. See 869 F.3d at 922. But to the extent Defendant now believes this would serve as a basis to allow it to prevail on Plaintiff's reasonable accommodation [*12]  claim, there is no reason it could not have made that argument in its briefing, allowing for an orderly back-and-forth on the topic, and a resolution by the Court. Had Defendant paid close enough attention to the arguments Plaintiff was raising in his Opposition with respect to those claims, instead of simply hammering away at the points that it felt were strongest in its favor, it presumably would have argued Alamillo and Brundage then, not now after-the-fact as part of an improper reconsideration motion.3
One topic that the Court would have likely wanted to consider had the issue been properly raised was whether the accommodation in Alamillo - which the Ninth Circuit characterized as "essentially, that [the employer] not terminate [the plaintiff/employee] for prior misconduct," id. - really is an accurate characterization of what Plaintiff asserts is at issue here. Plaintiff sought time off to help him deal with his issues, not a request that he simply not be terminated. Indeed, he did not even know that Defendant was contemplating terminating him at the time he sought time off. Although Defendant eventually allowed him that time off, it allowed for no opportunity to determine whether [*13]  the accommodation had resolved the issue. Moreover, Defendant does not now even attempt to address the Court's parenthetical observation in its ruling — repeatedly quoted by Plaintiff in his Opposition to this motion — that "whether [Defendant] was required to make an effort to accommodate [Plaintiff] prior to his formal depression diagnosis and having gone out on leave" was "a question that would likely also be answered in [Plaintiff's] favor, at least for purposes of the instant motion." Docket No. 139, at pg. 55 of 65.
Finally, the Court denied the summary judgment motion as to Plaintiff's second cause of action for disability-based associational discrimination in violation of FEHA. See Docket No. 140. There remains interesting issues in regards to whether Defendant had an obligation to provide Plaintiff with reasonable accommodation and/or an interactive process vis-à-vis his relationships with the disabled members of his family, which preclude summary judgment as to the fifth and sixth causes of action.
For the above stated reasons, the Court denies Defendant's motion for reconsideration.


End of Document

