Woodell v. Kendall
United States District Court for the Northern District of Florida, Panama City Division
November 22, 2021, Decided; November 22, 2021, Filed
Case No. 5:20cv182-TKW-MJF

Reporter
2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 267145 *; 2021 WL 11680430
KATHRYN WOODELL, Plaintiff, v. FRANK KENDALL,1 in his official capacity as Secretary, U.S. Air Force, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For BARBARA SECRETARY US AIR FORCE BARRETT, Defendant: ELIZABETH BARRY PARKER, USAO, Pensacola, FL.
For KATHRYN WOODELL, Plaintiff: MARIE A MATTOX, MARIE A MATTOX PA - TALLAHASSEE FL, Tallahassee, FL.
For BARBARA SECRETARY US AIR FORCE BARRETT, Defendant: MARY ANN LANE COUCH, USAO, Pensacola, FL.
Judges: T. KENT WETHERELL, II, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: T. KENT WETHERELL, II
Opinion



ORDER GRANTING SUMMARY JUDGMENT
This case is before the Court based on Defendant's motion for summary judgment (Doc. 25). Upon due consideration of the motion, Plaintiff's response in opposition (Doc. 30), Defendant's reply (Doc. 32), and the numerous2 exhibits submitted by the parties (attachments to Docs. 24, 31), the Court finds for the reasons that follow that the motion is due to be granted.

Facts
Plaintiff served in the Air Force from 2006 to 2014, and as a result of her service, she suffers from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, and social anxiety.
In September 2015, Plaintiff was hired as a civilian employee at Tyndall Air Force Base (Tyndall AFB). Her job title was Base Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) and Privacy Manager, and her primary job duties were managing and ensuring compliance with the FOIA [*2]  and Privacy Act programs. She also served as an alternate Base Records Manager (BRM).
Plaintiff was fired in 2016, but she was reinstated in January 2017 after filing an Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) complaint in which she alleged sexual harassment against a supervisor, MSgt. Aminah Meho.
On Plaintiff's first day back at work, her second-level supervisor, Lt. Col. Ofayo Kingsberry, told her in a "hostile" tone that "everyone is replaceable" and instructed her to meet with MSgt. Meho for a "changeover" to discuss what she had missed while she was gone. MSgt. Meho directed Plaintiff to Sgt. Marissa Morrison for the changeover because she (Sgt. Morrison) handled Plaintiff's duties as FOIA and Privacy Manager while she was gone.
Plaintiff claims that MSgt. Meho and others in her chain of command told her co-workers to stay away from her, and she also claims that the co-workers were standoffish, unfriendly, ostracized her, and treated her unprofessionally. According to Plaintiff, this tension made it difficult for her to train employees and effectively communicate with her co-workers.
Plaintiff discussed with her first-level supervisor, Michael Reynolds (Supervisor Reynolds), that she [*3]  felt like she was being treated differently than other employees and that her co-workers would leave rooms when she walked in, glare at her, exclude her from social situations, and generally make her feel unwelcome. She also informed him of her PTSD, anxiety, and depression, and let him know that she would require leave to attend medical appointments. Supervisor Reynolds did nothing to resolve these concerns, and according to Plaintiff, he was generally more friendly and approachable with her co-workers than he was with her.
In February or March of 2017, Plaintiff heard second-hand that MSgt. Meho told another employee that Plaintiff's personnel file was missing and he (MSgt. Meho) suspected Plaintiff may have stolen it.
On March 15, 2017, Plaintiff learned that there had been a privacy breach in December 2016 while she was gone. The following day, she received a memorandum of record regarding the privacy breach. The memorandum noted that the primary Base Privacy Manager failed to timely respond to the incident, but it did not name Plaintiff. During the investigation of the incident, Plaintiff informed the investigator that she had been out on leave when the breach occurred. Plaintiff [*4]  was unaware of any negative impact that the incident or the memorandum had on her employment.
In April 2017, MSgt. James Briney informed Plaintiff that he was now her first-level supervisor. Plaintiff spoke to MSgt. Briney in June 2017 to confirm whether the change had occurred because Supervisor Reynolds was still reflected in the system as her supervisor. Plaintiff was concerned that if her supervisor was not properly identified, it could result impact her annual review because no one would be able to speak about her work.
MSgt. Briney told Plaintiff that he was retiring and that her supervisor was going to be Chief Senior MSgt. Stephanie Williams. Plaintiff complained to Supervisor Reynolds that she believed that MSgt. Williams would be biased against her because of her relationship with MSgt. Meho.
MSgt. Williams never became Plaintiff supervisor. Supervisor Reynolds again became Plaintiff's supervisor after MSgt. Briney's retirement. Later (around July 2018), when the squadron Plaintiff served was reorganized, James Smith (Supervisor Smith) became Plaintiff's supervisor.
During a July 2017 change of command meeting, MSgt. William Komraus mentioned that Lt. Col. Kingsberry's replacement, [*5]  Maj. James Johnson, was "well equipped to deal with our squadron" because he was a mental health technician. Plaintiff believed that this was a reference to her mental health disabilities.
Also, in July 2017, there was a privacy breach incident in which the staging door to Tyndall AFB's sensitive records area was left open. Plaintiff first learned of this incident when she received a call from a co-worker. Plaintiff informed MSgt. Briney of this call as soon as she arrived at work and he told her not to get involved as it was not verified yet whether the door had been left open. It was later determined that the staging door had in fact been left open and the responsible person was never identified. No one was reprimanded for this incident. After this incident Plaintiff requested that she no longer be tasked with BRM duties.
On August 29, 2017, Plaintiff and Sgt. Morrison, the acting base privacy manager at the time, had a confrontation about the staging door incident during which Sgt. Morrison entered Plaintiff's cubicle and demanded that Plaintiff tell her who told Plaintiff about the open staging door. Plaintiff requested that she and Sgt. Morrison discuss the incident somewhere else [*6]  because other employees were around, but Sgt. Morrison told Plaintiff she would not follow her anywhere. Plaintiff then left the cubicle and went directly to MSgt. Williams' office.
Two days later, a meeting about the confrontation between Plaintiff and Sgt. Morrison was held between Plaintiff, Supervisor Reynolds, Maj. Johnson, and others. Plaintiff was asked what had happened during the confrontation and Plaintiff shared her version of events. She also shared that she was concerned about hostility, ostracism, and retaliation in the workplace and how it was affecting her and her job. Additionally, Plaintiff again requested that the BRM duties be removed from her position.
Plaintiff was subsequently relieved of her BRM duties. She was thereafter not included in BRM meetings, but there is no evidence that Plaintiff was excluded from any meetings she needed to attend.
In September 2017, Plaintiff overheard MSgt. Williams say that "I am not worried about her she is a civilian and isn't military anymore," which Plaintiff understood to be a reference to her. Plaintiff also heard that MSgt. Williams told a coworker in a feedback session to limit interaction with Plaintiff. After these events, [*7]  Plaintiff once again raised her concerns of retaliation and hostility in the workplace to Supervisor Reynolds, but he did nothing to change the situation and he told Plaintiff that she was being paranoid.
Towards the end of September 2017, Plaintiff was tasked by Airman First Class (A1C) Kelsey Powell to do a privacy review. Plaintiff did not believe that A1C Powell was the proper person to be assigning her tasks, but A1C Powell told her that Sgt. Morrison told her to assign Plaintiff the task. Plaintiff believed that this occurred because MSgt. Williams had told Sgt. Morrison to avoid Plaintiff, but Sgt. Morrison explained that A1C Powell was assigned the task so she could learn the program.
On September 22, 2017, Plaintiff submitted her first formal request for accommodations for her disabilities along with a letter from her psychologist, Dr. Neda Koehnmann. The request sought relocation to a private office with a door for privacy and window to allow natural light; flexible scheduling to accommodate her medical appointments and triggers; permission to record meetings, feedbacks, trainings, and to be provided meeting minutes specifically involving workplace issues and trainings.
In October [*8]  2017, Supervisor Reynolds asked that Plaintiff clarify what would best meet her needs and she did so. Thereafter, Plaintiff was provided a flexible work schedule (every other Friday off), relocated to a private office with a window and door, and she was told by Supervisor Reynolds that she would receive minutes of meetings in which she was given tasks or follow-up was expected from her. Plaintiff confirmed that her needs had been satisfactorily accommodated.
In November 2017, Plaintiff learned that she had not been informed about lost BRM records, and because Sgt. Morrison was to deploy soon, Plaintiff was concerned she may need to take over BRM duties and would have needed to have been up to speed on the missing records. Once Sgt. Morrison deployed, Plaintiff received calls asking about BRM, and after consulting with Supervisor Reynolds about the calls, she was told to refer any further communications about it to himself or MSgt. Williams.
In March 2018, Plaintiff was assigned to investigate some missing assets. Plaintiff was told that several individuals (including MSgt. Williams) had asked that she be removed from the investigation, but they were told that Plaintiff was properly handling [*9]  the investigation. Plaintiff was not removed from the investigation and completed it.
On April 20, 2018, Plaintiff requested records from a commander for an investigation but was told that the records could not be found. After Plaintiff "appealed," the records were found and provided to her. Plaintiff completed the investigation, but she claims that the appeal increased her anxiety in the workplace.
On May 7, 2018, Plaintiff received her midterm feedback review from Supervisor Reynolds. He brought no performance issues to her attention, but when Plaintiff again raised concerns about how she was treated by coworkers, Supervisor Reynolds suggested that it could have something to do with Plaintiff's friendship with a coworker who had complained about conditions in the workplace.
Plaintiff was not provided minutes of the meeting with Supervisor Reynolds, and she had only been provided one email of meeting minutes pursuant to her reasonable accommodation request since November 2017. That email was from a staff review with Maj. Johnson.
On May 17, 2018, Plaintiff received her final appraisal with an overall rating of "fully successful." This was the same rating Plaintiff received in 2017, and [*10]  in both years, Plaintiff received cash and time-off awards.
Plaintiff scored lower (but still "fully successful") on her management of the Privacy Act program than her other responsibilities. Plaintiff was first told that the lower score was the result of her not performing BRM duties, but she was later told that she was marked down one because of a lack of communication between her and her supervisors.
The day after receiving the appraisal, Plaintiff emailed Supervisor Reynolds expressing her confusion over the scoring and reiterating her concerns about the workplace. Supervisor Reynolds never followed up on this email.
On May 30, 2018, Plaintiff contacted the Tyndall AFB EEO Office. She formally filed a complaint on July 13, 2018, and she amended the complaint on October 3, 2018 and February 19, 2019.
In July 2018, Plaintiff submitted a "Schedule A" request for reassignment to seven positions at Tyndall AFB.3 Schedule A hiring authority allows federal government agencies to hire excepted-service employees with disabilities without going through the normal hiring process, but it does not guarantee the applicant will be selected or provide a hiring preference.
Plaintiff's Schedule A application materials [*11]  were forwarded to the civilian personnel officer at Tyndall AFB, Donna Dempsey. Plaintiff was referred for all the positions she applied, but she was not selected for any of the positions. There is no evidence that the selecting officials for those positions spoke with any of Plaintiff's supervisors or had any knowledge of Plaintiff's EEO complaints, and the evidence shows that the persons selected for the positions were better qualified than Plaintiff.
On July 23, 2018, Plaintiff submitted a second formal request for reasonable accommodation based on her disabilities. The request sought reassignment and it was accompanied by a letter from Dr. Koehnmann.
The following day, Supervisor Smith asked Plaintiff to copy him on any emails to base leadership. This request was not unique to Plaintiff, nor was it unique to Supervisor Smith. Supervisor Reynolds had also asked Plaintiff to copy him on correspondence with base leadership regarding Privacy Act and FOIA matters, and both he and Supervisor Smith asked other employees to copy them on their correspondence with base leadership.
Reassignment was considered an accommodation of last resort at Tyndall AFB, so on July 30, 2018, Ms. Dempsey requested additional [*12]  medical documentation from Plaintiff to justify that request. Plaintiff responded three weeks later, on August 20, with another letter from Dr. Koehnmann. Three days later, Ms. Dempsey informed Plaintiff that the request would be further handled by Rachel Sugrue because Ms. Dempsey was about to go on leave.
Plaintiff reached out to Ms. Sugrue on August 23, and again on September 4, to let her know about the supplemental letter from Dr. Koehnmann. Ms. Sugrue responded on September 6 and explained that the supplemental letter from Dr. Koehnmann was insufficient and that the interactive process for her accommodation request would be paused until more detail was provided about Plaintiff's medical condition and needs.
On September 18 and again on October 1, 2018, Ms. Sugrue tried to schedule a teleconference with Dr. Koehnmann to get additional information about Plaintiff's condition and what accommodations she needed. She was not able to get the teleconference scheduled and she never received any additional information from Plaintiff or Dr. Koehnmann.
On October 8, 2018 Tyndall AFB was evacuated in anticipation of Hurricane Michael. The hurricane devastated the base and the surrounding area. [*13] 
Plaintiff evacuated to Mississippi with her family. Her home was heavily damaged and she no longer had childcare for her 2-year-old son. As a result, Plaintiff worked remotely intermittently after the hurricane.
On December 28, 2018, Plaintiff received a text from Supervisor Smith informing her that she would need to return to work.
On January 2, 2019, Plaintiff emailed Supervisor Smith that she would not be able to return to work as her family was still on evacuation status, her home was unlivable, and she still had no childcare for her son.
Supervisor Smith forwarded the email to Maj. Johnson to ask whether Plaintiff should be on "admin leave" since she could not return. Maj. Johnson responded affirmatively and told him to "[w]ork with her as best you can," and Supervisor Smith forwarded that message to Plaintiff.
The following week, on January 11, Plaintiff emailed Supervisor Smith that she still had no childcare, asked if telework or a flex schedule were available, and noted that she was open to taking administrative leave. Maj. Johnson advised Supervisor Smith that Plaintiff could not telework on sensitive matters, but he directed Supervisor Smith to "[w]ork with her as much as you [*14]  can" and try to findn other non-sensitive work that Plaintiff could do from home for a week instead of taking leave.
On January 23, 2019 Plaintiff submitted a letter of resignation to Supervisor Smith. Her resignation was effective the following week, on February 1.
The resignation letter cited "personal reasons" (specifically, the hurricane damage to Plaintiff's home and the lack of available childcare) as the reason for Plaintiff's resignation. Plaintiff gave the same explanation to Dr. Koehnemann, as reflected in contemporaneous treatment notes.4 However, Plaintiff now claims that her voluntary resignation was actually a constructive discharge and that the "real reason" for her resignation was because she felt that the work environment would remain negative and that she was physically ill at the thought of returning.
On May 29, 2020, the Tyndall AFB EEO Office issued a final agency decision finding "no discrimination" based on the claims asserted by Plaintiff in the EEO complaint filed in July 2018.

Procedural History
In July 2020, Plaintiff filed a two-count complaint against Defendant in this Court asserting claims of disability discrimination (Count I) and retaliation (Count II) under [*15]  the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.5 Defendant filed an answer denying the alleged discrimination and raising various affirmative defenses, including failure to exhaust administrative remedies.
After discovery closed, Defendant filed a motion for summary judgment on all claims alleged in the complaint. The motion is ripe for a ruling, and no hearing is necessary to rule on the motion.

Summary Judgment Standard
"The court shall grant summary judgment if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). An issue of fact is material if it would change the outcome of the litigation, and a dispute about a material fact is genuine if, when viewed in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, the record evidence could lead a reasonable jury to find for the non-moving party. See Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248 (1986). "For factual issues to be considered genuine, they must have a real basis in the record." Boone v. Gaxiola, 665 F. App'x 772, 774 (11th Cir. 2016).

Analysis
Defendant argues that he is entitled to summary judgment because the undisputed facts show that (1) most of the claims asserted in the complaint were not administratively exhausted, and (2) on the merits, Plaintiff cannot establish a prima facie case of disability [*16]  discrimination or retaliation. Each argument will be addressed in turn.
Exhaustion of Administrative Remedies
Defendant argues that all claims based on acts that occurred before April 15, 2018—which is 45 days before Plaintiff contacted the EEO Office on May 30, 2018—were not properly exhausted. Plaintiff responds that all her claims were exhausted based on her 2016 EEO complaint and the continuing violation doctrine. The Court agrees with Defendant.
The Rehabilitation Act prohibits federal agencies from discriminating in employment against individuals with disabilities. See 29 U.S.C. §794(a); Shiver v. Chertoff, 549 F.3d 1342, 1344 (11th Cir. 2008). Under the Act, employees are required to initiate contact with an EEO counselor within 45 days of any alleged discriminatory act or retaliatory conduct. See 29 C.F.R. §1614.105. Generally, where an employee does not satisfy the 45-day requirement, the discrimination claim is barred for failure exhaust administrative remedies. See Fleck v. Sec'y of U.S. Dep't of Transp., 826 F. App'x 782, 784 (11th Cir. 2020).
"Each alleged discriminatory act . . . constitutes a separate unlawful employment action that starts a new clock for filing charges based on that act." Id. (internal citations omitted); see also Nat'l R.R. Passenger Corp. v. Morgan, 536 U.S. 101, 114 (2002) ("Discrete acts such as termination, failure to promote, denial of transfer, or refusal to hire . . . constitute[] a separate [*17]  actionable 'unlawful employment practice.'" (quoting 42 U.S.C. §2000e-2)). However, even if a discrete discriminatory act is not actionable because it is time-barred, it can be used "as background evidence in support of a timely claim." Morgan, 536 U.S. at 113.
Plaintiff's July 2018 EEO complaint details alleged acts of retaliation and discrimination dating back to January 2017 when Plaintiff returned to work after settling her 2016 EEO complaint. However, any acts that occurred before April 15, 2018, are time barred and can only be considered as "background." Thus, only the following claims have been exhausted: withholding of records on April 20, 2018; exclusion from BRM meetings in April 2018; denial of Plaintiff's reasonable accommodations for notes in April and May 2018; downgrade on Plaintiff's performance evaluation in May 2018; requirement to copy supervisor on emails in July 2018; denial of reassignment in July 2018; failure to permit telework in 2019; and alleged constructive discharge in January 2019.
The Court did not overlook Plaintiff's argument that all the alleged discriminatory acts asserted in the complaint were properly exhausted by virtue of the 2016 EEO compliant and the continuing violation doctrine. This [*18]  argument is unpersuasive for two reasons.
First, the Eleventh Circuit has explained that the Supreme Court's ruling in Morgan "essentially rejected the 'continuing violation doctrine' and simplified the law by allowing courts to view allegations of hostile work environment as a 'single unlawful employment practice.'" Shields v. Fort James Corp., 305 F.3d 1280, 1282 (11th Cir. 2002). Second, to the extent the continuing violation doctrine is still viable, it does not apply here because Plaintiff's complaint is based on discrete acts of alleged disability discrimination and retaliation, and it does not assert a hostile work environment claim.
On the second point, although Plaintiff argues that the complaint "makes clear" that she experienced a "hostile work environment," see Doc. 30, at 24, the complaint did not specifically assert a hostile work environment claim and "[a] plaintiff may not amend her complaint through argument in a brief opposing summary judgment." Gilmour v. Gates, McDonald & Co., 382 F.3d 1312, 1315 (11th Cir. 2004). Moreover, as cogently explained by another district court,
A hostile work environment claim stands on its own. The Court and opposing parties should not have to guess whether a hostile work environment claim is hiding in a discrimination count. Plaintiff should have articulated a separate count [*19]  in her complaint alleging the hostile work environment claim.
Copeland v. Ga. Dep't of Juv. Just., 2013 WL 1296778, at *13 (M.D. Ga. Mar. 27, 2013).
Accordingly, the Court finds that Plaintiff failed to exhaust her administrative remedies on the claims asserted in the complaint except as indicated above.
Merits of Plaintiff's Claims
Plaintiff asserts claims for disability discrimination (based on disparate treatment and failure to provide reasonable accommodations) and retaliation. Each claim will be discussed in turn.
Where, as here, there is no direct evidence of discrimination (or retaliation),6 the plaintiff's claims must be analyzed under the McDonnell Douglas 7 burden-shifting framework. See Center v. Sec'y, Dep't of Homeland Sec., Customs & Border Prot. Agency, 895 F.3d 1295, 1303 (11th Cir. 2018). Under that framework, if the plaintiff establishes a prima facie case (the elements of which vary based on the claim being asserted), the burden shifts to the employer to provide a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the challenged employment action. See Forsyth v. Univ. of Alabama, Bd. of Trustees, 2021 WL 4075728, at *4 (11th Cir. Sept. 8, 2021). If the employer meets that burden of production, the burden shifts back to the plaintiff to present "actual evidence" that the proffered reason is pretextual and that discrimination (or retaliation) was the real reason for the challenged action. Id.

Disability Discrimination — Disparate Treatment
To establish a prima facie [*20]  case of disability discrimination under the Rehabilitation Act based on disparate treatment, Plaintiff must show that (1) she has a disability; (2) she is otherwise qualified for the position; and (3) she was subjected to unlawful discrimination as the result of her disability. Id. (quoting Garrett v. Univ. of Ala. at Birmingham Bd. of Trs., 507 F.3d 1306, 1310 (11th Cir. 2007)). To establish the third element (which is the only element challenged by Defendant), Plaintiff must show that she has suffered an "adverse employment action" because of her disability. See Ellis v. England, 432 F.3d 1321, 1326 (11th Cir. 2005).
To establish an adverse employment action, "an employee must show a serious and material change in the terms, conditions, or privileges of employment ... as viewed by a reasonable person in the circumstances." Porterfield v. Soc. Sec. Admin., 2021 WL 3856035, at *5 (11th Cir. Aug. 30, 2021) (quoting Davis v. Town of Lake Park, 245 F.3d 1232, 1239 (11th Cir. 2001)). The "asserted impact cannot be speculative and must at least have a tangible adverse effect on the plaintiff's employment." Id. "The employee's subjective view of the significance and adversity of the employer's action is not controlling; the employment action must be materially adverse as viewed by a reasonable person in the circumstances.'" Alvarez v. Lakeland Area Mass Transit Dist., 2020 WL 3473286, at *11 (M.D. Fla. June 25, 2020) (quoting Davis, 245 F.3d at 1239).
Additionally, the plaintiff must establish that the adverse employment action was taken "solely by reason of her disability." Porterfield, 2021 WL 3856035, at *4 (quoting Schwarz v. City of Treasure Island, 554 F.3d 1201, 1212 n.6 (11th Cir. 2008)). "[I]t is not enough [*21]  [under the Rehabilitation Act] for a plaintiff to demonstrate that an adverse employment action was based partly on his disability." Ellis, 432 F.3d at 1326; see also Porterfield, 2021 WL 3856035, at *5 ("We have previously held . . . that a plaintiff cannot prevail if she shows that her employer based the adverse employment action partially on her disability and partially on other factors.").
Here, Defendant argues that none of the exhausted claims of discrimination amount to adverse employment actions. The Court agrees because, despite Plaintiff's argument that "the hostile treatment she received from coworkers and leadership greatly impacted her ability to actually perform her job duties" and led to her constructive discharge, Doc. 30, at 28, there is no evidence from which a jury could find that the discrete acts of alleged discrimination amounted to a serious and material change in the terms, conditions, or privileges of employment. See Center, 895 F.3d at 1304 (finding that plaintiff's conclusory allegations that officials were unfriendly to him and knew that something wrong was happening to him, without "specific supporting facts" had no probative value from which a jury could find a discrimination claim.).
For example, there is no evidence that the allegedly withheld records [*22]  (which Plaintiff was able to obtain after an "appeal") had any tangible impact on her employment. Similarly, there is no evidence that the failure to provide Plaintiff with meeting notes in April or May 2018 or the request that Plaintiff copy supervisors on her emails in July 2018 negatively affected her employment in any tangible way. Likewise, no reasonable jury could find that Plaintiff's exclusion from BRM meetings was an adverse employment action because, once the BRM duties were removed from Plaintiff's job responsibilities (at her request), there is no evidence that she needed to be at the meetings or that her absence from the meetings negatively affected her work in any way.
A negative performance evaluation can be an adverse employment action. See Crawford v. Carroll, 529 F.3d 961, 974 (11th Cir. 2008) (holding that an employee suffered an adverse employment action because she received an unfavorable performance review that affected her eligibility for a merit pay increase). However, here, there is no evidence from which a jury could find that Plaintiff was adversely impacted by the "downgrade" of her 2018 performance evaluation because she received an overall rating of "fully successful" along with cash and time-off awards and, [*23]  as explained by Ms. Dempsey, "[a] 'Fully Successful' versus 'Outstanding' performance appraisal does not affect an employee's step increase or within-grade increase."
Likewise, although a constructive discharge can be an adverse employment action, in order to establish that a voluntary resignation amounted to a constructive discharge, the plaintiff must show that "the work environment and conditions of employment were so unbearable that a reasonable person in that person's position would be compelled to resign." Bryant v. Jones, 575 F.3d 1281, 1298 (11th Cir. 2009) (quoting Virgo v. Riviera Beach Assoc., Ltd., 30 F.3d 1350, 1363 (11th Cir.1994)); see also Jones v. Allstate Ins. Co., 707 F. App'x 641, 646 (11th Cir. 2017) (explaining that to survive summary judgment on a constructive discharge claim, the plaintiff must "produce substantial evidence that conditions were intolerable." (quoting Akins v. Fulton Cty., 420 F.3d 1293, 1302 (11th Cir. 2005))). This determination is governed by an objective standard, not the employee's subjective feelings. See Boyle v. City of Pell City, 866 F.3d 1280, 1289 (11th Cir. 2017).
Here, even though Plaintiff's resignation letter cited lack of childcare as the basis for her decision to resign (and she told the same thing to her psychologist at the time of her resignation), Plaintiff now argues that she was "unable to escape her work environment—one that made her physically ill each day because of the anxiety and stress it caused her—she had no choice but to [*24]  resign." Doc. 30, at 27. However, at the time of her resignation, Plaintiff had not been physically working at Tyndall AFB for over three months. Moreover, even in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, the record reflects that at the time of her resignation, Defendant was still working with Plaintiff to determine what matters she could work on from home and she was offered administrative leave as an alternative to resignation. Accordingly, on this record, no reasonable juror would find that Plaintiff's work environment and conditions at the time of her resignation were sufficiently intolerable to support a constructive discharge claim, nor that her work environment at the time was so unbearable that she had no choice but to resign.
The Court did not overlook Plaintiff's argument that discrimination can be inferred from the fact that she was treated less favorably than her non-disabled coworkers. However, as Defendant persuasively argues (Doc. 25, at 33-35), none of the of the alleged "comparators" identified by Plaintiff to support this claim were, in fact, similarly situated to Plaintiff.
Nor has the Court overlooked Plaintiff's argument that discrimination could be inferred from a [*25]  "convincing mosaic" of circumstantial evidence. The Eleventh Circuit has held that in the absence of a similarly situated comparator, a plaintiff can present a convincing mosaic that "may be shown by evidence that demonstrates, among other things, (1) suspicious timing, ambiguous statements ..., and other bits and pieces from which an inference of discriminatory intent might be drawn, (2) systematically better treatment of similarly situated employees, and (3) that the employer's justification is pretextual." Lewis v. City of Union City, Georgia, 934 F.3d 1169, 1185 (11th Cir. 2019) (internal quotations omitted); see also Lewis v. Sch. Bd. of Palm Beach Cty., Fla., 850 F. App'x 674, 680 (11th Cir. 2021) (finding a convincing mosaic of race discrimination where a white plaintiff's employment was not renewed after his employer mentioned staff should reflect student body, the study body was largely black, plaintiff was replaced by a black woman, and plaintiff was offered a recommendation to a school with "different demographics").
Here, Plaintiff argues that a convincing mosaic can be inferred because she "was treated far worse than her non-disabled coworkers" and "[l]eadership called her a problem and crazy and instructed her coworkers to stay away from her." Doc. 30, at 29. However, the evidence does not support this claim because irrespective [*26]  the petty slights that Plaintiff experienced (or perceived) from leadership or her coworkers, it is undisputed that Plaintiff was provided numerous accommodations over the course of her employment and that her supervisors were still engaged in the process of trying to "work with her" about teleworking when she resigned.
Accordingly, Defendant is entitled to summary judgment on the disparate treatment claim in Count I of the complaint.

Disability Discrimination — Failure to Accommodate
Turning to Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim, in order to establish a prima facie case, Plaintiff must show that "(1) she is disabled; (2) she was a qualified individual at the relevant time, meaning she could perform the essential functions of the job in question with or without reasonable accommodations; and (3) she was discriminated against by way of the defendant's failure to provide a reasonable accommodation." Solloway v. Clayton, 738 F. App'x 985, 987 (11th Cir. 2018) (internal quotations omitted). Here, only the third element is in dispute.
A reasonable accommodation allows an employee to "perform the job's essential functions." Frazier v. Sec'y, Dep't of Health & Hum. Servs., 710 F. App'x 864, 869 (11th Cir. 2017). A reasonable accommodation need not be exactly in the manner the employee requests, nor must it be "the maximum accommodation [*27]  or every conceivable accommodation possible." Stewart v. Happy Herman's Cheshire Bridge, Inc., 117 F.3d 1278, 1285 (11th Cir. 1997) (quoting Lewis v. Zilog, Inc., 908 F. Supp. 931, 947 (N.D. Ga. 1995)); see also Curry v. Sec'y, Dep't of Veterans Affs., 518 F. App'x 957, 964 (11th Cir. 2013).
"The duty to provide a reasonable accommodation is not triggered . . . unless a specific demand for an accommodation has been made by the employee." Hudson v. Tyson Farms, Inc., 769 F. App'x 911, 918 (11th Cir. 2019). Even after a request is made, the employer may engage in an "interactive process" with the employee to determine a reasonable accommodation, and if the employee fails to identify an accommodation that would be reasonable, no liability attaches to the employer for failing to engage in an interactive process. See Kassa v. Synovus Fin. Corp., 800 F. App'x 804, 809 (11th Cir. 2020) (citing Frazier-White v. Gee, 818 F.3d 1249, 1257-58 (11th Cir. 2016)); see also Everett v. Grady Mem'l Hosp. Corp., 703 F. App'x 938, 946 (11th Cir. 2017).
Here, Plaintiff claims that Defendant failed to accommodate her disability (1) by not providing meeting minutes as agreed in response to her first request for accommodations, (2) by denying her request for reassignment in July 2018, and (3) by not permitting her to telework in 2019.
With respect to the first point, this claim is only exhausted with respect to the meeting with Supervisor Reynolds related to her performance review in May 2018 and there is no evidence that Plaintiff was responsible for any tasks or follow-up based on that meeting. Accordingly, the accommodation provided to Plaintiff based on her first request did not require [*28]  that she be provided minutes of that meeting.
With respect to the second point, even if a jury could find that Plaintiff's Schedule A request was a formal reasonable accommodation request, there is no evidence from which a jury could find that it was mishandled in any way or that the failure to hire Plaintiff for any of the positions she applied to amounts to a denial of a request for a reasonable accommodation. See MacDonald v. Cohen, 233 F.3d 648, 653 (1st Cir. 2000) ("[U]nder the Schedule A regulations, handicapped persons who qualify are not required to be given preference. . . . Schedule A provides the agency a means to avoid competitive placement but does not impose an obligation to use this authority in any specific case."). Likewise, there is no evidence from which a jury could find that Plaintiff was denied a reasonable accommodation with respect to her formal request for reassignment in July 2018 because the undisputed evidence shows that Defendant was actively engaged in the interactive process (and awaiting additional information from Plaintiff) to determine what accommodation Plaintiff needed when Hurricane Michael disrupted operations at Tyndall AFB.8 See Stewart, 117 F.3d at 1287 (finding in the ADA context that "[l]iability simply cannot arise [*29]  . . . when an employer does not obstruct an informal interactive process; makes reasonable efforts to communicate with the employee and provide accommodations based on the information it possesses; and the employee's actions cause a breakdown in the interactive process."); Walker v. Fla., 2014 WL 1017933, at *4 (N.D. Fla. Mar. 17, 2014) ("[T]he duty to make a reasonable accommodation does not simply spring from the fact that the handicapped person wants such an accommodation made. Defendants must instead have . . . the ability to conduct a meaningful review of the requested accommodation." (quoting United States v. Hialeah Hous. Auth., 418 F. App'x 872, 876 (11th Cir. 2011))).
With respect to the third point, there is no evidence from which a jury could find that Plaintiff's request to telework was a formal request for a reasonable accommodation based on her disability, rather than her lack of childcare. Moreover, even if Plaintiff's request to work from home could be considered a disability-based request, there is no evidence from which a jury could find that Defendant had definitively denied that request because Plaintiff was given permission to work from home on matters that did not involve sensitive privacy or FOIA issues and her supervisors were continuing to "work with her" on her request when she submitted her letter [*30]  of resignation.
Accordingly, Defendant is entitled to summary judgment on the failure to accommodate claim in Count I of the complaint.

Retaliation
In Count II of the complaint, Plaintiff alleges that Defendant retaliated against her based on her EEO complaints in 2016 and 2018. Defendant responds Plaintiff cannot establish that she suffered any adverse action that is causally related to her complaints. The Court agrees with Defendant.
Retaliation claims under the Rehabilitation Act are subject to the same framework as Title VIII retaliation claims. See Burgos-Stefanelli v. Sec'y, U.S. Dep't of Homeland Sec., 410 F. App'x 243, 245 (11th Cir. 2011). Thus, to establish a prima facie case of retaliation, Plaintiff must show that "(1) that she engaged in statutorily protected activity, (2) that she suffered an adverse action, and (3) that the adverse action was causally related to the protected activity." Gogel v. Kia Motors Mfg. of Georgia, Inc., 967 F.3d 1121, 1134-35 (11th Cir. 2020) (quoting Jefferson, 891 F.3d at 924) (internal quotations omitted).
An "adverse action" in the context of a retaliation claim is one where the employer's actions are such that they could "dissuade a reasonable worker from making or supporting a charge of discrimination." Palmer v. McDonald, 624 F. App'x 699, 702-03 (11th Cir. 2015) (citing Burlington N. & Santa Fe Ry. Co. v. White, 548 U.S. 53, 57 (2006)). Instances of "petty slights, minor annoyances, [or] simple lack of good manners" that often occur in the workplace are not enough to deter an objectively [*31]  reasonable worker. Id. (internal citation omitted).
A causal relationship between the adverse action and protected activity exists so long as they are not "completely unrelated." Gooden v. Internal Revenue Serv., 679 F. App'x 958, 968 (11th Cir. 2017) (quoting Meeks v. Computer Assocs. Int'l, 15 F.3d 1013, 1021 (11th Cir. 1994)). Although temporal proximity can provide an inference of a causal relationship it "must be very close to suggest causation in a ... retaliation case." Johnson v. Miami-Dade Cty., 948 F.3d 1318, 1327-28 (11th Cir. 2020) (quoting Jefferson, 891 F.3d at 926).
Here, even if the actions between April 2018 and January 2019 that were properly exhausted could be considered adverse actions, there is no evidence from which a jury could find that those actions are causally related to Plaintiff's 2016 EEO complaint. Moreover, none of the alleged discrimination that occurred before Plaintiff filed her 2018 EEO complaint could be causally related to that complaint. See Palmer, 624 F. App'x at 703 (finding no causal relationship where allegedly retaliatory incidences occurred before the protected activity).
With respect to the alleged discrimination that occurred after Plaintiff's 2018 EEO compliant, there is no evidence from which a jury could find that the alleged denial of reassignment, failure to permit telework, or constructive discharge were causally related to that complaint in any way. Moreover, there is no evidence that [*32]  these actions were pretextual because it is undisputed that the interactive process with respect to the reassignment broke down based on Plaintiff's failure to provide follow-up information and Hurricane Michael; Plaintiff's supervisors had allowed her to telework on non-sensitive matters for months after the hurricane and they were continuing to "work with her" to find a long-term solution when she resigned; and Plaintiff's resignation letter and her psychologist's contemporaneous notes reflect that Plaintiff was not "constructively discharged," but rather she resigned for personal reasons unrelated to any discrimination or retaliation. Likewise, there is no evidence from which a jury could find that the requirement to copy supervisors on all e-mails would have deterred a reasonable worker from brining her claims,9 nor is there evidence from which a jury could find that the fact that Plaintiff's co-workers were "standoffish" and instructed not to interact with her were anything more than "petty slights, minor annoyances, and simple lack of good manners" that are not enough to deter a reasonable worker from pursuing a charge of discrimination.
Accordingly, Defendant is entitled to summary [*33]  judgment on the retaliation claims in the Count II of the complaint.

Conclusion
In sum, for the reasons stated above, it is ORDERED that:
1. Defendant's motion for summary judgment (Doc. 25) is GRANTED.
2. The Clerk shall enter judgment in favor of Defendant and close the case file.
DONE and ORDERED this 22nd day of November, 2021.
T. Kent Wetherell, II
T. KENT WETHERELL, II
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

