Brown v. Stoddard
United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
August 21, 2019, Filed
No. 18-1943

Reporter
2019 U.S. App. LEXIS 25043 *
DAVID BROWN, Plaintiff-Appellant, v. CATHLEEN STODDARD, Acting Warden, et al., Defendants-Appellees, and JOHN PRELESNIK, Warden, et al., Defendants.
Notice: NOT RECOMMENDED FOR FULL-TEXT PUBLICATION. SIXTH CIRCUIT RULE 28 LIMITS CITATION TO SPECIFIC SITUATIONS. PLEASE SEE RULE 28 BEFORE CITING IN A PROCEEDING IN A COURT IN THE SIXTH CIRCUIT. IF CITED, A COPY MUST BE SERVED ON OTHER PARTIES AND THE COURT. THIS NOTICE IS TO BE PROMINENTLY DISPLAYED IF THIS DECISION IS REPRODUCED.
Prior History:  [*1] ON APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE WESTERN DISTRICT OF MICHIGAN.
Brown v. Prelesnik, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 37369 (W.D. Mich., Mar. 23, 2016)
Counsel: David Brown, Plaintiff - Appellant, Pro se, Ionia, MI.
For [unknown] Lahr, C.O., DANIEL H. HEYNS, Director of MDOC, Michigan Department of Corrections, P. SHOARD, Sergeants, Nannette Norwood, D.W., Erica Huss, D.W., Unknown Gilkey, Rum, Jody Lebarre, Hum, CATHLEEN STODDARD, Acting Warden, JOHN PRELESNIK, Warden, Defendants, Defendants - Appellees: Michael Richard Dean, Assistant Attorney General, Office of the Attorney General, Lansing, MI.
Judges: Before: ROGERS, SUTTON, and READLER, Circuit Judges.
Opinion



ORDER
In 2012, David Brown sued the Michigan Department of Corrections ("MDOC"), along with multiple MDOC officials, for alleged statutory and constitutional violations that occurred while he was incarcerated in Michigan's Ionia Correctional Facility. Among other claims, Brown alleged that the defendants failed to accommodate his degenerative eye condition in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") and the Rehabilitation Act ("RA"), and that multiple defendants violated his Eighth Amendment right to be free from cruel and unusual punishment under 42 U.S.C. § 1983. The district court dismissed Brown's claims against twelve defendants [*2]  for failure to state a claim, including Cathleen Stoddard (former warden at Ionia), Erika Huss (former deputy warden at Ionia), Nannette Norwood (former deputy warden at Ionia), and Bo Gilkey (former resident unit manager at Ionia). The court subsequently granted summary judgment to Jody LeBarre (Ionia's health unit manager). Brown's ADA and RA claims against four defendants went to trial, and the jury found in favor of the defendants. On appeal, Brown challenges the district court's pre-trial dismissal of his claims against Stoddard, Huss, Norwood, and Gilkey, along with the district court's grant of summary judgment to LeBarre. None of Brown's arguments succeeds.
Brown identifies the following as claims that should go forward against Stoddard, Huss, Norwood, Gilkey, and LeBarre. First, Brown alleges that Stoddard was made aware of Brown's need for special accommodations through the grievance process and personal conversations but failed to either modify Ionia's facilities and policies or recommend that Brown be transferred to a facility that could accommodate him. Second, Brown claims that he made Huss aware that Ionia did not properly accommodate his needs under the ADA and the RA, [*3]  and that Huss punished Brown for filing grievances concerning Ionia's lack of handicap accommodations by placing him in a cell next to a mentally ill prisoner who would throw urine and feces at Brown's door and squirt it through the air vents. Third, Brown asserts that he informed Norwood during a grievance interview that Ionia did not accommodate his needs under the ADA and the RA, and provided supporting documentation. Norwood allegedly disregarded Brown's complaints, which led to Brown slipping in the shower, declining to shower for 288 days, and developing a rash. Fourth, Brown contends that he provided Gilkey with documentation of his need for accommodations, but Gilkey disregarded Brown's needs by failing to request that Brown be transferred to another facility. Fifth, Brown alleges that LeBarre reviewed Brown's accommodations sheets but disregarded his need for ramps, elevators, and barrier free housing, took away his walking stick, and refused to indicate on Brown's transfer sheet that Brown cannot be housed at Ionia due to his medical needs.
The district court properly dismissed Brown's claims against Stoddard, Huss, Norwood, and Gilkey for failure to state a claim under FED. R. CIV. PROC. 12(b)(6), [*4]  for the reasons given by the district court. See Brown v. Prelesnik, et al., No. 1:12-cv-873, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 30361, 2013 WL 838289, at *4-8, *16-17 (W.D. Mich. Mar. 6, 2013). Stoddard, Huss, Norwood, and Gilkey were allegedly aware of Ionia's handicap inaccessibility and failed to intervene on behalf of Brown, after which Brown suffered injuries to his neck and back after slipping in the shower on multiple occasions. However, a mere awareness of wrongdoing is insufficient to establish liability under § 1983. "Supervisory liability under § 1983 does not attach when it is premised on a mere failure to act; it 'must be based on active unconstitutional behavior.'" Greene v. Barber, 310 F.3d 889, 899 (6th Cir. 2002) (quoting Bass v. Robinson, 167 F.3d 1041, 1048 (6th Cir. 1999)). "Because § 1983 liability cannot be imposed under a theory of respondeat superior, proof of personal involvement is required to incur personal liability." Grinter v. Knight, 532 F.3d 567, 575 (6th Cir. 2008) (quoting Miller v. Calhoun County, 408 F.3d 803, 817 n.3 (6th Cir. 2005)). Brown does not allege that the defendants were personally involved in causing Brown's slip-and-fall injuries, and Brown's Amended Complaint therefore does not state a claim against the defendants based on their awareness of Ionia's handicap inaccessibility.
To the extent that the defendants were allegedly aware of Brown's exclusion from certain programs and activities at Ionia, their failure to intervene does not amount to an Eighth Amendment violation for which [*5]  the defendants would be liable. Although Brown's brief summarily asserts that various defendants were deliberately indifferent to his medical needs, his Amended Complaint does not allege circumstances in which the defendants disregarded a risk of harm serious enough to violate the Eighth Amendment. To state a claim for an Eighth Amendment violation against a prison official, an inmate must assert the following: (1) that the official failed to protect the inmate from a "risk of harm" that "must be objectively sufficiently serious" from the perspective of a layperson, Mingus v. Butler, 591 F.3d 474, 480 (6th Cir. 2010) (quoting Harrison v. Ash, 539 F.3d 510, 518 (6th Cir. 2008)); and (2) "that the official acted with 'deliberate indifference' to inmate health or safety," Mingus, 591 F.3d at 480 (quoting Farmer v. Brennan, 511 U.S. 825, 834, 114 S. Ct. 1970, 128 L. Ed. 2d 811 (1994)). Merely depriving Brown of reading and writing assistance and of the opportunity to participate in prison programs is not enough to satisfy the first requirement for an Eighth Amendment claim. "[A] prison official cannot be found liable under the Eighth Amendment for denying an inmate humane conditions of confinement unless the official knows of and disregards an excessive risk to inmate health or safety." Farmer, 511 U.S. at 837. Brown has not claimed that he experienced such an excessive risk to his health or safety as a result of the defendants' actions, and his allegations are therefore [*6]  insufficient to state an Eighth Amendment claim against Stoddard, Huss, Norwood, and Gilkey.
On appeal, Brown cites the ADA and the RA in his discussion of the allegations against Stoddard, Huss, and Norwood, suggesting that he seeks to challenge the dismissal of his ADA and RA claims against those defendants. However, Brown's Amended Complaint expressly sued Stoddard, Huss, and Norwood in their individual capacities, and neither the ADA nor the RA permits suits against defendants in their individual capacities. See Brown, No. 12-cv-00873, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 30361, 2013 WL 838289, at *17; see also Everson v. Leis, 556 F.3d 484, 501 n.7 (6th Cir. 2009); Lee v. Mich. Parole Bd., 104 F. App'x 490, 493 (6th Cir. 2004). The district court denied Brown permission to amend his complaint for a second time due to the lateness of his request, and Brown does not argue that the denial was erroneous. Accordingly, the ADA and RA claims against Stoddard, Huss, and Norwood were properly dismissed.
Stoddard and Gilkey allegedly refused to transfer Brown to a prison facility that could accommodate his disability, but these allegations also fall short of claims for § 1983 liability. "An inmate possesses no inherent constitutional right to placement in any particular prison or in any particular section within the prison system." Joseph v. Curtin, 410 F. App'x 865, 868 (6th Cir. 2010) (quoting Williams v. Bass, 63 F.3d 483, 485 (1995) (internal alteration omitted)). Brown does not [*7]  explain how the defendants' failure to transfer him was tied to a constitutional violation. The district court did not err in dismissing Brown's claims against Stoddard and Gilkey based on their denial of his requests for transfer.
Furthermore, Brown does not offer persuasive arguments to reverse the district court's grant of summary judgment to LeBarre. Although LeBarre was allegedly aware of Ionia's inability to accommodate Brown's disability, a mere awareness of wrongdoing—without further personal involvement on the part of LeBarre—is not enough to establish liability under § 1983. Brown also claims that LeBarre authorized the removal of his walking cane and refused to indicate on Brown's transfer sheet that Brown was transferred due to Ionia's inability to accommodate his disability. However, both of these claims also fall short of claims for § 1983 liability because Brown does not identify the serious medical needs that were put at risk as a result of LeBarre's actions. While Brown summarily asserts that LeBarre acted with a deliberate indifference to his serious medical needs, he does not provide any further explanation regarding what those needs were or how LeBarre jeopardized them. "Threadbare [*8]  recitals of the elements of a cause of action, supported by mere conclusory statements, do not suffice" to state a claim that would survive a motion to dismiss, much less a motion for summary judgment. Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678, 129 S. Ct. 1937, 173 L. Ed. 2d 868 (2009). Brown's brief does not offer more than conclusory statements with respect to how LeBarre's actions interfered with his serious medical needs. Accordingly, LeBarre's alleged awareness of Ionia's handicap inaccessibility, authorization of the removal of Brown's walking cane, and refusal to properly fill out Brown's prison transfer sheet do not provide a basis for reversing the district court's judgment.
Brown's two remaining allegations against Norwood and Huss were not included in his Amended Complaint, and for that reason the allegations do not warrant reversal. First, Brown claims that Huss retaliated against him for filing grievances by ordering him housed next to a mentally ill patient who threw feces and urine at his door and squirted urine through the air vents. Second, Brown claims that Norwood personally required Brown to choose between showering in a non-handicap facility or not showering at all, which allegedly led to Brown's inability to shower for 288 days. Neither of these [*9]  allegations was raised in Brown's Amended Complaint, and we do not address them here in light of "the long-standing rule that this court generally will not consider an argument not raised in the district court and presented for the first time on appeal." United States v. Ellison, 462 F.3d 557, 560 (6th Cir. 2006).
The district court's judgment is affirmed.


End of Document

