In re Posey
United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit
September 23, 2019, Filed
No. 19-12156-B

Reporter
2019 U.S. App. LEXIS 28723 *
In re: DAVID POSEY, Petitioner.
Prior History:  [*1] On Petition for Writ of Mandamus from the United States District Court for the Northern District of Florida.
In re Posey, 2019 U.S. App. LEXIS 22683 (11th Cir. Fla., July 30, 2019)
Counsel: In re: DAVID RUSSELL POSEY, Petitioner, Pro se, Milton, FL.
For United States of America, Mandamus Respondent: U.S. Attorney Service - Northern District of Florida, U.S. Attorney's Office, Pensacola, FL.
Judges: Before: TJOFLAT and BRANCH, Circuit Judges.
Opinion


BY THE COURT:
David Posey, a Florida prisoner proceeding pro se, moves for reconsideration of this Court's denial of leave to proceed in forma pauperis ("IFP") as to his petition for extraordinary writ, which we construed as a mandamus petition. He also moves for leave to amend mandamus petition and includes a "Notice: of American Disabilities Act Violations." His original mandamus petition related to his 28 U.S.C. § 2254 proceedings in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Florida. In an order issued on July 30, 2019, we determined that Posey was not entitled to proceed IFP because his mandamus petition was frivolous. Specifically, we concluded that Posey had not shown a clear and indisputable right to relief as to his request that we direct the district court to empanel a grand jury. In addition, we determined that his alternative that [*2]  this Court forward his request to the U.S. Attorney for processing was not cognizable in mandamus.
A party seeking rehearing or reconsideration must specifically allege any point of Law or fact that we overlooked or misapprehended. See Fed. R. App. P. 40(a)(2). Mandamus is available "only in drastic situations, when no other adequate means are available to remedy a clear usurpation of power or abuse of discretion." Jackson v. Motel 6 Multipurpose, Inc., 130 F.3d 999, 1004 (11th Cir. 1997) (quotation marks omitted). The petitioner has the burden of showing that he has no other avenue of relief, and that his right to relief is clear and indisputable. Mallard v. U.S. Dist. Court, 490 U.S. 296, 309, 109 S. Ct. 1814, 104 L. Ed. 2d 318 (1989). "[A] writ of mandamus may issue only to confine an inferior court to a lawful exercise of its prescribed jurisdiction or to compel it to exercise its authority when it is its duty to do so." In re Smith, 926 F.2d 1027, 1030 (11th Cir. 1991) (quotation marks omitted).
Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 6(a)(1) requires that a "court must order that one or more grand juries be summoned" when justice so requires. Fed. R. Crim. P. 6(a)(1). Additionally, the chief judge of a district court must order a grand jury if certain circumstances are met and the Attorney General or his designee "certifies in writing to the chief judge of the district that in his judgment a special grand jury is necessary because of criminal activity in the district." 18 U.S.C. § 3331(a). In In re [*3]  Smith, we held that mandamus was the appropriate remedy for the trial court's refusal to approve a pretrial settlement agreement, where the trial court ordered parties to "work something out," effectively freezing litigation and thwarting the possibility of an appealable final order, and had no discretion to reject the settlement on its stated grounds of financial excessiveness. 926 F.2d at 1030.
Here, Posey does not raise any points of law or fact that we overlooked or misapprehended. See Fed. R. App. P. 40(a)(2). Aside from reiterating his argument that Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 6(a)(1) required the district court to empanel a grand jury as justice required, Posey does not raise any new points of law in his motion for reconsideration. Although he cites to In re Smith in his motion, he does not raise any points of law that we misapprehended. In In re Smith, we held that mandamus relief was appropriate where the district court failed to enforce a settlement agreement, and we did not address the district court's obligations under Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 6(a)(1). See In re Smith, 926 F.2d at 1030.
Further, to the extent Posey argues that he had no adequate alternative remedies for the district court's alleged abuse of discretion in failing to empanel a grand jury due to the fact that his complaints with other entities [*4]  either went unanswered or were denied, these facts are irrelevant to our conclusions that Posey's petition was frivolous because (1) he did not show a clear and indisputable right to mandamus relief, and (2) his request that we forward his petition for "processing at the U.S. Attorney's office" was not cognizable in mandamus. Thus, because Posey has not pointed to any facts or law that we overlooked or misapprehended in reaching its conclusions, we deny his reconsideration motion.
Next, we deny Posey's motion for leave to amend his mandamus petition. First, it is unclear what amendments Posey proposes. To the extent he wishes to amend his petition to add his new arguments raised in his motion for reconsideration, his proposed amendments would be futile for same reasons discussed above. To the extent that Posey separately wishes to amend his mandamus petition to request that we order the prison's Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") coordinator to answer his requests for accommodation or make accommodations for a disability, his new request would be frivolous because it is not cognizable in mandamus. See In re Smith, 926 F.2d at 1030. Thus, this we deny Posey's motion for leave to amend his mandamus petition, [*5]  as his proposed amendments would also be frivolous.
In summary, we denied leave to proceed IFP, as the mandamus petition was frivolous, and Posey has not pointed to any facts or law that we overlooked or misapprehended in reaching this particular conclusion. Accordingly, his reconsideration motion is DENIED. In addition, to the extent Posey wishes to amend his mandamus petition to raise the arguments contained in his instant filing, they would be frivolous. Accordingly, his motion for leave to amend his petition is DENIED.


End of Document

