Laguerre v. Nat'l Grid USA
United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit
March 11, 2022, Decided
No. 20-3901-cv

Reporter
2022 U.S. App. LEXIS 6328 *; 2022 WL 728819
JANINA LAGUERRE, Plaintiff-Appellant, v. NATIONAL GRID USA, Defendant-Appellee.
Notice: PLEASE REFER TO FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE RULE 32.1 GOVERNING THE CITATION TO UNPUBLISHED OPINIONS.
Prior History:  [*1] Appeal from a judgment of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York (Gershon, J.).
Laguerre v. Nat'l Grid United States, 2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 168202 (E.D.N.Y., Sept. 3, 2021)
Counsel: FOR APPELLANT: ARTHUR Z. SCHWARTZ, Advocates for Justice, Chartered Attorneys, New York, NY.
FOR APPELLEE: PATRICK M. COLLINS, Ogletree, Deakins, Nash, Smoak & Stewart, P.C., New York, NY.
Judges: PRESENT: MICHAEL H. PARK, BETH ROBINSON, Circuit Judges, JED S. RAKOFF, District Judge.*.
Opinion



SUMMARY ORDER
UPON DUE CONSIDERATION WHEREOF, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED, AND DECREED that the judgment appealed from entered on October 23, 2020, is AFFIRMED in part, REVERSED in part, and REMANDED for proceedings consistent with this order.
Plaintiff-Appellant Janina Laguerre worked as a Customer Service Representative ("CSR") receiving inbound calls for her employer, Defendant-Appellee National Grid USA. Laguerre, who has lupus, alleged that National Grid unlawfully discriminated against her on the basis of her disability when it failed to accommodate her work-from-home request or transfer her to a different position within the company, in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C. § 12101, et seq. ("ADA"); Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. § 794 ("Section 504"); the New York State Human Rights Law, N.Y. Exec. L. § 290, et seq. ("NYSHRL"); and the New York City Human Rights Law, N.Y.C. Admin. Code § 8-101, et seq. ("NYCHRL"). Laguerre appeals the district [*2]  court's grant of summary judgment in favor of National Grid with respect to Laguerre's ADA claim and its pre-judgment order denying her motion to re-open the summary judgment record for further fact finding regarding National Grid's post-pandemic shift to remote work.1
We assume the parties' familiarity with the underlying facts, procedural history, and arguments on appeal, to which we refer only as necessary to explain our decision to AFFIRM in part, REVERSE in part, and REMAND the matter to the district court. We review an order granting a motion for summary judgment de novo, meaning without deference to the district court. Sotomayor v. City of New York, 713 F.3d 163, 164 (2d Cir. 2013). "Summary judgment is proper only when, construing the evidence in the light most favorable to the non-movant, 'there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.'" Doninger v. Niehoff, 642 F.3d 334, 344 (2d Cir. 2011) (quoting Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a)).2
1. Laguerre's ADA Claim
To establish a failure to accommodate claim under the ADA, a plaintiff must demonstrate: (1) the plaintiff is a person with a disability for purposes of the ADA; (2) an employer covered by the statute had notice of the plaintiff's disability; (3) with reasonable accommodation, the plaintiff could perform [*3]  the essential functions of the job at issue; and (4) the employer has refused to make such an accommodation. See, e.g., McMillan v. City of New York, 711 F.3d 120, 125-26 (2d Cir. 2013). The parties do not dispute that Laguerre has produced sufficient evidence to establish the first and second elements. Our inquiry concerns the third and fourth prongs—whether Laguerre made a sufficient showing that, with reasonable accommodation, she could perform the essential functions of her position and that National Grid failed to make the appropriate accommodation. See McBride v. BIC Consumer Prods. Mfg. Co., 583 F.3d 92, 97 (2d Cir. 2009).
This Court uses "a two-step process to evaluate whether the failure to provide a proposed accommodation constitutes a violation of the ADA." Jackan v. New York State DOL, 205 F.3d 562, 566 (2d Cir. 2000) (discussing allocation of burdens with respect to accommodations in ADA and Rehabilitation Act cases). The plaintiff bears the initial "burdens of both production and persuasion as to the existence of some accommodation" that would allow the plaintiff to perform the essential functions of the employment position, "including the existence of a vacant position for which [the plaintiff] is qualified." McBride, 583 F.3d at 97. If the plaintiff meets this burden, then the analysis shifts to the second inquiry: whether the proposed accommodation is reasonable. "As to the requirement [*4]  that an accommodation be reasonable, we have held that the plaintiff bears only a burden of production." Borkowski v. Valley Cent. Sch. Dist., 63 F.3d 131, 138 (2d Cir. 1995). Once done, the plaintiff "has made out a prima facie showing that a reasonable accommodation is available, and the risk of nonpersuasion falls on the defendant." Id.
Laguerre alleges that National Grid discriminated against her by failing to reasonably accommodate her disability. See 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A) (defining "discriminat[ion] against a qualified individual on the basis of disability" under the ADA to include "not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who is an applicant or employee, unless such covered entity can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business of such covered entity"). In particular, Laguerre made two distinct accommodation requests: first, to be transferred from her position as a CSR receiving inbound calls3 to a different, less stressful job at National Grid; and second, to work from home.
Construing the record evidence in the light most favorable to Laguerre, she did not meet her burden of production with respect to her request [*5]  to transfer to a different position. Laguerre bears the burden to identify the existence, at or around the time when she sought her accommodation, of an existing vacant position to which she could have been reassigned. See McBride, 583 F.3d at 97-98; see also Molina v. City of Rochester, 764 F. App'x 49, 50-51 (2d Cir. 2019). Mere speculation that such a position existed, or that National Grid could have created such a position, is insufficient. See Hicks v. Baines, 593 F.3d 159, 166 (2d Cir. 2010) ("A party may not rely on mere speculation or conjecture as to the true nature of the facts to overcome a motion for summary judgment."); see also Norville v. Staten Island Univ. Hosp., 196 F.3d 89, 99 (2d Cir. 1999) ("[A]n employer need not reassign an employee if no position is vacant. Nor is the employer obliged to create a new position to accommodate the employee."). Because Laguerre identifies no position at National Grid that was both "less stressful" and vacant during the relevant period, the district court did not err in awarding National Grid summary judgment with respect to this accommodation request. App'x at 324.
Laguerre's request to work from home is a closer question. Construing the evidence in the light most favorable to Laguerre, we conclude that she satisfied her burden of proposing a reasonable accommodation that would allow her to continue performing the essential functions [*6]  of her position (taking inbound calls) from home.4
In discrimination claims based on an employer's alleged failure to accommodate, the plaintiff bears the initial burdens of both production and persuasion as to the existence of some accommodation that would allow the plaintiff to perform the essential functions of the job. See McMillan, 711 F.3d at 126. In clarifying the standard for plaintiffs seeking to prove employment discrimination claims under the ADA, we have explained: First, plaintiffs bear the burden of proving they are otherwise qualified; if an accommodation is needed, then plaintiffs must show, as part of their burden of persuasion, that an effective accommodation exists that would render them otherwise qualified. Borkowski, 63 F.3d at 139. Second, "[a]s to the requirement that an accommodation be reasonable, we have held that the plaintiff bears only a burden of production." Id. at 138. Notably, "[t]his burden . . . is not a heavy one." Id. Rather, "[i]t is enough for the plaintiff to suggest the existence of a plausible accommodation, the costs of which, facially, do not clearly exceed its benefits." Id. (emphasis added). In other words, the plaintiff need only show that an accommodation "seems reasonable on [*7]  its face, i.e., ordinarily or in the run of cases." US Airways, Inc. v. Barnett, 535 U.S. 391, 401, 122 S. Ct. 1516, 152 L. Ed. 2d 589 (2002). In sum, "[t]hese two requirements placed on the plaintiff will permit district courts to grant summary judgments for defendants in cases in which the plaintiff's proposal is either clearly ineffective or outlandishly costly." Borkowski, 63 F.3d at 139.
The record evidence supports Laguerre's position that an effective accommodation (remote work) existed, it was plausible for CSRs to work from home, and the technology to enable a work-from-home arrangement was not, on its face, unobtainable for National Grid.
Specifically, the evidence demonstrates that CSRs at National Grid who perform functions other than receiving inbound customer calls have worked remotely, National Grid has piloted remote work positions in the past, and inbound calls can be routed to other call centers. The president of the union, who worked as a CSR in the call center for 25 years, also stated her belief that it was possible to route calls to other locations, and based on her experience, she did not see why calls could not be routed to a CSR's home:
In my opinion, and I was a CSR who worked on inbound calls for over 20 years, there is no reason why inbound calls cannot be routed to a [*8]  [CSR's] home. [National Grid's] system reroutes calls to other Call Centers, sometimes to Syracuse, sometimes to Massachusetts, when there is an overload. The computer system, called CRIS, can be accessed [online]. Rerouted calls can easily be recorded. No confidential information is given during the course of such calls, such as Social Security numbers. At no time in discussions about Ms. Laguerre has [National Grid] explained why it could not allow her to do incoming call work at home.
App'x at 433.
Even if this evidence does not conclusively establish the reasonableness of the accommodation, viewing the evidence in Laguerre's favor, Laguerre met her modest burden of proposing a plausible accommodation, the cost of which, on its face, did not exceed its benefits.
Upon receiving Laguerre's request for accommodation, the burden shifted to National Grid to demonstrate that such accommodation was unreasonable or unduly burdensome. McMillan, 711 F.3d at 128 ("If a plaintiff suggests plausible accommodations, the burden of proof shifts to the defendant to demonstrate that such accommodations would present undue hardships and would therefore be unreasonable."). An "undue hardship" is "an action requiring significant [*9]  difficulty or expense." Id. (quoting 42 U.S.C. § 12111(10)(A)). These inquiries are inherently fact specific. Noll v. IBM, 787 F.3d 89, 94 (2d Cir. 2015) ("The reasonableness of an employer's accommodation is a fact-specific question that often must be resolved by a factfinder."); Wernick v. Fed. Rsrv. Bank of N.Y., 91 F.3d 379, 385 (2d Cir. 1996) ("Whether or not something constitutes a reasonable accommodation is necessarily fact-specific. Therefore, determinations on this issue must be made on a case-by-case basis."). An employer "must show special (typically case-specific) circumstances that demonstrate undue hardship in the particular circumstances." US Airways, Inc., 535 U.S. at 402.
The only evidence that National Grid provided to satisfy this burden is conclusory testimony that Laguerre could not work from home because the company did not possess the requisite technology at the time of her request. But "reasonable accommodation" may include "acquisition or modification of equipment or devices" and "other similar accommodations." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(9)(B). National Grid did not state that the technology was unavailable or was unreasonably expensive, and it did not claim even to have investigated the feasibility of procuring such technology in response to Laguerre's request for accommodation. Nor did National Grid provide any evidence regarding the costs of acquiring [*10]  technology that would enable Laguerre to work at home, much less an analysis to demonstrate that the cost of such an endeavor would exceed its benefits. Under our case law, it is incumbent upon the employer to provide a more robust defense of its position. See, e.g., Borkowski, 63 F.3d at 139 ("[W]hile the plaintiff could meet her burden of production by identifying an accommodation that facially achieves a rough proportionality between costs and benefits, an employer seeking to meet its burden of persuasion on reasonable accommodation and undue hardship must undertake a more refined analysis.").
Thus, the reasonableness of Laguerre's accommodation request, and whether it would impose an undue hardship on National Grid, is a material fact in dispute and one best left to the factfinder on remand.5
2. Laguerre's Motion to Reopen the Evidence Post-COVID-19
Laguerre contends that the district court abused its discretion by denying her motion to reopen the summary judgment record to permit the trial court to consider National Grid's prompt transition to remote work in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.6
We review the district court's ruling under an "abuse of discretion" standard. Wills v. Amerada Hess Corp., 379 F.3d 32, 41 (2d Cir. 2004). "A district court abuses [*11]  its discretion when (1) its decision rests on an error of law . . . or a clearly erroneous factual finding, or (2) its decision—though not necessarily the product of a legal error or a clearly erroneous factual finding—cannot be located within the range of permissible decisions." In re Fitch, Inc., 330 F.3d 104, 108 (2d Cir. 2003).
Here, the district court reasonably concluded that National Grid's post-pandemic actions were not relevant to the reasonableness of the requested accommodation at the time of Laguerre's pre-pandemic accommodation request. Therefore, we conclude that the district court did not abuse its discretion by denying Laguerre's motion to reopen the record.7
* * *
For the reasons set forth above, the district court's judgment is AFFIRMED regarding the dismissal of Laguerre's Section 504 claim, REVERSED regarding the dismissal of Laguerre's ADA, NYSHRL, and NYCHRL claims, and REMANDED to the district court for further proceedings consistent with this Order.


End of Document

