Bell-Kachelski v. Mich. Prot. & Advocacy Serv.
United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
September 10, 2018, Filed
No. 17-2508

Reporter
2018 U.S. App. LEXIS 25983 *
LINDA BELL-KACHELSKI, Plaintiff-Appellant, v. MICHIGAN PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY SERVICE, INC.; MICHIGAN REHABILITATION SERVICES, Defendants-Appellees.
Notice: NOT RECOMMENDED FOR FULL-TEXT PUBLICATION. SIXTH CIRCUIT RULE 28 LIMITS CITATION TO SPECIFIC SITUATIONS. PLEASE SEE RULE 28 BEFORE CITING IN A PROCEEDING IN A COURT IN THE SIXTH CIRCUIT. IF CITED, A COPY MUST BE SERVED ON OTHER PARTIES AND THE COURT. THIS NOTICE IS TO BE PROMINENTLY DISPLAYED IF THIS DECISION IS REPRODUCED.
Prior History:  [*1] ON APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF MICHIGAN.
Bell-Kachelski v. Mich. Prot. & Advocacy Serv., 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 191299 ( E.D. Mich., Nov. 20, 2017)
Counsel: Linda Bell-Kachelski, Plaintiff - Appellant, Pro se, Flint, MI.
For Michigan Protection And Advocacy Service, Inc., Defendant - Appellee: Steven M. Wolock, Maddin, Hauser, Roth & Heller, Southfield, MI.
For Michigan Rehabilitation Services, Defendant - Appellee: John G. Fedynsky, Office of the Attorney General of Michigan, Lansing, MI.
Judges: Before: MERRITT, CLAY, and BUSH, Circuit Judges.
Opinion



ORDER
Linda Bell-Kachelski, a pro se Michigan resident, appeals the district court's order granting summary judgment in favor of the defendants and dismissing her civil complaint. This case has been referred to a panel of the court that, upon examination, unanimously agrees that oral argument is not needed. See Fed. R. App. P. 34(a). Bell-Kachelski also moves for the appointment of counsel.
In 2016, Bell-Kachelski, represented by counsel, filed a complaint against Michigan Protection and Advocacy Service, Inc. ("MPAS") and Michigan Rehabilitation Services ("MRS"). MPAS is a private, non-profit organization whose mission is to advocate for and protect the rights of individuals with disabilities, and MRS is a part of Michigan's Department of Health [*2]  and Human Services. Bell-Kachelski claimed that she suffers from a permanent cognitive disability that prevents her from working all day within a large group. She sought assistance from MRS in obtaining her sign-language interpreter certification and tuition towards the completion of her bachelor's degree. When disputes arose between Bell-Kachelski and MRS regarding the services that she was receiving, she sought MPAS's assistance on multiple occasions to advocate on her behalf with MRS. Unsatisfied with the defendants' services, she filed the present lawsuit alleging that the defendants violated her rights under the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") by denying her services on the basis of her cognitive disability. See 42 U.S.C. §§ 12132, 12182. She also brought state-law claims for violations of the Michigan Persons with Disabilities Civil Rights Act, Michigan Compiled Laws § 37.1301; violations of the Elliott-Larsen Civil Rights Act, Michigan Compiled Laws § 37.2101, et seq.; legal malpractice; and civil conspiracy. Both defendants filed motions for summary judgment. After briefing and argument, the district court granted summary judgment in favor of the defendants on the ADA claims. The district court then dismissed her state-law claims without prejudice to her ability [*3]  to re-raise them in state court.
Now proceeding pro se on appeal, Bell-Kachelski challenges the district court's dismissal of her ADA claims and lists various causes of action, and she lists statutes and regulatory provisions that she believes the defendants violated. She echoes the claims in her complaint and states that she does not know what arguments her attorney made in the district court. She also asserts that her business affairs and personal life have been disrupted after the University of Michigan-Flint garnished her wages due to her defaulted student loans.
We review a grant of summary judgment de novo. Laster v. City of Kalamazoo, 746 F.3d 714, 726 (6th Cir. 2014). Summary judgment is appropriate where "the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). When reviewing a motion for summary judgment, we view the evidence and all inferences drawn from the underlying facts "in the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion." Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 587, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986) (quoting United States v. Diebold, Inc., 369 U.S. 654, 655, 82 S. Ct. 993, 8 L. Ed. 2d 176 (1962)). Summary judgment is appropriate against a party that "fails to make a showing sufficient to establish the existence of an element essential to that party's case, and on which that party will bear the burden of [*4]  proof at trial." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). The nonmoving party must show that sufficient evidence exists to create a genuine issue of material fact, with a mere "scintilla" of evidence being insufficient. Bell v. Ohio State Univ., 351 F.3d 240, 247 (6th Cir. 2003).
Title II of the ADA "forbids any 'public entity' from discriminating based on disability." Fry v. Napoleon Cmty. Sch., 137 S. Ct. 743, 749, 197 L. Ed. 2d 46 (2017); see also 42 U.S.C. §§ 12131-33. "[N]o qualified individual with a disability shall, by reason of such disability, be excluded from participation in or be denied the benefits of the services, programs, or activities of a public entity, or be subjected to discrimination from any such entity." 42 U.S.C. § 12132. Individuals may seek monetary damages or injunctive relief for violating this section of the ADA. Fry, 137 S. Ct. at 750. To establish a prima facie case of discrimination under Title II, a plaintiff must show "that he (1) is disabled under the statutes, (2) is 'otherwise qualified' for participation in [a state or local government] program, and (3) 'is being excluded from participation in, denied the benefits of, or subjected to discrimination' because of his disability or handicap." Gohl v. Livonia Pub. Sch. Sch. Dist., 836 F.3d 672, 682 (6th Cir. 2016) (quoting G.C. v. Owensboro Pub. Sch., 711 F.3d 623, 635 (6th Cir. 2013)), cert. denied, 138 S. Ct. 56, 199 L. Ed. 2d 18 (2017). The plaintiff must also establish that "but for" the plaintiff's disability, the discrimination would not have occurred. Id.
Bell-Kachelski alleged that MRS [*5]  discriminated against her, in violation of Title II, by closing her case on multiple occasions and failing to honor its promises to her that it would (1) pay the fee for her to re-take her interpreter's exam; (2) pay for her to take English 112 at the University of Michigan-Flint as an assessment of her ability to proceed with college coursework; (3) develop an Individualized Plan for Employment ("IPE"),1 which she needed to gain certification as an interpreter and to receive financial assistance to pay for her full-time enrollment at the University of Michigan-Flint to complete her bachelor's degree, should she pass English 112; and (4) assign her a new MRS counselor. The district court concluded that this claim failed because she did not present evidence that she was "otherwise qualified" to receive the services or that MRS acted with animus toward her disability. The district court did not err in these conclusions.
Bell-Kachelski's response to MRS's summary-judgment motion identified disputes of fact regarding whether MRS denied her services that it had promised to provide. But the mere facts that MRS may have denied Bell-Kachelski services, closed her case, or attempted to have her [*6]  sign an IPE that did not include their earlier promises do not demonstrate that MRS had an animus towards her cognitive disability. See Anderson v. City of Blue Ash, 798 F.3d 338, 357 (6th Cir. 2015). MRS presented non-discriminatory reasons for not keeping its previous promises, i.e., because it could not provide her with funding on a non-assessment basis without a signed IPE, and because funding her bachelor's degree was not necessary for her to obtain her interpreter's license and achieve her identified career goal. In the absence of evidence of discriminatory animus against her disability, summary judgment was appropriate on this claim. Moreover, the district court correctly determined that Bell-Kachelski was not otherwise qualified to receive further services from MRS because she failed to comply with MRS's standard policy that requires any individual it serves to develop and sign an IPE before it authorizes any non-assessment financial assistance. See Burns v. Coca-Cola Enters., Inc., 222 F.3d 247, 258 (6th Cir. 2000).
Bell-Kachelski claimed that MPAS discriminated against her in violation of Title II because a receptionist allegedly referred to her using racial slurs, MPAS repeatedly closed and reopened her case file, an MPAS representative mistakenly noted in her file that she had signed an IPE that did [*7]  not include financial support for English 112, and MPAS failed to ensure that MRS lived up to an agreement outlined in an April 3, 2014, letter. Even if these events did occur, they do not demonstrate that MPAS discriminated against her due to an animus toward her cognitive disability as required under Title II. First, the racial slur was alleged to have been made by an MRS receptionist, not an MPAS employee. Regardless, such a comment would have been evidence of racial bias, not animus against her cognitive disability. Bell-Kachelski did not present any evidence that the repeated opening and closing of her file was anything other than MPAS's standard internal procedure for addressing new complaints. Similarly, she did not demonstrate discriminatory intent by pointing to MPAS's decision to close her file when it mistakenly believed that she had signed her IPE or to MPAS's conclusion that it could not argue for enforcement of the terms of the April 3, 2014, letter because the terms would violate MRS's own policies.
Bell-Kachelski's Title III claim also fails because that title similarly requires that the plaintiff be discriminated against on the basis of her disability. See 42 U.S.C. § 12182(a).
Title III [*8]  of the ADA prohibits a place of public accommodation from discriminating against disabled individuals and states that "[n]o individual shall be discriminated against on the basis of disability in the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations of any place of public accommodation by any person who owns, leases (or leases to), or operates a place of public accommodation."
Smith v. Moorman, 47 F. App'x 755, 756 (6th Cir. 2002) (quoting 42 U.S.C. § 12182(a)). The defendants sought dismissal of Bell-Kachelski's claims under Title III of the ADA because she failed to request any injunctive relief. See 42 U.S.C. §§ 12182, 12188(a); Smith v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 167 F.3d 286, 293 (6th Cir. 1999). Bell-Kachelski responded by requesting leave to amend her complaint to add injunctive relief. The district court expressed skepticism that she could identify any proper injunctive relief because she had already received her bachelor's degree and interpreter's certification but determined that the claim was without merit regardless.
Bell-Kachelski alleged that MRS failed to provide her with a reasonable accommodation in light of her cognitive disability due to MRS's holding meetings in large groups. The district court rejected this claim because Bell-Kachelski identified only one meeting that she attended [*9]  with MRS that included more than two individuals besides herself, she did not request any type of accommodation from MRS for these meetings, and she failed to demonstrate how such accommodations were "necessary to afford" her or other individuals with cognitive disabilities the opportunity to realize the full benefit of MRS's services. See 42 U.S.C. § 12182(b)(2)(A)(ii). The district court correctly concluded that she was able to understand the draft IPE that was presented to her and to determine that it did not accurately reflect what had previously been represented to her, that she was treated the same as a nondisabled person in her position would have been treated, and that MRS gave her abundant resources over the course of two years. In light of these facts, Bell-Kachelski failed to establish a claim against MRS under Title III.
Further, the district court did not err by declining to exercise jurisdiction over Bell-Kachelski's state-law claims after her federal claims were dismissed. See 28 U.S.C. § 1367(c)(3). The decision of whether to exercise supplemental jurisdiction is discretionary, but, in general, when a court is presented with federal and state claims and dismisses the federal claims over which it had original jurisdiction, [*10]  "the balance of considerations usually will point to dismissing the state law claims, or remanding them to state court if the action was removed." Musson Theatrical, Inc. v. Fed. Express Corp., 89 F.3d 1244, 1254-55 (6th Cir. 1996). Bell-Kachelski has not shown an abuse of discretion here.
Accordingly, we AFFIRM the district court's judgment and DENY the motion for the appointment of counsel.


End of Document

