Van Vorst v. Healthcare
United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit
December 22, 2021, Decided
No. 21-4

Reporter
2021 U.S. App. LEXIS 37887 *; 2021 WL 6101474
ANDREA L. VAN VORST, KENNETH MAHNKEN, YVETTE SOTO, MARTIN J. WEINER, Plaintiffs-Appellants, v. LUTHERAN HEALTHCARE, DBA LUTHERAN MEDICAL CENTER, Defendant-Appellee.
Notice: PLEASE REFER TO FEDERAL RULES OF APPELLATE PROCEDURE RULE 32.1 GOVERNING THE CITATION TO UNPUBLISHED OPINIONS.
Prior History:  [*1] Appeal from an order of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York (Korman, J.).
Van Vorst v. Lutheran Healthcare, 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 234633, 2020 WL 7343799 (E.D.N.Y., Dec. 14, 2020)
Counsel: FOR PLAINTIFFS-APPELLANTS: ANDREW ROZYNSKI (David John Hommel, on the brief), Eisenberg & Baum, LLP, New York, NY.
FOR DEFENDANT-APPELLEE: ROY W. BREITENBACH (Svetlana K. Ivy, Katerina Marie Kramarchyk, on the brief), Harris Beach PLLC, Uniondale, NY, and Pittsford, NY.
Judges: PRESENT: SUSAN L. CARNEY, RICHARD J. SULLIVAN, Circuit Judges, J. PAUL OETKEN, District Judge.*
Opinion



SUMMARY ORDER
UPON DUE CONSIDERATION, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED, AND DECREED that the order entered on December 14, 2020, is AFFIRMED.
Plaintiffs-Appellants are deaf individuals who allege that Defendant-Appellee Lutheran Healthcare (the "Hospital"), during plaintiffs' numerous visits to the Hospital for medical care from 2012 through 2016, failed to provide them with accommodations required under the New York City Human Rights Law ("NYCHRL").1 Following a two-week trial, a jury rendered a verdict in the Hospital's favor. Plaintiffs appeal from the district court's denial of their posttrial motion for judgment as a matter of law or, in the alternative, for a new trial. We assume the parties' familiarity with the underlying [*2]  facts, procedural history, and arguments on appeal, to which we refer only as necessary to explain our decision to affirm.
Section 8-107(15) of the NYCHRL requires covered entities,2 including the Hospital, to provide a "reasonable accommodation" to enable persons with disabilities to "enjoy the right or rights in question"—that is, to use or enjoy the entities' services. N.Y.C. Admin. Code § 8-107(15); see In re Comm'n on Hum. Rts. ex rel. Stamm v. E & E Bagels, Inc., OATH Index No. 803/14, 2016 WL 1644879, at *6 (N.Y.C. Comm'n Hum. Rts. Apr. 20, 2016) (defining the "right" in the public-accommodation context as the ability "to use or enjoy the public accommodation"). The statute defines "reasonable accommodation" as "such accommodation that can be made that does not cause undue hardship in the conduct of the covered entity's business," placing on "[t]he covered entity . . . the burden of proving undue hardship." N.Y.C. Admin. Code § 8-102; see Phillips v. City of New York, 66 A.D.3d 170, 884 N.Y.S.2d 369, 378 (App. Div. 1st Dep't 2009) ("[U]nlike the ADA, there are no accommodations [under the NYCHRL] that may be 'unreasonable' if they do not cause undue hardship."). Plaintiffs maintain that the Hospital discriminated against them by treating them less well than hearing individuals and failing to provide the required reasonable accommodation.3

1. Rule 50(b) motion for judgment as a matter of law
We review de novo the denial of a motion for judgment as a matter of law under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 50(b). See Manganiello v. City of New York, 612 F.3d 149, 161 (2d Cir. 2010). The applicable [*3]  standard is high: a court may grant a Rule 50(b) motion and set aside a jury's verdict only where "there exists such a complete absence of evidence supporting the verdict that the jury's findings could only have been the result of sheer surmise and conjecture, or the evidence in favor of the movant is so overwhelming that reasonable and fair minded persons could not arrive at a verdict against it." Wiercinski v. Mangia 57, Inc., 787 F.3d 106, 112 (2d Cir. 2015) (internal quotation marks and alterations omitted). "In short, a Rule 50 motion may be granted only if the court . . . concludes that a reasonable juror would have been compelled to accept the view of the moving party." Cash v. County of Erie, 654 F.3d 324, 333 (2d Cir. 2011) (internal quotation marks omitted).
In their complaint, plaintiffs sought damages for the Hospital's alleged failures to "provide [plaintiffs] with effective accommodations for [their] disability of deafness despite [their] requests."4 J.A. 31, 35, 44, 46. Following the jury's December 2019 verdict rejecting these allegations, plaintiffs advanced a new legal theory in their posttrial motions and pursue it again now on appeal: they urge us to hold that the NYCHRL required the Hospital not merely to provide "reasonable accommodations" necessary for effective communication between plaintiffs [*4]  and their treatment providers, but to provide every deaf patient with a live American Sign Language ("ASL") interpreter on every visit, regardless of the patient's fluency in English or facility in lipreading and writing, and regardless of whether the patient requested an interpreter.5 In other words, according to plaintiffs, and notwithstanding ample evidence that effective communication between medical personnel and the patient by other means could and did regularly occur, the only "reasonable accommodation" for any deaf patient under the NYCHRL is a live ASL interpreter, subject only to "rare exceptions." Appellants' Br. at 30 n.7.
No state or federal court has interpreted the NYCHRL as creating such a strict liability standard for healthcare providers serving deaf individuals, and we decline to do so here.6 We identify no reversible error in the standard set forth in the jury instructions, which plaintiffs proposed in part and which they now attempt to challenge. Those instructions, taken as a whole, adequately informed the jury that the Hospital had an obligation under the NYCHRL to ensure effective communication with patients on an individual basis and to consider each [*5]  patient's preferred or requested communication method. See, e.g., J.A. 169 ("Effective communication is a two-way street, requiring all parties to be able to receive information from, and convey information to, one another."); J.A. 170 ("The law provides that the type of auxiliary aids will vary depending upon the circumstances . . . in accordance with the method of communication used by the individual . . . .").
In any event, the jury's verdict that the Hospital did not discriminate against any plaintiff was eminently reasonable in light of the telling evidence presented at trial. Referring to the testimony of their expert witness as "unrebutted," plaintiffs avoid acknowledging on appeal that the cross-examination inflicted substantial damage on the credibility of their witnesses, including their expert. Appellant's Br. at 54-56. The Hospital's counsel elicited testimony from plaintiffs that strongly rebutted their expert's assertion that plaintiffs' English reading levels ranged from the first-to the fourth-grade level.7 Moreover, at trial, all four plaintiffs either were compelled to change their testimony when confronted with conflicting evidence—for example, hospital records [*6]  showing that they received ASL interpretation services for consent forms that they claimed they could not read or understand—or stated that they simply could not recall whether they had in fact received accommodations that they had claimed in their pleadings not to have received. Although plaintiffs introduced into evidence seventy consent forms that they claim to have signed without giving their informed consent and rest their claims for damages on this evidence, only four of those forms were referenced during the trial testimony. In addition, plaintiffs either were not asked whether they understood the forms or were impeached regarding their testimony about whether they received effective communication regarding the respective medical procedures before signing those forms.
In light of the significant record evidence contradicting plaintiffs' allegations and substantiating the Hospital's position that it provided reasonable accommodations to these individual plaintiffs, we conclude that no "reasonable juror would have been compelled to accept" plaintiffs' claims against the Hospital. Cash, 654 F.3d at 333. We therefore affirm the district court's denial of plaintiffs' Rule 50(b) motion for [*7]  judgment as a matter of law.

2. Rule 59 motion for new trial
We review a district court's denial of a motion for a new trial under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 59 for abuse of discretion. Song v. Ives Labs., 957 F.2d 1041, 1047 (2d Cir. 1992). "A district court has abused its discretion if it has (1) based its ruling on an erroneous view of the law, (2) made a clearly erroneous assessment of the evidence, or (3) rendered a decision that cannot be located within the range of permissible decisions." Chin v. Port Auth. of N.Y. & N.J., 685 F.3d 135, 146 (2d Cir. 2012) (internal quotation marks omitted). In adjudicating a Rule 59 motion, the court must disregard any errors or defects that, in all likelihood, did not "affect[] the outcome of the case." Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). As relevant here, a district court may award a new trial if it determines that the jury reached a verdict that is against the weight of the evidence—that is, only if a verdict is "seriously erroneous" or would result in a miscarriage of justice. See Raedle v. Credit Agricole Indosuez, 670 F.3d 411, 417-18 (2d Cir. 2012). Further, on a Rule 59 motion, courts must accord a "high degree of deference . . . to the jury's evaluation of witness credibility." ING Glob. v. United Parcel Serv. Oasis Supply Corp., 757 F.3d 92, 97 (2d Cir. 2014) (internal quotation marks omitted). "Absent a showing of prejudice, the jury's verdict should not be disturbed." Chin, 685 F.3d at 162 (internal quotation marks and alteration omitted).
Plaintiffs fail to demonstrate [*8]  that the district court abused its discretion here. They have neither identified a prejudicial error in the jury instructions nor offered a persuasive reason to conclude that the jury's verdict in the Hospital's favor is not in accordance with the weight of the evidence presented at trial. We therefore affirm the district court's denial of plaintiffs' Rule 59 motion.
* * *
We have considered plaintiffs' remaining arguments and find in them no basis for reversal. The order of the district court is AFFIRMED.


End of Document

