Andrews v. Keystone Human Servs.
United States District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania
October 1, 2019, Decided; October 1, 2019, Filed
Civil No. 1:19-cv-220

Reporter
2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 171120 *; 2019 WL 9465909
DELAINE ANDREWS, Plaintiffs v. KEYSTONE HUMAN SERVICES, WENDY BARGO, and DAVE TYSON, Defendants
Subsequent History: Adopted by, Dismissed by, in part, Dismissed by, Without prejudice, in part, Remanded by Andrews v. Keystone Human Servs., 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 233369 (M.D. Pa., Oct. 21, 2019)
Prior History: Andrews v. Keystone Human Servs., 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 66276 (M.D. Pa., Apr. 18, 2019)
Counsel:  [*1] Delaine Andrews, Plaintiff, Pro se, Harrisburg, PA.
For Keystone Human Services, Wendy Bargo Individual, Dave Tyson Individual, Defendants: Kelley E. Kaufman, Mark A. Hipple, McNees Wallace & Nurick LLC, Harrisburg, PA.
Judges: Martin C. Carlson, United States Magistrate Judge. Judge Kane.
Opinion by: Martin C. Carlson
Opinion



REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION

I. Introduction and Statement of the Case
This is a pro se lawsuit brought by a former employee of Keystone Human Services ("Keystone"), alleging discriminatory and retaliatory conduct by the defendants. The plaintiff brings this action against Keystone and her individual supervisors, Wendy Bargo and Dave Tyson.
At the outset, some brief consideration of the procedural history of this case is appropriate. The current operative pleading in this case is Andrews' third amended complaint. (Doc. 24.) The fact that we are, at the outset of this litigation, considering a third amended complaint highlights what has been an early pattern in this lawsuit in which the defendants would move to dismiss the complaint, and Andrews would not directly respond to the dispositive motion but would simply seek leave to amend. Thus, Andrews commenced this action in February of 2019 by filing [*2]  a complaint. (Doc. 1.) The defendants then filed a motion to dismiss the pro se complaint. (Doc. 12.) In response, the plaintiff moved to file an amended complaint. (Doc. 13.) We granted this motion and dismissed the defendant's motion to dismiss as moot in light of the filing of the amended complaint. (Doc. 15.) The defendants then filed a second motion to dismiss. (Doc. 17.) This second motion to dismiss inspired another effort by the plaintiff to further amend the amended complaint to address the exhaustion questions raised by the motion to dismiss. (Doc. 18.) We permitted Andrews to file this second amended complaint, and the defendants moved to dismiss this, the plaintiff's second amended complaint. (Doc. 20.)
Andrews did not respond to this motion to dismiss. Instead, she filed yet another motion to amend her complaint. (Doc. 22.) We permitted this third amendment of the complaint and granted this motion but advised the plaintiff in clear and precise terms that: "given these three amendments of this complaint, no further leave to amend will be granted, absent compelling circumstances." (Doc. 23.) The defendants then moved to dismiss this third amended complaint. (Doc. 25.) Andrews, in turn, filed [*3]  a fourth motion to amend this complaint. (Doc. 28.) The motion was unaccompanied by any brief which would have provided an explanation regarding how this motion complied with our instruction that no further amendment would be permitted absent compelling circumstances, and the defendants filed an opposition to this motion to amend for yet another time. Accordingly, in order to address the threshold merits questions raised repeatedly by the defendants in their various motions to dismiss, but repeatedly deferred by Andrews through the filing of amended complaints, we denied this request to file a fourth amended complaint. In taking this course, however, we expressly noted that: "The motion to amend will be denied without prejudice to the plaintiff responding to the motion to dismiss by arguing that leave to amend should be granted if the motion to dismiss is granted." (Doc. 32.)
Given this procedural prologue, we turn to a consideration of the defendant's motion to dismiss certain claims set forth in the plaintiff's third amended complaint. The well-pleaded facts set forth in that third amended complaint allege as follows: The plaintiff, Delaine Andrews, worked as a Direct Support Professional [*4]  for Defendant Keystone since December 19, 2016. (Doc. 24, ¶ 9). Keystone provides mental health and disability services. Andrews alleges that she is a qualified person with a disability and that she performed all essential functions of her job under Co-Defendant Supervisor Bargo. (Id., ¶ 10). At some time during her employment with Keystone, Andrews requested a reasonable accommodation from her supervisors. (Id., ¶ 14). Wendy Grace, a Human Resources employee, granted Andrews' request for a reasonable accommodation. (Id., ¶¶ 15, 16).
Andrews alleges that following her reasonable accommodation request being granted, Tyson began to retaliate against her in the following ways: Tyson increased Andrews' workload in comparison to similarly situated employees without a disability, made work assignments more difficult in comparison to similarly situated employees without a disability, berated Andrews, and "[b]reached company policy by going into Plaintiff['s] computer." (Id., ¶¶ 17a-17d). Andrews subsequently made a complaint with Keystone. (Id., ¶ 18). A Keystone administrator recommended a transfer and in October 2017, Andrews was transferred to a different facility. (Id., ¶¶ 20, 22).
At the [*5]  new facility, Andrews again requested a reasonable accommodation. (Id., ¶ 23). Andrews requested a chair lift or other lifting apparatus to assist Andrews in lifting Keystone clients. (Id., ¶ 36). Andrews alleges that Keystone and Bargo required Andrews to lift more weight than what was required in the job description. (Id., ¶ 24). Andrews further alleges that Keystone and Bargo did not require similarly situated employees without a disability to lift more than the required weight. (Id., ¶¶ 25, 27, 29, 32, 34).
Andrews claims that on or about December 16, 2017, Andrews made a report to Grace and Bargo that she was unable to lift a Keystone client and needed a lifting apparatus. (Id., ¶ 42). Grace directed Andrews to use her paid leave until they could decide what to do regarding her accommodation request. (Id., ¶ 43). Andrews contends that she used all of her paid leave and went on unpaid leave, as directed by Grace. (Id., ¶ 44). On January 25, 2018, Andrews' request for an accommodation was denied and she was placed on leave without pay until July 31, 2018. (Id., ¶ 46). Andrews argues that she was constructively terminated at this point. (Id., ¶ 50).
Andrews alleges that the defendants [*6]  are liable under the Americans with Disability Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq., and the Rehabilitation Act ("RA"), 29 U.S.C. § 794, because Andrews was held to a higher standard than similarly situated employees outside of the protected class when she was required to lift more than similarly situated employees and more than the job description required. (Id., ¶¶ 54-56, 68). She contends that her work assignments were more difficult than other similarly situated employees without a disability. (Id., ¶¶ 95-96). Andrews further alleges that the defendants are liable under the ADA because they failed to provide her with a reasonable accommodation. (Id., ¶ 67). Finally, Andrews contends that the defendants are liable for "state law claims." (Id., ¶ 105).
The defendants have now filed the instant partial motion to dismiss. (Doc. 25). In this motion the defendants seek dismissal of Andrews' RA claims, "state law claims," and the federal claims lodged against the individual defendants, Bargo and Tyson. (Doc. 26). With respect to the RA claims, they contend that Andrews has failed to allege facts which show that Keystone is a program receiving federal funds and thus the RA does not apply to Keystone. (Id.) The defendants request [*7]  dismissal of Andrews' "state law claims" because she fails to identify any factual or legal basis for the claims. (Id.) In the same vein, the defendants contend that, to the extent Andrews is attempting to assert a claim under the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act ("PHRA"), 43 Pa. Cons. Stat. § 951 et seq., her claim fails because she has not exhausted her administrative remedies. Finally, the defendants request dismissal of Andrews' claims against individuals Bargo and Tyson because neither the ADA nor the RA imposes individual liability. (Id.)
For the reasons that follow, we will recommend that Keystone's Partial Motion to Dismiss be granted.

II. Discussion

A. Motion to Dismiss-Standard of Review
A motion to dismiss tests the legal sufficiency of a complaint. It is proper for the court to dismiss a complaint in accordance with Rule 12(b)(6) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure when the complaint "fail[s] to state a claim upon which relief can be granted." With respect to this benchmark standard for legal sufficiency of a complaint, the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit has aptly noted the evolving standards governing pleading practice in federal court, stating that:
Standards of pleading have been in the forefront of jurisprudence in recent years. [*8]  Beginning with the Supreme Court's opinion in Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 127 S. Ct. 1955, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929 (2007) continuing with our opinion in Phillips [v. Phillips, 515 F.3d 224, 230 (3d Cir. 2008)]and culminating recently with the Supreme Court's decision in Ashcroft v. Iqbal   556U.S.662  , 129 S. Ct. 1937, 173 L. Ed. 2d 868 (2009) pleading standards have seemingly shifted from simple notice pleading to a more heightened form of pleading, requiring a plaintiff to plead more than the possibility of relief to survive a motion to dismiss.
Fowler v. UPMC Shadyside, 578 F.3d 203, 209-10 (3d Cir. 2009).
In considering whether a complaint fails to state a claim upon which relief may be granted, the Court must accept as true all allegations in the complaint and all reasonable inferences that can be drawn therefrom are to be construed in the light most favorable to the plaintiff. Jordan v. Fox Rothschild, O'Brien & Frankel, Inc., 20 F.3d 1250, 1261 (3d Cir. 1994). However, a court "need not credit a complaint's bald assertions or legal conclusions when deciding a motion to dismiss." Morse v. Lower Merion Sch. Dist., 132 F.3d 902, 906 (3d Cir. 1997). Additionally, a court need not "assume that a ... plaintiff can prove facts that the ... plaintiff has not alleged." Associated Gen. Contractors of Cal. v. California State Council of Carpenters, 459 U.S. 519, 526, 103 S. Ct. 897, 74 L. Ed. 2d 723 (1983). As the Supreme Court held in Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 127 S. Ct. 1955, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929 (2007), in order to state a valid cause of action a plaintiff must provide some factual grounds for relief which "requires more than labels and conclusions, and a formulaic recitation of the elements of a cause of actions will not do." Id. at 555. "Factual allegations must be enough to raise a right to [*9]  relief above the speculative level." Id.
In keeping with the principles of Twombly, the Supreme Court has underscored that a trial court must assess whether a complaint states facts upon which relief can be granted when ruling on a motion to dismiss. In Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 129 S. Ct. 1937, 173 L. Ed. 2d 868 (2009), the Supreme Court held that, when considering a motion to dismiss, a court should "begin by identifying pleadings that, because they are no more than conclusions, are not entitled to the assumption of truth." Id. at 679. According to the Supreme Court, "[t]hreadbare recitals of the elements of a cause of action, supported by mere conclusory statements, do not suffice." Id. at 678. Rather, in conducting a review of the adequacy of complaint, the Supreme Court has advised trial courts that they must:
[B]egin by identifying pleadings that because they are no more than conclusions are not entitled to the assumption of truth. While legal conclusions can provide the framework of a complaint, they must be supported by factual allegations. When there are well-pleaded factual allegations, a court should assume their veracity and then determine whether they plausibly give rise to an entitlement to relief.
Id. at 679.
Thus, following Twombly and Iqbal, a well-pleaded complaint [*10]  must contain more than mere legal labels and conclusions. Rather, a complaint must recite factual allegations sufficient to raise the plaintiff's claimed right to relief beyond the level of mere speculation. As the Third Circuit has stated:
[A]fter Iqbal, when presented with a motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim, district courts should conduct a two-part analysis. First, the factual and legal elements of a claim should be separated. The District Court must accept all of the complaint's well-pleaded facts as true, but may disregard any legal conclusions. Second, a District Court must then determine whether the facts alleged in the complaint are sufficient to show that the plaintiff has a 'plausible claim for relief.' In other words, a complaint must do more than allege the plaintiff's entitlement to relief. A complaint has to 'show' such an entitlement with its facts.
Fowler, 578 F.3d at 210-11.
Two years after Fowler, the Third Circuit further observed:
The Supreme Court in Twombly set forth the "plausibility" standard for overcoming a motion to dismiss and refined this approach in Iqbal. The plausibility standard requires the complaint to allege "enough facts to state a claim to relief that is plausible [*11]  on its face." Twombly, 550 U.S. at 570, 127 S. Ct. 1955. A complaint satisfies the plausibility standard when the factual pleadings "allow[ ] the court to draw the reasonable inference that the defendant is liable for the misconduct alleged." Iqbal, 129 S. Ct. at 1949 (citing Twombly, 550 U.S. at 556, 127 S. Ct. (1955)). This standard requires showing "more than a sheer possibility that a defendant has acted unlawfully." Id. A complaint which pleads facts "merely consistent with" a defendant's liability, [ ] "stops short of the line between possibility and plausibility of 'entitlement of relief.'"
Burtch v. Milberg Factors, Inc., 662 F.3d 212, 220-21 (3d Cir. 2011).
In practice, consideration of the legal sufficiency of a complaint entails a three-step analysis:
First, the court must "tak[e] note of the elements a plaintiff must plead to state a claim." Iqbal, 129 S. Ct. at 1947. Second, the court should identify allegations that, "because they are no more than conclusions, are not entitled to the assumption of truth." Id. at 1950. Finally, "where there are well-pleaded factual allegations, a court should assume their veracity and then determine whether they plausibly give rise to an entitlement for relief." Id.
Santiago v. Warminster Twp., 629 F.3d 121, 130 (3d Cir. 2010).
In addition to these pleading rules, a civil complaint must comply with the requirements of Rule 8(a) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, which defines what a complaint should say and provides that:
(a) A pleading that [*12]  states a claim for relief must contain (1) a short and plain statement of the grounds for the court's jurisdiction, unless the court already has jurisdiction and the claim needs no new jurisdictional support; (2) a short and plain statement of the claim showing that the pleader is entitled to relief; and (3) a demand for the relief sought, which may include relief in the alternative or different types of relief.
Fed. R. Civ. P. 8(a).
Thus, a well-pleaded complaint must contain more than mere legal labels and conclusions. Rather, a plaintiff's complaint must recite factual allegations which are sufficient to raise the plaintiff's claimed right to relief beyond the level of mere speculation, set forth in a "short and plain" statement of a cause of action.

B. Keystone's Partial Motion to Dismiss Should be Granted.
Keystone has moved to dismiss Plaintiff's Rehabilitation Act claims, the federal claims against individual defendants Bargo and Tyson, and any state law claims, including any claims brought pursuant to the PHRA. After a review of the complaint, we conclude that Andrews fails to allege facts that would bring Keystone within the coverage of the Rehabilitation Act (RA), and her claims against individual [*13]  defendants should be dismissed because the ADA and RA do not impose individual liability. Additionally, the state law claims should be dismissed because Andrews fails to identify a factual or legal basis for any actionable common law claims, and to the extent Andrews is attempting to allege a claim under the PHRA, her third amended complaint does not allege that she has exhausted her administrative remedies.

1. The Rehabilitation Act Applies Only to Parties Receiving Federal Assistance.
Andrews asserts claims under the Rehabilitation Act. The RA prohibits discrimination against individuals "under any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance or under any program or activity conducted by an Executive agency or United States Postal Service." 29 U.S.C. § 794(a). In order to assert a claim against Keystone under the RA, Andrews must show that Keystone is a (1) a "program or activity" that (2) receives "federal financial assistance." Bamat v. Glenn O. Hawbaker, Inc, 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 39236, *5 (M.D. Pa. March 12, 2019). On this score, the Third Circuit has stated that "the question of whether the entity received federal funds is important . . . in order to make out a prima facie case under the RA." Haybarger v. Lawrence Cnty. Adult Prob. & Parole, 551 F.3d 193, 199 n.3 (3d Cir. 2008); see also Hunt v. University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pinnacle, 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 135650, 2019 WL 3776545, at *5 (M.D. Pa. Aug. 12, 2019); Dana v. Baker Hughes, Inc., 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 125548, 2015 WL 5576880, at *5 (M.D. Pa. Sept. 21, 2015). Here, Andrews does not allege any facts showing that Keystone [*14]  is a program or activity that receives federal financial assistance, and thus has not made a prima facie showing that Keystone is subject to the RA. Accordingly, Andrews' RA claims should be dismissed.

2. The ADA and Rehabilitation Act Do Not Allow for Liability Against Individual Defendants.
Andrews has also filed this federal civil rights lawsuit against both Keystone and individual Defendants Bargo and Tyson. However, Andrews fails to state any actionable federal claims against the individual defendants under either the RA or ADA. These federal individual liability claims fail for a single, simple reason. To the extent Andrews asserts claims against Bargo and Tyson under the ADA, such claims must fail because the ADA does not provide for individual liability. Koslow v. Pa., 302 F.3d 161, 178 (3d Cir. 2002); Michalesko v. Freeland Borough, 18 F. Supp. 3d 609, 626 (M.D. Pa. 2014). Similarly, to the extent Andrews asserts claims against these individuals under the RA, such claims must fail because the RA does not provide for individual liability. A.W. v. Jersey City Public Schools, 486 F.3d 791, 804 (3d Cir. 2007); Emerson v. Thiel College, 296 F.3d 184, 190 (3d Cir. 2002). Accordingly, the federal RA and ADA claims lodged against the individual defendants should be dismissed.

3. Plaintiff Identifies No Legal or Factual Basis for State Law Claims.
Finally, in Count V of her Third Amended Complaint, Andrews asserts "state law" [*15]  claims but does not provide a legal or factual basis for these ill-defined state law claims. The only factual allegations in Count V generally refer to "discrimination and retaliation." (Doc. 24, ¶ 106). It appears, therefore, that Andrews is purporting to raise state law claims of discrimination and retaliatory discharge based on her disabilities.
To the extent that Andrews is attempting to allege some free-standing state common law claims, it is well-established that "courts will not entertain a separate common law action for wrongful discharge where specific statutory remedies are available." Jacques v. AKZO Int'l Salt, Inc., 422 Pa. Super. 419, 619 A.2d 748, 753 (Pa. Super. 1993); see Gillispie v. RegionalCare Hosp. Partners Inc., 892 F.3d 585, 597 (3d Cir. 2018) ("Pennsylvania law does not recognize a common law cause of action for violating public policy if a statutory remedy exists"); Bruffett v. Warner Communications, Inc., 692 F.2d 910, 919 (3d Cir. 1982) ("If a common law action for the same claims were recognized, it would give the claimant an opportunity to circumvent the carefully drafted legislative procedures"); Fisher v. Catholic Soc. Servs. Of Archdiocese of Philadelphia, 2019 WL 3731688, at *10 (E.D. Pa. Aug. 8, 2019) ("Pennsylvania courts have consistently held that the availability of a statutory remedy precludes any reliance on the public policy exception"). Importantly, statutory remedies are available both under state law through the PHRA and under federal law through the ADA for claims of discrimination, [*16]  including discharge or constructive discharge, discrimination based on a disability, as well as a failure to engage in an interactive process and provide reasonable accommodations to an otherwise qualified individual with a disability. 42 U.S.C. § 12101; 43 Pa. Cons. Stat. § 951. Because statutory remedies exist under the PHRA and ADA, Andrews' generic, common law "state law" claims based on discrimination and retaliation fail. Weaver v. Harpster, 601 Pa. 488, 975 A.2d 555, 567 (Pa. 2009).
Further, to the extent that Andrews is attempting to assert a claim under the PHRA, this claim should be dismissed because Andrews has thus far failed to properly allege that she timely exhausted her administrative remedies. For an administrative complaint to be timely under the PHRA, the administrative complaint must be filed with the Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission within 180 days of the discriminatory or retaliatory conduct. 43 Pa. Cons. Stat. § 959(h). Under the PHRA, a plaintiff must exhaust all administrative remedies before pursuing litigation. Woodson v. Scott Paper Co., 109 F.3d 913, 925 (3d Cir. 1997).
In this current, third amended complaint, Andrews does not allege that she (1) dual-filed her EEOC Charges with the PHRC as required by the Act, or (2) filed an administrative complaint within 180 days of the alleged discriminatory or retaliatory conduct as required by [*17]  the Act. Although Andrews claims that "EEOC Charges against Defendants alleging disability discrimination, harassment, hostile work environment and retaliation were timely filed with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission," the EEOC Charge does not bear any indication or receipt or acceptance by the EEOC. The EEOC charge bears Andrews' signature and is dated July 5, 2018. Further, any discriminatory or retaliatory conduct occurring more than 180 days prior to July 5, 2018 (prior to January 6, 2018) and Andrews has not shown that this claim was raised in a timely manner under the PHRA. In her Third Amended Complaint, Andrews contends that she was "constructively discharged" on or about December 17, 2017, which is prior to January 6, 2018 and therefore is beyond the limitations period set by the PHRA. (Doc. 24, ¶ 67). Accordingly, to the extent that Andrews is attempting to assert a claim against the defendants under the PHRA, this claim fails because Andrews has not alleged that she properly exhausted her administrative remedies.
Having reached these conclusions and recommendations with respect to the defendants' motion to dismiss the third amended complaint in this case, we note [*18]  that Andrews' has voiced a desire to attempt to file yet another, fourth amended complaint, in an effort once again to endeavor to address the administrative exhaustion issues raised by the defense. (Doc. 28.) We had previously declined Andrews' invitation to defer merits analysis through the filing of a fourth amended complaint but had stated that "The motion to amend will be denied without prejudice to the plaintiff responding to the motion to dismiss by arguing that leave to amend should be granted if the motion to dismiss is granted." (Doc. 32.) We are mindful of the fact that in civil rights cases pro se plaintiffs often should be afforded an opportunity to amend a complaint before the complaint is dismissed in its entirety, Fletcher-Hardee Corp. v. Pote Concrete Contractors, 482 F.3d 247, 253 (3d Cir. 2007), unless granting further leave to amend is not necessary in a case such as this where amendment would be futile or result in undue delay, Alston v. Parker, 363 F.3d 229, 235 (3d Cir. 2004). Accordingly, acting out of an abundance of caution, and understanding that Andrews has belatedly suggested that she may be able to state facts which would satisfy this administrative exhaustion requirement under the PHRA, it is further recommended that Andrews' federal claim under the RA and her federal claims against [*19]  the individual defendants be dismissed with prejudice. In addition, any state law common-law claims advanced by Andrews should be dismissed with prejudice, but Andrews' state law PHRA claim should be dismissed without prejudice to Andrews attempting to file an amended complaint which properly states a fully exhausted claim under this state statute.

III. Recommendation
Accordingly, or the foregoing reasons, IT IS HEREBY RECOMMENDED that the defendants' partial motion to dismiss (Doc. 25) be GRANTED. IT IS FURTHER RECOMMENDED THAT the plaintiff's Rehabilitation Act claims and the federal claims lodged against the individual defendants, Bargo and Tyson, be dismissed with prejudice and that any common law "state law claims" be dismissed with prejudice. IT IS ALSO RECOMMENDED that any state law claims under the PHRA be dismissed without prejudice to the filing of an amended complaint which properly states a fully exhausted claim under this state statute.
The parties are hereby placed on notice that pursuant to Local Rule 72.3:
Any party may object to a magistrate judge's proposed findings, recommendations, or report addressing a motion or matter described in 28 U.S.C. § 636 (b)(1)(B) or making a recommendation for the disposition [*20]  of a prisoner case or a habeas corpus petition within fourteen (14) days after being served with a copy thereof. Such party shall file with the clerk of court, and serve on the magistrate judge and all parties, written objections which shall specifically identify the portions of the proposed findings, recommendations or report to which objection is made and the basis for such objections. The briefing requirements set forth in Local Rule 72.2 shall apply. A judge shall make a de novo determination of those portions of the report or specified proposed findings or recommendations to which objection is made and may accept, reject, or modify, in whole or in part, the findings or recommendations made by the magistrate judge. The judge, however, need conduct a new hearing only in his or her discretion or where required by law, and may consider the record developed before the magistrate judge, making his or her own determination on the basis of that record. The judge may also receive further evidence, recall witnesses, or recommit the matter to the magistrate judge with instructions.
Submitted this 1st day of October 2019.
/s/ Martin C. Carlson
Martin C. Carlson
United States Magistrate Judge


End of Document

