Annenberg v. Clark Cnty. Sch. Dist.
United States District Court for the District of Nevada
May 2, 2019, Decided
Case No.: 2:17-cv-03090-APG-NJK

Reporter
2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 247778 *; 2019 WL 13249693
PAMELA ANNENBERG, Plaintiff v. CLARK COUNTY SCHOOL DISTRICT, Defendant
Prior History: Annenberg v. Clark Cty. Sch. Dist., 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 101003, 2018 WL 3014791 (D. Nev., June 15, 2018)
Counsel:  [*1] For Clark County School District, Defendant: Crystal J. Herrera, Clark County School District, Las Vegas, NV.
For Pamela Annenberg, Plaintiff: Kirk T Kennedy, Kirk T. Kennedy, Las Vegas, NV.
For Clark County School District, Defendant: S. Scott Greenberg, LEAD ATTORNEY, Clark County School District, Las Vegas, NV.
Judges: ANDREW P. GORDON, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: ANDREW P. GORDON
Opinion



Order Granting Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment
Plaintiff Pamela Annenberg is a special education teacher at defendant Clark County School District's (CCSD) Eldorado High School in Las Vegas, Nevada. Annenberg suffers from a medical condition that affects her ability to concentrate and sought an accommodation under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) to help her complete certain job duties. CCSD granted her an accommodation, but Annenberg alleges that school administrators did not honor it. She sues CCSD for violations of the ADA, the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA), and corresponding Nevada law. CCSD moves for summary judgment, arguing that Annenberg's claims lack evidentiary support. I grant CCSD's motion because Annenberg cannot show a dispute of material fact as to any of her claims and CCSD is entitled to judgment a as a [*2]  matter of law.

I. BACKGROUND
Annenberg has been a special education teacher at Eldorado since 2007.1 She is responsible for, among other things, serving as the "teacher of record" for assigned students.2 This requires her to develop, implement, and complete a record of her assigned students' individualized education plans (IEPs).3 IEPs are an essential function of the special-education teacher position and must be completed by federally mandated deadlines.4

A. Annenberg's Classroom Observations, Discipline, and Overall Evaluation
During the 2016-17 school year, Annenberg was a collaborative/cooperative teacher at Eldorado.5 Jennifer Ludtke joined Eldorado as an assistant principal in December 2016.6 Part of her duties as assistant principal was to observe teachers under the Nevada Education Performance Framework.7 Ludtke's first observation of Annenberg was on January 31, 2017.8 She noted that Annenberg was not activating students' initial understandings, was not structuring or assisting any classroom routines or expectations, and was not collaborating with the general education teacher in the classroom.9 Ludtke noticed that Annenberg stayed at her desk and did not engage with her students. [*3] 10 Ludtke reviewed her observation with Annenberg two days later and told her that if she did not improve her performance, she would receive an overall "minimally effective" or "ineffective" score at the end of the school year.11
Ludtke observed Annenberg again a week later and noted similar issues, including Annenberg giving one-size-fits-all tasks to students and teaching information incorrectly.12 Ludtke reviewed her observation with Annenberg two weeks later and again told Annenberg that she needed to improve or she would receive "minimally effective" or "ineffective" overall scores.13 Ludtke conducted a third observation in early March, again noted similar issues, and in reviewing the observation with Annenberg four days later warned Annenberg of the danger to her overall score if she did not improve.14 Ludtke noted the same issues in her final observation ten days later.15 The same day, she reviewed her final observation with Annenberg and gave her the same warning she had previously given.16
About one week before the final observation, Ludtke was notified via email that Annenberg was sleeping during class.17 Ludtke investigated and learned that several students [*4]  had told another teacher about the incident.18 She interviewed students from the class period at issue and some confirmed the story.19 Ludtke issued an oral warning to Annenberg.20 The document accompanying the warning noted that witness statements supported the allegation that Annenberg was sleeping during class, that Annenberg said she did not remember falling asleep during class, and that Annenberg was directed to meet her instructional duties and conduct herself professionally.21
Based on her failure to improve over the course of four observations and the oral warning, Annenberg received an overall rating of "minimally effective" on her evaluation for the 2016-17 school year.22
At the beginning of the 2017 school year, Annenberg was informed that there would be a surplus that year and Eldorado would lose two special education positions.23 She was asked if she wanted to voluntarily transfer in accordance with the applicable collective bargaining agreement.24 Annenberg refused. There was no surplus that year, though, and Eldorado ended up losing only one special education position.25

B. Annenberg's Disability and Accommodation
In August 2016, Annenberg contacted CCSD's Office [*5]  of Diversity and Affirmative Action/ADA Programs for a disability accommodation.26 Between August and October, the Office of Diversity worked with Annenberg to understand her disability and request for accommodation. Initially, Annenberg requested not to have to complete IEPs.27 But when she confirmed that completing IEPs was an essential function of her job, the Office of Diversity told her that it could not grant an accommodation that removes essential job functions so she withdrew that request.28
The Office of Diversity worked with CCSD officials and Eldorado's administration to identify an accommodation, eventually offering an aide to assist in inputting the IEPs on the computer.29 Annenberg rejected this offer and said that she wanted to discuss things with her doctor before deciding how to proceed.30
She stopped communicating with the Office of Diversity until January 2017, when she submitted an ADA questionnaire from her doctor discussing her disability.31 The ADA questionnaire noted that Annenberg suffered from memory loss and difficulty concentrating, which made computer-based tasks difficult.32 Her doctor opined that Annenberg could perform her job with a reasonable accommodation, [*6]  like receiving more time to do certain tasks.33 When the Office of Diversity followed up with Annenberg about this questionnaire and her accommodation request, she stated that she would like more time to complete her assigned IEPs.34 Annenberg told the Office of Diversity that she was "not trying to get out of doing IEPs," and instead just needed to space them out so she did not have multiple IEPs due on the same day.35 She said that she did not want to have to complete several IEPs in the same week on consecutive days and spacing them out would help with her concentration issues.36 The Office of Diversity eventually granted Annenberg the accommodation of being able to space out her IEPs as needed so long as federal deadlines were met.37

C. Charge of Discrimination and This Lawsuit
Annenberg filed a charge of discrimination with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) in February 2017, alleging that she was discriminated and retaliated against because of her age and disability. She alleged that she received a negative observation in January 2017 based on her disability. She received her notice of right to sue from the EEOC in September 2017 and filed this suit in December [*7]  2017.
In her amended complaint, Annenberg asserts a single cause of action, alleging violations of the ADA, ADEA, and "Nevada Law."38 Annenberg now agrees to dismiss her ADEA claims, so I address only her claims for discrimination and retaliation in violation of the ADA and comparable Nevada statutes.39

II. LEGAL STANDARD
Summary judgment is appropriate when the pleadings and admissible evidence "show there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law."40 When considering summary judgment, the court views all facts and draws all inferences in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party.41 If reasonable minds could differ on material facts, summary judgment is not appropriate and the case must proceed to trial.42
If the moving party demonstrates the absence of any genuine issue of material fact, the burden shifts to the party resisting summary judgment to "set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial."43 "To defeat summary judgment, the nonmoving party must produce evidence of a genuine dispute of material fact that could satisfy its burden at trial."44

III. ANALYSIS
Cases brought under the ADA are [*8]  subject to the burden-shifting analysis from McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green45 and its progeny.46 The McDonnell Douglas analysis follows a three-step process, the first of which requires the plaintiff to establish a prima facie case of discrimination.47 "Establishment of a prima facie case in effect creates a presumption that the employer unlawfully discriminated against the employee."48 If the plaintiff presents a prima facie case, "the burden shifts to the defendant to produce some evidence demonstrating a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the employee's termination."49 And if the defendant meets that burden, "any presumption that the defendant discriminated 'drops from the case,' and the plaintiff must then show that the defendant's alleged reason for termination was merely a pretext for discrimination."50 To the extent that Annenberg's claim is also based on Nevada Revised Statutes § 613.330 et seq., the same analysis applies, so I will not address those claims separately.51
Annenberg alleges CCSD discriminated against her because of her disability and retaliated against her for requesting an accommodation and filing an EEOC charge. In her opposition to the summary judgment motion, Annenberg argues that CCSD interfered [*9]  with her exercise of her rights under the ADA, similar to interference under the Family Medical Leave Act. But this was not part of her amended complaint or a theory up to this point, and she does not cite law that supports this as an independent cause of action. Her argument seems to recharacterize her ADA retaliation claim as one for interference. But an opposition to summary judgment is not "a procedural second chance to flesh out inadequate pleadings."52 Annenberg's amended complaint asserts claims for ADA discrimination and retaliation, and she cannot now present a new theory of recovery. So I will consider only discrimination and retaliation.

A. ADA Discrimination
Title I of the ADA prohibits public and private employers from discriminating against qualified individuals with disabilities in employment practices.53 The ADA contemplates two types of discrimination: disparate treatment and failure to accommodate.54 Annenberg does not specify under which theory she brings her claim, but she argues the standards for both in her opposition to CCSD's motion, so I address both.

1. Disparate Treatment
CCSD argues that Annenberg's claim for disparate-treatment discrimination fails for several reasons: (1) Annenberg cannot [*10]  present a prima facie case for discrimination because she is not disabled or a qualified individual under the ADA and she did not suffer an adverse employment action; and (2) even if she could present a prima facie case, she lacks evidence to show CCSD's legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its actions were pretext for discrimination.
To establish a prima facie case of discrimination under the ADA, a plaintiff must demonstrate that: (1) she is disabled within the meaning of the ADA; (2) she is a qualified individual able to perform the essential functions of the job with reasonable accommodation; and (3) she suffered an adverse employment action because of her disability.55 Annenberg's disparate-treatment claim fails this test.
Annenberg bases her discrimination claim on five alleged adverse employment actions: the negative observations, Ludtke's criticism of her teaching style, being asked if she would voluntarily transfer to another school in the surplus, the administration allegedly not honoring her accommodation, and the oral warning for sleeping in class. CCSD argues that none of these is an adverse employment action because Annenberg cannot show that any of them negatively affected [*11]  her employment.
For an act to be considered an "adverse employment action," it must "materially" affect the compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of the plaintiff's employment.56 For example, "hiring, firing, failing to promote, reassignment with significantly different responsibilities, or a decision causing significant change in benefits" are adverse employment actions.57 "By contrast," things like "declining to hold a job open for an employee and badmouthing an employee outside the job reference context do not constitute adverse employment actions."58
A mediocre performance evaluation not accompanied by any meaningful change in work assignment is not an adverse employment action.59 Annenberg has not presented evidence outside of her own speculation that the negative observations were undeserved or affected her work assignment, so they are not adverse employment actions.60 Similarly, Annenberg presents no evidence that Ludtke's negative comments affected the terms of her employment in any way. To the extent that Annenberg now argues that Ludtke's actions amounted to a hostile work environment, Annenberg abandoned those allegations when she agreed that her ADEA claims should be dismissed. [*12] 61
Annenberg also alleges that the school attempted to remove her during the 2017-18 school year, but it is undisputed that Annenberg was asked only if she wanted to voluntarily transfer in anticipation of the surplus. Annenberg does not dispute that she was not actually transferred to another school. She speculates that the school was trying to force her out but offers no evidence of that. And because she remained in her position at Eldorado, she cannot show that there was any effect on the terms of her employment as a result of being asked if she would volunteer to transfer.
As to Annenberg's argument that her accommodation was not honored, she makes no argument about how this could be an adverse employment action. It is unclear how the alleged failure to honor her accommodation (regardless of the accommodation's parameters) affected the terms, conditions, or benefits of her employment. Annenberg's primary argument about her accommodation was that it was not honored at all, not that the failure to honor it somehow negatively affected her employment. She therefore fails to show that this was an adverse employment action.
Finally, the oral warning was not disciplinary in nature, and there [*13]  is no evidence that it was accompanied by a demotion, loss of pay, loss of work privileges, suspension, or other discipline. The document informs Annenberg that her "performance is seriously below standard and must improve."62 "[L]etters of warning or reprimand that are unaccompanied by an actual adverse effect on compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment do not constitute 'adverse employment actions.'"63 The oral warning is not an adverse employment action.
Annenberg therefore fails to establish a prima facie case for discrimination, and her claim fails at the first step of the McDonnel Douglas analysis. Accordingly, I grant summary judgment in CCSD's favor on this portion of Annenberg's claim.

2. Failure to Accommodate
"[T]he ADA says that 'discrimination' includes an employer's 'not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified . . . employee unless [the employer] can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of its business."64 "[O]nce the employee requests an accommodation . . . the employer must engage in an interactive process with the employee to determine the appropriate [*14]  reasonable accommodation."65 But "there exists no stand-alone claim for failing to engage in the interactive process. Rather, discrimination results from denying an available and reasonable accommodation."66
Annenberg argues that administrators at Eldorado did not honor the accommodation she believed she had received. The record shows that Annenberg requested the accommodation of either not having to do IEPs or spacing out her IEPs, and that CCSD worked with her to reach a reasonable accommodation: Annenberg would be allowed to space out her IEPs at her discretion so long as federal deadlines were met. There is no dispute that an available and reasonable accommodation existed and that CCSD granted Annenberg that accommodation.
Annenberg presents no evidence that the administration prevented her from spacing out her IEPs at her discretion as long as federal deadlines were met. But regardless of the actual parameters of her accommodation,67 Annenberg has failed to show a dispute about whether it was honored. Annenberg alleges in her amended complaint that she was required to "complete more IEP sessions than contemplated by her approved ADA accommodation,"68 but presents no evidence that she was [*15]  assigned extra IEPs or had too many IEPs scheduled. Her conclusory allegation is not enough to create a dispute of fact to survive summary judgment.69 Therefore, to the extent that Annenberg's ADA discrimination claim is premised on failure to accommodate, I grant summary judgment in CCSD's favor.

B. ADA Retaliation
The last part of Annenberg's claim alleges that the administration's actions against her (the negative observations, oral warning, criticism, and request to voluntarily transfer) were retaliation for requesting an accommodation and filing an EEOC charge. CCSD argues that Annenberg cannot present a prima facie case for retaliation and, even if she could, she lacks evidence of pretext to overcome CCSD's legitimate, nonretaliatory reasons for taking those actions. Annenberg responds that the timing of the actions related to her protected activity give rise to a presumption of retaliation that CCSD cannot overcome.
To present a prima facie case for ADA retaliation, a plaintiff must show that (1) she engaged in a protected activity, (2) she suffered an adverse employment action, and (3) there exists a causal connection between the protected activity and the adverse employment [*16]  action.70
Like her discrimination claim, Annenberg's claim for retaliation fails because she cannot make out a prima facie case. Annenberg relies on the same adverse employment actions in this claim as she did in her discrimination claim. But, as discussed above, none of the complained-of actions is an adverse employment action. While she is correct that her protected activity and the allegedly adverse employment actions happened within a short window of time, that only speaks to the third element of her prima facie case. She is still required to present evidence that she suffered an adverse employment action, and she has not done so. I therefore grant summary judgment in CCSD's favor for this portion of Annenberg's claim.

IV. CONCLUSION
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED that CCSD's motion for summary judgment [ECF No. 35] is GRANTED. The clerk of court is directed to enter judgment in favor of defendant Clark County School District and against plaintiff Pamela Annenberg and to close this case.
DATED this 2nd day of May, 2019.
/s/ Andrew P. Gordon
ANDREW P. GORDON
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

