Apedjinou v. Inova Health Care Servs.
United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia, Alexandria Division
December 19, 2018, Decided; December 19, 2018, Filed
Case No. 1:18-cv-287

Reporter
2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 242355 *
OLGA APEDJINOU, Plaintiff, v. INOVA HEALTH CARE SERVICES, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Inova Health Care Services, Defendant: Laurie Lea Kirkland, LEAD ATTORNEY, Blankingship & Keith PC(Fairfax), Fairfax, VA.
For Olga Apedjinou, Plaintiff: Sara Nunley McDonough, Susan Laiken Kruger, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Alan Lescht & Associates PC, Washington, DC.
Judges: T. S. Ellis, III, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: T. S. Ellis, III
Opinion



ORDER
Plaintiff brings this action against her former employer, defendant, pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"),1 alleging that defendant (i) denied plaintiff reasonable accommodations for her disability, (ii) discriminated against plaintiff on the basis of plaintiff's disability, and (iii) retaliated against plaintiff because plaintiff requested a reasonable accornmodation.2 Defendant has moved for summary judgment on each of these claims. Because the undisputed record evidence shows that defendant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law as to each of these claims, defendant's motion for summary judgment must be granted.

I.
The summary judgment standard is too well-settled to merit extended discussion. As Rule 56, Fed. R. Civ. P., makes clear, summary judgment is appropriate where "the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as [*2]  to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." And it is settled that "the burden on the moving party may be discharged by 'showing'—that is, pointing out to the district court—that there is an absence of evidence to support the nonmoving party's case." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 325, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). On the other hand, if the record reflects a genuine factual dispute, summary judgment is precluded. A genuine factual dispute exists "if the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). But importantly, the party opposing summary judgment may not rest upon mere allegations and denials, but must instead "set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." Id. Moreover, these specific facts must be shown to exist in the record in legally admissible form. Finally, "[t]he mere existence of a scintilla of evidence in support of the [non-moving party's] position will be insufficient; there must be evidence on which the jury could reasonably find for the [non-moving party]." Id at 252.
Given that summary judgment is appropriate only where there are no genuine disputes of material fact, Fed. R. Civ. P. 56, the first step in the analysis is to identify the record facts [*3]  as to which no genuine dispute exists. In this regard, Local Rule 56(B) directs a movant for summary judgment to include in its submission a separately captioned section listing in numbered paragraphs all material facts as to which the movant contends no genuine dispute exists. Local Civ. R. 56(B); see also Apedjinou v. Inova Health Care Servs., No. 1:18-cv-00287-TSE-IDD, Order at ¶ 14, ECF No. 9 (June 15, 2018). The nonmovant must then respond to each numbered paragraph, either admitting or contesting the putative undisputed fact and citing admissible record evidence to establish that there is a genuine dispute of material fact. The nonmovant's failure to respond to a fact listed by the movant or to cite to admissible record evidence constitutes an admission that the fact is undisputed. Apedjinou v. Inova Health Care Servs., No. 1:18-cv-00287-TSE-IDD, Order at ¶ 14, ECF No. 9 (June 15, 2018).
In this case, both parties essentially complied with the requirements.3 Accordingly, the facts recited here are derived from the parties' lists of material facts that are not disputed and their respective responses.
• Defendant, Inova Healthcare Services, is a not-for-profit healthcare system based in Northern Virginia and employs [*4]  over 16,000 people. Defendant maintains nondiscrimination and anti-retaliation policies and regularly conducts trainings with employees to emphasize that defendant does not tolerate discrimination or retaliation.
• Plaintiff, Olga Apedjinou, was employed by defendant from fall 2015 until January 2017. Although plaintiff was initially hired as a "float pool nurse," which is a position requiring the ability to work in any hospital unit, defendant re-assigned plaintiff to a bedside nurse position in the Medicine C Unit. Defendant re-assigned plaintiff due to reports that plaintiff's clinical skills were too weak for plaintiff to work as a float pool nurse.
• On August 21, 2016, plaintiff reported that she felt a sharp pain in her right arm while attempting to help a patient into an upright position.4
• Because plaintiff's injury occurred on the job, plaintiff was referred to defendant's Employee Health and Workers' Compensation departments.
• In late August 2016, plaintiff submitted to defendant a "return to work status form," which reflected that plaintiff could return to work only under certain restrictions. Specifically, plaintiff could not lift or carry anything weighing more than five [*5]  pounds, and she could not use her right arm, which was in a sling.
• Plaintiff's unit, the Medicine C Unit, could not accommodate a nurse with these restrictions because that unit provides inpatient care. For the safety of both the patients and the nurse herself, a nurse providing inpatient care must be able to use both arms freely and lift more than five pounds.
• The Employee Health Department, including the team lead, Laura Luca, was tasked with searching for "light-duty assignments" for plaintiff until she could return to her regular position as a nurse on the Medicine C Unit.
• The first light-duty assignment located for plaintiff was a temporary, thirty-day assignment in the Medical Library. In accepting this assignment, plaintiff agreed to follow up with the Employee Health Department and provide documentation of her work status after all medical appointments.
• Because the Medical Library's temporary assignment was available only for an employee's first thirty days of light-duty, the Employee Health Department secured a second light-duty assignment for plaintiff in the Pre-Surgical Services Department. However, Pre-Surgical Services sent plaintiff home because plaintiff had already [*6]  worked overtime that week in the library.
• Because plaintiff had been sent home, the Employee Health Department located a third light-duty assignment for plaintiff as a telesitter, in which plaintiff would monitor patients in the hospital via computer monitors.
• On September 28, 2016, plaintiff accepted the telesitter light-duty assignment for thirty-six hours per week. In accepting the assignment, plaintiff reaffirmed her responsibility to follow up with the Employee Health Department and provide documentation of her work status after medical appointments.
• On October 3, 2016, plaintiff complained to Laura Luca in the Employee Health Department about working the night shifts as a telesitter because plaintiff's medication made her drowsy and would inhibit her ability to monitor patients. Although plaintiff's physician's restrictions did not prohibit her from working at night, Ms. Luca agreed to inquire as to whether any day shifts were available instead.
• Ms. Luca noted that during her conversations with plaintiff, plaintiff was very argumentative and demanding about her desired schedule.
• Ms. Walter, the then-Interim Senior Director of Nursing Support at Inova, learned about the scheduling [*7]  issues between plaintiff and the telesitter department and involved Ms. Byrum, a senior employee in HR. Ms. Byrum recommended that a written warning be issued to plaintiff. Ultimately, however, Mr. Mullins, one of plaintiff's supervisors in the Medicine C Unit, decided instead to provide coaching—first verbally in a meeting with plaintiff and Ms. Byrum, and then also in writing by e-mail—regarding plaintiff's scheduling issues and plaintiff's argumentative attitude toward supervisors.
• In November, Ms. Walter noticed that plaintiff was working unauthorized overtime by working through her meal breaks. Ms. Walter advised plaintiff on November 8, 2016, to take a meal break or to obtain permission from a supervisor to work through a meal break. On November 10 and 12, 2016, plaintiff again worked through her meal breaks without permission. Ms. Walter emailed plaintiff to inform her that they would need to discuss this issue with HR.
• That same month, Holly Wirth, the Clinical Director for the telesitter department, had scheduling issues with plaintiff, including plaintiff calling out for (i.e. declining to work) scheduled shifts and working at least one shift for which she was not scheduled. [*8]  Ms. Wirth felt that when she addressed these issues with plaintiff, plaintiff responded in an argumentative fashion. As a result of this behavior, the telesitter department no longer intended to schedule plaintiff for any additional light-duty hours despite having a need for nurses in this role.
• Specifically, on November 18, 2016, plaintiff and Ms. Wirth communicated via text message. During that conversation, Ms. Wirth asked plaintiff why she had not worked her scheduled shifts that week. In response, plaintiff argued with Ms. Wirth about whether she was supposed to have worked a particular shift. Ms. Wirth stated that she was bringing this conversation to the attention of Ms. Walter. Plaintiff also asked if Ms. Wirth could switch her November 22, 2016 shift with another shift so plaintiff could attend two doctor's appointments and physical therapy. At the end of this conversation, Ms. Wirth informed plaintiff that she was cancelling plaintiff's remaining telesitter shifts.
• On that same date, Ms. Wirth emailed these text messages to Ms. Walter and explained that Ms. Wirth had terminated plaintiff's telesitter assignment because plaintiff had exhibited a pattern of being argumentative [*9]  toward supervisors and an inability to work as scheduled.
• On November 22, 2016, Ms. Walter and Ms. Byrum met with plaintiff in HR to discuss the concerns raised by Ms. Wirth about plaintiff's scheduling issues and plaintiff's argumentative behavior and to determine the next steps for plaintiff. Ms. Walter also understood that plaintiff had not been consistently following up with the Employee Health Department regarding her injury's status or her need for accommodations. During the meeting, Ms. Walter informed plaintiff that she was not meeting Inova's expectations for employees on light duty and that plaintiff would not receive further light-duty work until she was cleared to return to her position given that the telesitter department was no longer willing to assign plaintiff light-duty work owing to her argumentative behavior.
• On the same date, Ms. Luca also contacted plaintiff by telephone to discuss her current status given that the telesitter department no longer intended to assign shifts to her due to her failure to work as scheduled and to her argumentative behavior. Although Ms. Luca left a voicemail for plaintiff, plaintiff never returned Ms. Luca's call.
• Following the meeting [*10]  in HR on November 22, 2016, Ms. Walter reviewed Inova's Standards of Behavior—which all employees of Inova agree to follow—and began to prepare a document to address the ways in which plaintiff had not been meeting defendant's expectations under each Standard of Behavior. On November 29, 2016, Ms. Walter sent a draft of her document to Ms. Byrum, who approved the issuance of a written warning to plaintiff.
• One month later, on December 22, 2016, Ms. Luca advised Ms. Walter that plaintiff was not consistently following up with the Employee Health Department regarding her status.
• Accordingly, on that same date, Ms. Walter attempted to call plaintiff twice and left a voicemail for plaintiff. Plaintiff never returned Ms. Walter's calls.
• In early January, Ms. Walter had not heard from plaintiff since their meeting on November 22, 2016. Ms. Walter sought HR's assistance in preparing a letter to plaintiff to document defendant's attempts to contact plaintiff and plaintiff's failure to follow up with the Employee Health Department. The letter also served to document plaintiff's failure to comply with her light-duty requirements.
• On January 3,2017, plaintiff contacted Mary Helm in the Employee [*11]  Health Department to provide the Employee Health Department with her updated restrictions, which still prevented plaintiff from returning to her regular position. At this time, plaintiff had no additional follow up appointment scheduled.
• Upon learning that plaintiff had contacted the Employee Health Department, Ms. Walter sought HR's guidance as to whether to send the previously-drafted letter, given that plaintiff still had not returned Ms. Walter's calls.
• On January 4, 2017, Ms. Byrum also attempted to call plaintiff to discuss plaintiff's current work status and to arrange a meeting to discuss defendant's expectations for plaintiff's performance as an employee going forward. Although Ms. Byrum left a voicemail for plaintiff, plaintiff never returned Ms. Byrum's phone call.
• As neither Ms. Byrum nor Ms. Walter had heard from plaintiff in response to their calls or otherwise since November 22, 2016, nearly two months before, they proceeded with sending plaintiff the previously-drafted letter, which advised plaintiff that plaintiff had failed to respond to several calls from various supervisors and from the Employee Health Department and that plaintiff had failed to comply with requirements [*12]  for light-duty employees and had consistently failed to responding in a timely manner to messages from Ms. Luca in the Employee Health Department. The letter also warned plaintiff that it was mandatory that she contact Ms. Walter by January 20, 2017, to discuss her current status; otherwise, Ms. Walter would assume that plaintiff did not wish to continue her employment with defendant.
• As of January 23, 2017, Ms. Walter and Ms. Byrum still had not heard from plaintiff, nor had anyone in the Employee Health Department heard from plaintiff since January 3, 2017.
• To terminate an employee of defendant, a department director must submit a request to HR, and then HR must take the final action of either approving or denying the request to terminate. Neither a department director nor HR, alone, can terminate an employee.
• Upon confirming that Ms. Walter still had not heard from plaintiff, Ms. Byrum advised Ms. Walter that if Ms. Walter would submit a request to terminate plaintiff, HR would approve it. On January 23,2017, Ms. Walter submitted a request to terminate plaintiff's employment, and, on that same date, Ms. Byrum approved the request.
• Although plaintiff denies that she received [*13]  the January 13, 2017 letter, at the time that plaintiff was terminated, neither Ms. Walter nor Ms. Byrum had any reason to believe that plaintiff had not received the January 13,2017 letter or that she had not abandoned her position.
• Ms. Walter, Ms. Byrum, and the Employee Health Department did not hear from plaintiff for another full month. On February 23, 2017, plaintiff contacted defendant for the first time since January 3, 2017, having realized that her employment had been terminated a full month earlier.
• Ms. Walter stated that even assuming plaintiff had contacted her, as required by the January 13, 2017 letter, Ms. Walter nonetheless would have submitted a request to terminate plaintiff's employment because of plaintiff's failure to maintain consistent contact with defendant and to meet defendant's expectations while on light duty.

II.
Count 3 of the complaint alleges that defendant failed to provide plaintiff with reasonable accommodations for plaintiff's shoulder injury. In support of this claim, plaintiff highlights that on November 22, 2016, Ms. Walter, Ms. Byrum, and Ms. Luca advised plaintiff that she would no longer be provided [*14]  with light-duty assignments.
To establish a prima facie case of a failure to accommodate claim, a plaintiff must show that (1) she was an individual who had a disability within the meaning of the ADA; (2) her employer had notice of her disability; (3) she could perform the essential functions of her position with reasonable accommodation; and (4) her employer refused to make such accommodations." Wilson v. Dollar Gen. Corp., 717 F.3d 337, 345 (4th Cir. 2013).
Here, plaintiff has not satisfied the third element of a prima face failure to accommodate claim because plaintiff cannot show that she could perform the essential functions of her position with reasonable accommodation. Importantly, with respect to element (3), a "reasonable accommodation" is one that "presently, or in the immediate future, enables the employee to perform the essential functions" of her job. Halpern v. Wake Forest Univ. Health Scis., 669 F.3d 454, 465-66 (4th Cir. 2012). The ADA does not require an employer to accommodate an employee by providing substitute assignments or a leave of absence for an indefinite period of time. Id. The undisputed record in this case demonstrates (i) that plaintiff could not lift anything weighing more than five pounds and could not use her right arm and (ii) that plaintiff's position as an inpatient nurse on the Medicine [*15]  C unit required plaintiff to be able to use both of her arms freely and to be able to lift more than five pounds for the safety of patients and of herself.
In response, plaintiff has submitted no evidence that she requested any reasonable accommodation that would enable plaintiff to perform her job as an inpatient nurse on the Medicine C unit. Rather, plaintiff argues only that defendant could have continued to provide plaintiff with light-duty work because light-duty assignments remained available after November 22, 2016. This argument fails because the accommodation plaintiff proposes is not reasonable as it would require the employer to "wait indefinitely" for plaintiff to recover. Halpern, 669 F.3d at 465-66; Myers v. Hose, 50 F.3d 278, 283 (4th Cir. 1995) ("Nothing in the text of the reasonable accommodation provision requires an employer to wait an indefinite period for an accommodation to achieve its intended effect."). Indeed, the undisputed record reveals that as of November 22, 2016, defendant had already provided plaintiff with three months of light-duty work. Moreover, the undisputed record evidence demonstrates that at the time defendant informed plaintiff she would not be assigned further light-duty work, it remained uncertain how long it would [*16]  take for plaintiff to regain the use of her right arm. Accordingly, because plaintiff has submitted no evidence that defendant denied plaintiff a reasonable accommodation that would have enabled plaintiff to perform her position as an inpatient nurse on the Medicine C unit within a reasonable time, plaintiff has failed to establish a prima facie case of failure to accommodate. This is so because, as the Fourth Circuit has held on more than one occasion, a "reasonable accommodation" is one that "presently, or in the immediate future, enables the employee to perform the essential functions" of her job. See Halpern, 669 F.3d at 465-66; Myers, 50 F.3d at 283.
Furthermore, plaintiff cannot satisfy the fourth element of a prima facie failure to accommodate claim because defendant ended plaintiff's light-duty work on the basis of plaintiff's misconduct. It is well-settled in the Fourth Circuit that the ADA does not require an employer to accommodate a disabled employee who has engaged in a pattern of misconduct. Halpern, 669 F.3d at 465; Watson v. Fairfax Cty., Virginia, 297 F. Supp. 3d 591, 607 (E.D. Va. 2018). Thus, "the ADA is not violated when an employer discharges an individual based upon the employee's misconduct." Williamson v. Bon Secours Richmond Health Sys., Inc., 34 F. Supp. 3d 607, 614 (E.D. Va. 2014) (citing Jones v. Am. Postal Workers Union, 192 F.3d 417, 429 (4th Cir.1999)).
Here, the undisputed record evidence persuasively demonstrates that the decisions to terminate plaintiff's [*17]  telesitter assignment and to provide plaintiff with no further light-duty assignments were each based on plaintiff's argumentative misconduct. Ms. Wirth, plaintiff's supervisor in the telesitter unit, terminated plaintiff's telesitter assignment after a conversation with plaintiff in which Ms. Wirth perceived that plaintiff was argumentative regarding her reasons for not working as scheduled. Indeed, in a contemporaneous email to Ms. Walter, another one of plaintiff's supervisors, Ms. Wirth included a transcription of her conversation with plaintiff and explained to Ms. Walter that she had to remove plaintiff from the schedule in the telesitter unit because plaintiff had exhibited a pattern of being argumentative about her schedule with supervisors.
Similarly, Ms. Walter informed plaintiff that there would be no more light-duty assignments arranged for her during a meeting in which Ms. Walter and Ms. Byrum from HR addressed plaintiff's argumentative attitude and failure to work as scheduled. Following the meeting, Ms. Walter reviewed Inova's Standards of Behavior that all employees agree to follow and began to prepare a document to address the ways plaintiff's conduct had failed to [*18]  meet each Standard of Behavior. Also, on the same day, Ms. Luca, the team lead of the Employee Health Department, called plaintiff to confirm that no further light-duty work would be provided to plaintiff since plaintiff's telesitter assignment had been terminated due to plaintiff's misbehavior. This undisputed record evidence persuasively demonstrates that defendant, after reasonably accommodating plaintiff for more than three months, decided not to accommodate plaintiff further because of plaintiff's misconduct.
This conclusion finds further support in Ms. Wirth's sworn affidavit, in which she states that she would have continued to provide plaintiff with shifts in the telesitter unit if not for the fact that Ms. Wirth felt that plaintiff's misconduct made her a bad fit for the telesitter unit. Indeed, it is undisputed that defendant had already provided plaintiff with light-duty work for three months and that there remained a need for nurses to work in the telesitter unit. In response, plaintiff has submitted no evidence to create a genuine dispute as to whether defendant's explanation that defendant ended plaintiff's long period of accommodations because of plaintiff's argumentative [*19]  behavior was sincere. Indeed, the record discloses that defendant's explanation for ending plaintiff's light-duty work has been asserted consistently, both at the time defendant decided to end plaintiff's accommodations and during this litigation.
Accordingly, because plaintiff has failed to produce evidence to satisfy elements (3) and (4) of a prima facie failure to accommodate claim, summary judgment must be granted in favor of defendant as to Count 3.

III.
Count 4 of the complaint alleges that defendant discriminated against plaintiff on the basis of plaintiff's arm injury. Specifically, plaintiff points to three adverse employment actions taken by defendant: (i) Ms. Wirth terminated plaintiff's light-duty assignment, (ii) Ms. Walter informed plaintiff that no further light-duty assignments would be scheduled for her, and (iii) Ms. Walter terminated plaintiff's employment.
At the summary judgment stage, to establish a claim of disability discrimination under the ADA, plaintiff must either (1) offer sufficient direct and indirect evidence of discrimination, or (2)
proceed under the McDonnell Douglas5 burden-shifting method by stating a prima facie case of discrimination and by demonstrating [*20]  that defendant's proffered nondiscriminatory reason for taking adverse employment action against plaintiff is pretextual. Jacobs v. N.C. Admin. Office of the Courts, 780 F.3d 562, 572 (4th Cir. 2015). Because plaintiff has not produced direct evidence of discrimination and because plaintiff cannot establish a prima facie case or show pretext, summary judgment must be granted in favor of defendant on Count 4.

A.
To prevail via direct and indirect evidence, plaintiff must produce "direct evidence of a stated purpose to discriminate" or indirect "evidence of sufficient probative force to reflect a genuine issue of material fact." Rhoads v. F.D.I.C., 257 F.3d 373, 391 (4th Cir. 2001). In other words, plaintiff must produce "evidence of conduct or statements that both reflect directly the alleged discriminatory attitude and that bear directly on the contested employment decision." Id. at 391-92. Furthermore, the ADA requires a plaintiff show that her disability was the but-for cause of her termination; it is insufficient to show that the employer acted with mixed motives. Gentry v. E. W. Partners Club Mgmt. Co. Inc., 816 F.3d 228, 235 (4th Cir. 2016). Given this standard, it is clear that plaintiff has produced no direct evidence of discriminatory intent for any of the alleged adverse employment actions taken by defendant.
Plaintiff first attempts to introduce direct and indirect evidence of discrimination [*21]  with respect to Ms. Walter's decision not to schedule further light-duty assignments for plaintiff. In that regard, plaintiff points to a statement by Ms. Walter to plaintiff that plaintiff could not return to work until she could work as an RN without restrictions. This argument fails because it is clear that, considered in context, the statement does not reflect that Ms. Walter decided to send plaintiff home without further light-duty work because of plaintiff's injury. Ms. Walter's statement to plaintiff was made during a meeting with plaintiff in HR intended to address concerns raised by plaintiff's supervisor in the telesitter unit, Ms. Wirth, regarding plaintiff's failure to work as scheduled and plaintiff's argumentative conduct. During that meeting, Ms. Walter informed plaintiff that she was not meeting defendant's expectations for employees on light-duty status and that the telesitter unit was no longer willing to assign plaintiff further shifts owing to plaintiff's argumentative behavior and failure to work as scheduled. Furthermore, the evidence shows that it was a standard practice to decline to arrange further light-duty assignments for an employee who had been removed [*22]  from a light-duty assignment due to behavior. Indeed, it is undisputed that Laura Luca, the team lead of the Employee Health Department—the department responsible for arranging light-duty assignments—left plaintiff a voicemail later that day to explain that policy to plaintiff. Therefore, Ms. Walter's statement clearly reflects that the decision to assign plaintiff no further light-duty assignments was made not because of discrimination toward plaintiff's injury but rather as a consequence of the fact that plaintiff's previous light-duty assignment had been terminated on the basis of plaintiff's misconduct.
Plaintiff also appears to suggest that there is direct evidence that Ms. Walter terminated plaintiff's employment on the basis of a discriminatory attitude toward plaintiff's injury simply because Ms. Walter terminated plaintiff while plaintiff was on leave until she was physically able to resume her RN duties. But the mere fact that Ms. Walter made the decision to terminate plaintiff while, coincidentally, plaintiff was on leave because of her injury does not constitute direct or indirect evidence of Ms. Walter's discriminatory attitude. And plaintiff has cited no other evidence, [*23]  such as statements or conduct by Ms. Walter, that reflect a discriminatory attitude toward plaintiff's injury. Moreover, as discussed more fully below, the evidence that in the summary judgment record clearly demonstrates that Ms. Walter made the decision to terminate plaintiff's employment because plaintiff failed to respond to communications from her supervisors, HR, and the Employee Health Department after the end of plaintiff's final light-duty assignment. Thus, plaintiff has produced no direct or indirect evidence of discrimination, and she must proceed under the familiar McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework.

B.
To establish a prima facie case of discrimination, and thereby shift the burden to defendant to show a legitimate non-discriminatory reason for taking adverse employment action, plaintiff must prove (1) that she "was a qualified individual with a disability," (2) that she suffered an adverse employment action, (3) that she was satisfying her employer's legitimate expectations at the time of the adverse action, and (4) that the circumstances surrounding the adverse action "raise a reasonable inference of unlawful discrimination."  [*24] Gonzalez v. Faithful+Gould, Inc., No. 1:17CV624, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 211305, 2017 WL 6559905, at *3 (E.D. Va. Dec. 22, 2017), aff'd, 741 F. App'x 961 (4th Cir. 2018) (citing Reynolds v. Am. Nat'l Red Cross, 701 F.3d 143, 150 (4th Cir. 2012). The undisputed record evidence demonstrates that plaintiff cannot establish the third or fourth elements of a prima facie case.
Importantly, with respect to whether plaintiff was satisfying her employer's legitimate expectations under element (3), "it is the perception of the decision-maker that is relevant, not the self-assessment of the plaintiff." DeJarnette v. Corning, Inc., 133 F.3d 293, 299 (4th Cir. 1998). Here, plaintiff cannot satisfy element (3) of a prima facie case of disability discrimination because the undisputed record evidence shows that plaintiff was not performing her job at a level that met her employer's legitimate expectations at the time of any of the three adverse employment actions taken by defendant.
There is substantial undisputed record evidence demonstrating that plaintiff failed to meet defendant's legitimate expectations during her telesitter assignment, which is when defendant terminated plaintiff's telesitter assignment and declined to give plaintiff further light-duty work. Ms. Walter's contemporaneous written warning to plaintiff clearly and thoroughly documents each of the ways that plaintiff had not been meeting defendant's expectations. According to the warning, plaintiff had [*25]  failed to act in conformity with defendant's Standards of Behavior, inter alia, (i) by frequently exhibiting an argumentative and demanding attitude toward her supervisors, (ii) by failing to work as scheduled, (iii) by failing to take responsibility when confronted by leadership, (iv) by failing to serve as a "positive ambassador" to her light-duty assignment, and (v) by failing to respond to emails in a timely manner. Similarly, less than a month before plaintiff's telesitter assignment was terminated, in lieu of a written warning, Mr. Mullins, one of plaintiffs supervisors, provided plaintiff with coaching regarding plaintiff's argumentative and demanding attitude toward supervisors and plaintiff's refusal to work two assigned shifts. Ms. Walter also emailed plaintiff on November 8, 2016 to instruct plaintiff that she was not allowed to skip meal breaks and that she needed to communicate with her supervisor if there was a need for plaintiff to work through the meal break. Then, on November 13, 2016, Ms. Walter again reprimanded plaintiff via email after plaintiff had again worked unauthorized overtime by working through her meal breaks on November 10 and 12, 2016 without obtaining [*26]  authorization or otherwise communicating with her supervisor about a need to work through the meal break.
In addition, the summary judgment record contains the testimony and contemporaneous communications of several of plaintiff's supervisors reflecting that they were dissatisfied with plaintiffs argumentative and demanding attitude and failure to work as scheduled. This substantial, undisputed evidence persuasively demonstrates that plaintiff was not performing at a satisfactory level when her telesitter assignment was terminated and when Ms. Walter informed plaintiff she would receive no further light-duty assignments.
In response, plaintiff offers no evidence that her performance during her telesitter assignment met defendant's expectations. Rather, plaintiff argues (i) that plaintiff was not argumentative or insubordinate and (ii) that defendant's expectations were not legitimate. As to the first of these arguments, plaintiff offers absolutely no evidence to support her assertion that she was not argumentative. Indeed, plaintiff's own sworn declaration lacks any claim by plaintiff herself that she did not exhibit an argumentative and demanding attitude toward supervisors. Furthermore, [*27]  it is well-settled in the Fourth Circuit that an employee's opinion that the employee was meeting her employer's expectations is irrelevant because it is the perception of the decision maker that is relevant to establishing a prima facie case of discriminatory discharge. King v. Rumsfeld, 328 F.3d 145, 149 (4th Cir. 2003); DeJarnette, 133 F.3d at 299; Blanch v. Hexagon US Fed., Inc., No. 1:17-CV-613, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 177281, 2018 WL 4997644, at *6 (E.D. Va. Oct. 15, 2018). And the undisputed record evidence here, including communications by many of plaintiff's supervisors and various warnings and poor evaluations of plaintiff's behavior, establishes that defendant clearly perceived plaintiff to be excessively argumentative and demanding toward supervisors and unreliable to work as scheduled.
With regard to plaintiff's second argument, plaintiff cites no legal authority or evidence to support her assertion that defendant's expectations were not legitimate. Instead, plaintiff contends, in a fashion similar to her first argument, that in her view, if plaintiff failed to meet defendant's expectations, then defendant's expectations were not legitimate. This argument also fails because a district court "does not sit as a kind of super-personnel department weighing the prudence of employment decisions made by firms charged with employment [*28]  discrimination." DeJarnette, 133 F.3d at 298-299. To that end, plaintiff's own opinion that her misconduct was reasonable in light of the circumstances is not probative. Smith v. Strayer Univ. Corp., 79 F. Supp. 3d 591, 604 (ED. Va. 2015) (holding that plaintiffs "own naked opinion" about the validity of her performance evaluation, "without more, is not enough to establish a prima facie" case of discrimination); Huie v. Univ. of Maryland Med. Ctr., No. CIV.A. RDB04-2987, 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 2734, 2006 WL 197183, at *4 (D. Md. Jan. 23, 2006) (holding that plaintiffs view that it was reasonable not to report to work because of an accident resulting in lane closures on the interstate was not probative). The Fourth Circuit has made quite clear that in the face of substantial evidence that the employer viewed the employee as failing to meet job performance expectations, as is the case here, the employee must introduce evidence from a qualified witness, such as an expert, to define the employer's legitimate expectations and evaluate plaintiffs performance in light of those expectations. King, 328 F.3d at 150. Here, plaintiffs argument fails because plaintiff bases her argument that defendant's expectations were illegitimate entirely on her own view that defendant could not have reasonably found fault with plaintiffs attitude and adherence to the schedule. This is not enough. [*29]  See King, 328 F.3d at 149; DeJarnette, 133 F.3d at 299
The undisputed record evidence also demonstrates that plaintiff was not meeting defendant's legitimate expectations at the time of the third adverse employment action, i.e. when defendant terminated plaintiffs employment in January 2017. At that time, it is undisputed that plaintiff inexplicably failed to remain in regular contact with her supervisors, HR, and the Employee Health Department. For example, Ms. Luca documented the Employee Health Department's repeated unsuccessful attempts to contact plaintiff and have plaintiffs injury re evaluated between November 22, 2016 and December 23, 2016. Not until January 3, 2017 did plaintiff finally respond to these communications by contacting the Employee Health Department, in violation of her agreement to maintain regular contact with the Employee Health Department. The undisputed record evidence also shows that plaintiff failed to respond to calls and voicemails from her supervisors on December 22, 2016 and from HR on January 4, 2017 instructing plaintiff to call back to discuss plaintiff's work status and address the expectations for her performance going forward. In addition, on January 13, 2017, Ms. Walter sent a letter to plaintiff [*30]  documenting that plaintiff had failed to communicate reliably, as defendant expected her to do, after the end of her telesitter assignment. The letter also clearly instructed plaintiff that if plaintiff did not contact Ms. Walter by January 20, 2017, plaintiff would be terminated. It is undisputed that plaintiff did not contact defendant again until February 23, 2017—over a month after plaintiff was terminated on January 20, 2017. This substantial, undisputed evidence clearly demonstrates that plaintiff was not meeting defendant's legitimate expectation that plaintiff stay in regular contact with her supervisors, HR, and the Employee Health Department when plaintiff was terminated. Accordingly, plaintiff has failed to satisfy a prima facie case of disability discrimination with regard to any of the three adverse employment actions taken by defendant.
Assuming, arguendo, that plaintiff could establish a prima facie claim of disability discrimination, which she cannot, the burden would then shift to defendant to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory justification for the adverse employment actions taken against plaintiff. Ennis v. Nat'l Ass'n of Bus. & Educ. Radio, Inc., 53 F.3d 55, 58 (4th Cir. 1995). If defendant articulates a legitimate, nondiscriminatory [*31]  reason, the burden shifts back to plaintiff to establish that these justifications are pretextual. Jacobs v. N.C. Admin. Office of the Courts, 780 F.3d 562, 575-76 (4th Cir. 2015).
The record reflects that defendant maintains (i) that Ms. Wirth terminated plaintiff's telesitter assignment because she felt that plaintiff exhibited an argumentative attitude, worked through her meal breaks without permission, and worked shifts for which she was not scheduled, (ii) that Ms. Walter, Ms. Byrum, and Ms. Luca declined to assign further light duty work to plaintiff because plaintiff had been dismissed from her telesitter assignment due to misbehavior, and (iii) that Ms. Walter terminated plaintiffs employment because plaintiff had not kept in communication with supervisors, HR, or the Employee Health Department. These justifications satisfy defendant's burden, and the burden shifts back to plaintiff to establish that these justifications are pretextual. Id.
In order to show pretext, "a plaintiff must establish both that the employer's reason was false and that [discrimination] was the real reason for the challenged conduct." Foster v. Univ. of Maryland-E. Shore, 787 F.3d 243, 252 (4th Cir. 2015) (internal quotes and alterations omitted). Indeed, the Fourth Circuit has explained that to establish a discrimination claim under the ADA, the plaintiff [*32]  must demonstrate that the plaintiff's disability was "more than a motivating factor: it must be the only motivating factor." Davis v. W. Carolina Univ., 695 F. App'x 686, 688 (4th Cir. 2017) (citing Gentry v. E. W. Partners Club Mgmt. Co., 816 F.3d 228, 235 (4th Cir. 2016)). Accordingly, "[i]f an employer acts with a mixed motive—both a discriminatory and non discriminatory reason—then the employer is not liable." Id.
This standard, applied here, reflects that plaintiff has failed to demonstrate that defendant's stated reasons for taking adverse employment action against plaintiff were pretextual. Specifically, plaintiff has failed to submit any evidence that discrimination against plaintiffs injury was the real and only but-for cause motivating defendant's adverse employment action against plaintiff. Moreover, plaintiff's arguments aimed at demonstrating that defendant's stated reasons are false each fail, as explained below.
Plaintiff chiefly argues that there is evidence of pretext because, according to plaintiff, defendant's justifications for terminating plaintiff's telesitter assignment, declining to assign plaintiff further light duty work, and firing plaintiff have materially varied over time. Under E.E.O.C. v. Sears Roebuck & Co., 243 F.3d 846, 852-53 (4th Cir. 2001), "the fact that [the defendant] has offered different justifications at different times for its [decision to take [*33]  adverse employment action against plaintiff] is, in and of itself, probative of pretext." Yet, the Fourth Circuit has made clear that "the plaintiff cannot seek to expose [the defendant's] rationale as pretextual by focusing on minor discrepancies that do not cast doubt on the explanation's validity." Hux v. City of Newport News, Va., 451 F.3d 311, 315 (4th Cir. 2006).
These principles, applied here, point persuasively to the conclusion that plaintiff has not shown a material dispute as to pretext because the discrepancies in defendant's justifications that plaintiff has identified are minor and do not cast doubt on the validity of the justifications. With regard to ending plaintiff's light duty work, the undisputed record evidence demonstrates that defendant's explanation has been consistent. Both at the time the adverse employment action was taken and during this litigation, defendant has maintained that terminating plaintiff's light-duty work was justified because plaintiff exhibited an argumentative attitude towards supervisors and failed to work as scheduled. Although defendant may have used various terms to label these issues, such as "misconduct," "performance and conduct," and "scheduling issues," these explanations all clearly identify plaintiff's [*34]  attitude and unreliability as the reasons for defendant's decision to terminate plaintiff's light-duty work. Thus, these discrepancies are minor and do not cast doubt on the validity of defendant's articulated justifications for terminating plaintiff's light-duty work.
Likewise, defendant has consistently maintained that the reason for firing plaintiff was that plaintiff failed to respond to defendant's communications after plaintiff's final light-duty assignment ended. Seeking to avoid this conclusion, plaintiff argues that during this litigation, defendant has also stated that plaintiffs firing was justified by plaintiff's misconduct in her light-duty assignments. In support, plaintiff cites the declaration and deposition testimony of Ms. Walter, in which Ms. Walter stated that even if plaintiff had responded to defendant's communications, Ms. Walter may have still pursued plaintiffs firing because of plaintiff's failure to meet defendant's expectations for employees on light-duty status. Plaintiffs attempt to show pretext in this regard fails because Ms. Walter's testimony as to what she might have done if, hypothetically, plaintiff had responded to communications in a timely fashion [*35]  simply does not show that the reason Ms. Walter sought plaintiff's termination is pretextual.
Therefore, because plaintiff has failed to produce any evidence that defendant's stated reasons for taking adverse employment action against plaintiff are were false or that plaintiff's disability was the real, but-for reason for defendant's adverse employment action, plaintiff has not met her burden to show pretext. Accordingly, defendant is entitled to summary judgment on Count 4.

IV.
Count 5 of the complaint alleges that defendant retaliated against plaintiff on the basis of plaintiff's request for accommodation for her injury. Specifically, plaintiff points to three adverse employment actions taken by defendant after plaintiff requested a change in her schedule so plaintiff could go to a doctor's appointment: (i) Ms. Wirth terminated plaintiffs light-duty assignment, (ii) Ms. Walter informed plaintiff that no further light-duty assignments would be scheduled for her, and (iii) Ms. Walter terminated plaintiffs employment. At the summary judgment stage, to establish a claim of retaliation under the ADA, plaintiff must either (1) offer sufficient direct and indirect evidence of retaliation, [*36]  or (2) proceed under a burden-shifting method by stating a prima facie case of retaliation. Rhoads v. F.D. I.C., 257 F.3d 373, 391 (4th Cir. 2001).

A.
As already outlined above, to prevail via direct and indirect evidence, plaintiff must produce "direct evidence of a stated purpose to [retaliate]" or indirect "evidence of sufficient probative force to reflect a genuine issue of material fact." Rhoads v. FDIC., 257 F.3d 373, 391 (4th Cir. 2001). And importantly, a plaintiff seeking to introduce direct evidence of retaliatory animus faces a high burden.6 To constitute direct or indirect evidence of retaliation, the evidence must show that "the unlawful retaliation would not have occurred in the absence of the alleged wrongful action or actions of the employer." Foster v. Univ. of Maryland-E. Shore, 787 F.3d 243, 249 (4th Cir. 2015) (quoting Univ. of Tex. Sw. Med Ctr v. Nassar, 570 U.S. 338, 360, 133 S. Ct. 2517, 186 L. Ed. 2d 503 (2013)). Put another way, purported direct evidence of retaliatory animus is insufficient at the summary judgment stage if the evidence demonstrates only that the employer may have had a "mixed motive" for taking adverse employment action against an employee who requested an accommodation. Id.
Plaintiff attempts to demonstrate that Ms. Wirth terminated plaintiffs light-duty assignment in retaliation for plaintiffs request for an accommodation by highlighting a text message exchange between plaintiff and Ms. Wirth that occurred on [*37]  November 18, 2016. In that conversation, Ms. Wirth advised plaintiff of her schedule in the telesitter unit for the week and also asked plaintiff to clarify why plaintiff had worked a shift for which she was not scheduled the previous week. In response, plaintiff asked Ms. Wirth to switch her telesitter shift on November 22 to another date because plaintiff had a doctor's appointment and physical therapy on November 22. Plaintiff then proceeded to argue with Ms. Wirth about whether she was justified in working the unscheduled shift. Ms. Wirth informed plaintiff that she would "escalate" this conversation to Ms. Walter, another one of plaintiff's supervisors. Plaintiff then asked, again, if Ms. Wirth could move plaintiff's November 22 shift because of plaintiff's doctor's appointments on that date. Ms. Wirth then advised plaintiff that she was cancelling the rest of plaintiff's scheduled shifts in the telesitter unit for the week.
Plaintiff argues that this conversation demonstrates that Ms. Wirth terminated plaintiff's light-duty assignment because plaintiff requested an accommodation. This argument fails because this conversation simply does not show that Ms. Wirth canceled plaintiff's [*38]  telesitter assignment in retaliation for plaintiffs request that Ms. Wirth rearrange plaintiff's schedule—much less that retaliatory animus was the but-for motivation for Ms. Wirth's decision, as is required to support a retaliation claim. Foster, 787 F.3d at 249. At most, this conversation shows that Ms. Wirth made the decision to end plaintiff's telesitter assignment in close temporal proximity to plaintiff's request for Ms. Wirth to reschedule her November 22 shift. But as the Fourth Circuit has made clear, temporal proximity is insufficient, without more, to demonstrate "but for" causation in a retaliation claim. Staley v. Gruenberg, 575 F. App'x 153, 156 (4th Cir. 2014). In that regard, plaintiff has pointed to absolutely nothing else about the conversation that reflects that Ms. Wirth retaliated against plaintiff by ending plaintiffs telesitter assignment.
Indeed, the content and context of the conversation clearly demonstrate that Ms. Wirth's decision to terminate plaintiffs telesitter assignment was motivated by plaintiffs argumentative attitude. The undisputed record evidence shows that, prior to this conversation, Ms. Wirth had observed that plaintiff responded in an argumentative and disrespectful fashion whenever Ms. Wirth attempted to address scheduling [*39]  issues with plaintiff. And the content of this conversation reveals that, once again, when Ms. Wirth asked plaintiff to explain why plaintiff had worked when she was not scheduled, plaintiff argued with Ms. Wirth about whether plaintiff was justified for working the shift in question. Thus, this conversation reflects that Ms. Wirth removed plaintiff from the schedule because she felt plaintiffs argumentative manner was not appropriate for the telesitter assignment, not because Ms. Wirth harbored retaliatory animus toward plaintiffs request that Ms. Wirth change plaintiffs schedule. And at the very least, the conversation certainly does not demonstrate that Ms. Wirth made the decision to end plaintiffs telesitter assignment solely because plaintiff requested an accommodation.
This conclusion finds further support in an email sent by Ms. Wirth to Ms. Walter on the same day as Ms. Wirth's text message with plaintiff. In that email, Ms. Wirth explained to Ms. Walter that Ms. Wirth believed plaintiff should be re-assigned to a different light-duty assignment because plaintiff had exhibited a pattern of arguing with supervisors and had again argued with Ms. Wirth in the text message conversation [*40]  about why she had worked an unscheduled shift. This contemporaneous communication by Ms. Wirth further undermines plaintiffs argument that Ms. Wirth's conversation with plaintiff shows that Ms. Wirth made the decision to end plaintiff's telesitter assignment because plaintiff requested an accommodation. Accordingly, because plaintiff has failed to produce any direct or indirect evidence reflecting a retaliatory attitude by the Ms. Wirth, plaintiff must attempt to survive summary judgment by proceeding under the burden-shifting method and establish a prima facie case of retaliation.

B.
To establish a prima facie case of retaliation, plaintiff must show that (1) she engaged in protected activity, (2) her employer took adverse action against her, and (3) there is a causal connection between the protected activity and the adverse employment action. Wulff v. Sentara Healthcare, Inc., 513 Fed. Appx. 267, 272 (4th Cir. 2013). With respect to the causation element, "Metaliation claims are subject to a higher 'but for' causation standard under which Plaintiff must show the causal link between her protected activity and the adverse employment action she suffered is so close that the adverse action would not have occurred but for the protected activity." Lacasse v. Didlake, Inc., 194 F. Supp. 3d 494, 503 (E.D. Va. 2016), aff'd, 712 F. App'x 231 (4th Cir. 2018) (citing [*41]  Univ. of Tex. Sw. Med. Ctr. v. Nassar, 570 U.S. 338, 352, 133 S. Ct. 2517, 186 L. Ed. 2d 503 (2013)).
Here, plaintiff cannot satisfy element (3) of a prima facie retaliation claim because the undisputed record evidence demonstrates plaintiff's request for an accommodation was not a "but for" cause of any of the adverse employment actions plaintiff alleges.
Plaintiff has submitted no evidence to demonstrate that defendant would not have taken any of the three adverse employment actions but for plaintiff's request to Ms. Wirth on November 18, 2018 to change her schedule so plaintiff could attend a doctor's appointment. At most, plaintiff has shown that two of the alleged adverse actions—Ms. Wirth's decision to terminate plaintiff's telesitter assignment on November 18, 2016 and Ms. Walter's decision to assign no further light-duty work to plaintiff on November 22, 2016—occurred soon after plaintiff requested an accommodation. But as the Fourth Circuit has made clear, temporal proximity alone is insufficient to demonstrate "but for" causation in a retaliation claim. Staley v. Gruenberg, 575 F. App'x 153, 156 (4th Cir. 2014). Thus, plaintiff has produced no evidence that shows plaintiff's request for a schedule change to accommodate her doctor's appointment was a "but for" cause of any of the three adverse employment actions taken by defendant. [*42] 
In contrast, as already discussed at length above, the undisputed record evidence clearly demonstrates that at the time defendant took each adverse employment action against plaintiff, plaintiff's supervisors, the Employee Health Department, and HR all felt that plaintiff consistently (i) exhibited an argumentative and demanding towards authority, (ii) failed to respond in a reliable and timely manner to emails and phone calls, and (iii) failed to meet and accept her scheduled work periods. In response, plaintiff has submitted no evidence to contest that these negative opinions about plaintiff's job performance—widely held and thoroughly documented by plaintiff's supervisors, HR, and the Employee Health Department—were not honestly held by the decisionmakers who took adverse employment action against plaintiff. In the face of this substantial, undisputed evidence concerning defendant's dissatisfaction with plaintiff's work performance, plaintiff's contention that defendant would not have taken adverse action against plaintiff, but for her request to change her schedule, is manifestly unpersuasive.
Plaintiff's causation argument is further weakened by the fact that the undisputed record [*43]  evidence shows that defendant had provided plaintiff with various accommodations for her injury over a three-month period until plaintiff's performance issues in the telesitter unit came to a head in late November 2016. The employer's history of reasonably accommodating the employee's disability has been appropriately noted in the cases as undermining any inference of retaliation in the employee's prima facie case. See, e.g., Blanch, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 177281, 2018 WL 4997644, at *13. As the record reflects, until late November, defendant had provided plaintiff with constant light-duty work since plaintiff's injury in August 2016. Moreover, plaintiff's supervisors had even scheduled plaintiff day shifts on the weekend instead of night shifts to accommodate the fact that plaintiff's medication made her drowsy, even though plaintiff's official medical report did not specify a need for this further accommodation. This undisputed evidence, revealing how extensively defendant had already accommodated plaintiff's injury, persuasively supports the conclusion that plaintiff's request for an additional minor accommodation was not a but for cause of the adverse employment actions taken by defendant.
For these reasons, plaintiff has failed to produce [*44]  evidence to show that but for plaintiff's request for an accommodation defendant would not have taken adverse employment action against plaintiff, as is required for a prima facie claim of retaliation under the ADA. In addition, for the same reasons discussed with respect to plaintiff's disability discrimination claim, see supra part III.B, plaintiff has failed to show that defendant's legitimate, non-retaliatory reasons for taking adverse employment action against plaintiff were pretextual. Accordingly, defendant is entitled to summary judgment as to Count 5.

V.
The undisputed record evidence discloses that distilled to its essence, the narrative of this case is that defendant reasonably accommodated plaintiff over a three-month period and during that three-month period tolerated plaintiff's inappropriate and argumentative attitude toward supervisors and plaintiff's failure to work as scheduled. Faced with plaintiffs consistent failure to meet defendant's legitimate expectations, defendant finally decided to end plaintiff's accommodations and to terminate plaintiff's employment because defendant believed plaintiff's argumentative attitude and her utter failure to respond to communications [*45]  made plaintiff a poor employee at Inova, not because of plaintiff's injury or her request for further accommodations. To conclude otherwise would effectively insert the court as a "super-personnel department, weighing the prudence of employment decisions made by firms charged with employment discrimination." DeJarnette v. Corning Inc., 133 F.3d 293, 299 (4th Cir. 1998).
Accordingly, for the reasons stated above,
It is hereby ORDERED that defendant's motion for summary judgment (Doc. 16) is GRANTED.
Accordingly,
It is further ORDERED that judgment is entered on behalf of defendant as to Counts 3, 4, and S of plaintiff's complaint.
The Clerk is directed to send a copy of this Order to all counsel of record and to place this matter among the ended cases.
The Clerk is further directed to enter Rule 58 judgment in favor of defendant.
Alexandria, Virginia
December 19, 2018
/s/ T. S. Ellis, III
T. S. Ellis, III
United States District Judge


End of Document

