Arreola v. Fedex Ground Package Sys.
United States District Court for the Central District of California
January 2, 2015, Decided; January 2, 2015, Filed
CV 14-01146 RGK (JCGx)

Reporter
2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 199952 *
GABRIELLE ARREOLA v. FEDEX GROUND PACKAGE SYSTEM, INC.
Prior History: Arreola v. Fedex Ground Package Sys., Inc., 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 200544 (C.D. Cal., Apr. 14, 2014)
Counsel:  [*1] Attorneys Present for Plaintiffs: Not Present.
Attorneys Present for Defendants: Not Present.
Judges: R. GARY KLAUSNER, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: R. GARY KLAUSNER
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES - GENERAL

Proceedings: (IN CHAMBERS) Order Re: Defendant's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment (DE 26)

I. INTRODUCTION
On January 21, 2014, Gabrielle Arreola ("Plaintiff") filed a Complaint against FedEx Ground Package System, Inc. ("Defendant" or "FedEx") alleging the following nine claims: (1) Breach of the Implied Covenant; (2) Discrimination in Violation of Government Code §§ 12940, et seq. ("FEHA"); (3) Retaliation in Violation of FEHA; (4) Failure to Prevent Discrimination and Retaliation in Violation of FEHA; (5) Failure to Provide Reasonable Accommodations in Violation of FEHA; (6) Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process in Violation of FEHA; (7) Retaliation in Violation of the California Family Rights Act; (8) Wrongful Termination in Violation of Public Policy; and (9) Declaratory Judgment. The Complaint arises out of the termination of Plaintiff's employment with FedEx.
Currently before the Court is Defendant's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment. Defendant seeks summary judgment as to Claims 1, 3-7, as well as Plaintiff's request for punitive [*2]  damages. For the following reasons, the Court grants Defendant's motion.

II. FACTUAL BACKGROUND
The following facts are based on the parties' allegations.
In August 2010, Defendant hired Plaintiff part-time as a package handler. Plaintiff's duties included sorting packages and loading them onto delivery trucks. In December 2011, Plaintiff felt a sharp pain in her back while lifting a box. On March 1, 2012, Plaintiff slipped and fell while performing her job duties. On the same day, Plaintiff discovered she was pregnant, and was therefore unable to obtain treatment for her slip and fall injuries. From March 2012 through September 2012, Plaintiff's work duties were restricted as a result of her physical condition. During this time, Defendant reassigned Plaintiff twice, to adjust for this condition.
On September 4, 2012, Plaintiff sought treatment from her doctor for severe back pain. Plaintiff's doctor excused her from work for three days due to the pain. According to Plaintiff, she attempted to contact Defendant to provide notice that she would not be showing up at work for the following three days pursuant to her doctor's orders. However, her calls to Human Resources went unanswered, and [*3]  she did not have a phone number to reach any of her managers directly. Plaintiff was absent from work between September 5, 2012 and September 7, 2012 ("September absence").
On September 10, 2012, Plaintiff returned to work. When she attempted to clock-in, her supervisor stopped her and terminated her employment for three consecutive "no call, no shows." The termination was pursuant to Defendant's Acceptable Conduct Policy. The policy provided that absence from work without notifying the company is a terminable offense. Plaintiff attempted to explain her absence and show her supervisor her doctor's note. Defendant refused to consider the doctor's note or reinstate her employment.
According to Plaintiff, Defendant terminated her employment because of her sex, disability, use of medical leave, and engagement in protected activity.

III. JUDICIAL STANDARD
Summary judgment is appropriate when there is no genuine issue of material fact for trial. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). The party moving for summary judgment has the burden of establishing that the other party cannot establish a necessary element of its case, notwithstanding any factual disputes. Novartis Corp. v. Ben Venue Laboratories, Inc., 271 F.3d 1043, 1046 (2001). Therefore, the moving party "has the initial responsibility of identifying [*4]  the legal basis of its motion, and of pointing to those portions of the record that it believes demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact." Id. (citation omitted). If the moving party overcomes that burden, the burden will shift to the non-moving party to point to specific facts that creates a genuine issue of material fact. Id. In the patent infringement context, the ultimate burden in proving infringement rests with the patentee. Id. On a summary judgment for non-infringement, therefore, it is not necessary for the moving party to offer evidence of non-infringement. Id. It suffices for the movant to point to lack of any evidence that supports infringement. Id.

IV. DISCUSSION
As an initial matter, Plaintiff, in her opposition, has stipulated to the dismissal of Claims 1 and 7. Therefore, the Court grants Defendant's motion as to those claims. As to the remaining claims at issue, Defendant argues that those claims fail as a matter of law. The Court agrees.

A. Claim 3: Retaliation in Violation of FEHA
To establish a prima facie case of retaliation under FEHA, Plaintiff must show (1) she engaged in a "protected activity," (2) Defendant subjected her to an adverse employment [*5]  action, and (3) a causal link existed between the protected activity and the Defendant's action. See McCoy v. Pacfici Maritime Assoc., 216 Cal. App. 4th 283, 298 (2013) (citation omitted). If a prima facie case is established, Defendant must offer a legitimate, nonretaliatory basis for the adverse employment action. If Defendant meets its burden, the burden then shifts back to Plaintiff, who must then prove intentional retaliation. Id.
Defendant argues that Plaintiff's prima facie case fails because she did not engage in protected activity, as defined by the statute. The Court agrees.
Under FEHA, protected activity includes opposing any practices forbidden under the statute, or filing a complaint, testifying, or assisting in any proceeding under the statute. Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(h). The determination as to what constitutes a protected activity is inherently fact-driven. Rope v. Auto-Chlor System of Washington, Inc., 220 Cal. App. 4th 635, 652, 163 Cal. Rptr. 3d 392 (2013). As stated by the California courts, an employee need not use specific legal terms or buzzwords in opposing discrimination. Nor does an employee need to file a formal charge. Id. However, the activities protected by the statute must demonstrate some degree of opposition to, or protest against, the employer's conduct or practices based on a reasonable belief that those practices are unlawful. Id. at 652-653. Moreover, there [*6]  must be some evidence that the employer knew the employee was engaged in opposition activities at the time of the alleged retaliation. Id. at 653.
Here, Defendant's evidence shows that Plaintiff never said anything during her employment that indicated opposition to any employment practice. (Arreola Dep., 202:6-203:7.) The evidence also shows that Plaintiff never refused to do anything that Defendant asked her to do. (Arreola Dep., 203:8-14.) This evidence supports Defendant's argument that Plaintiff did not engage in any protected activity that resulted in the adverse employment action.
In response, Plaintiff argues that she did, in fact, engage in protected activity when she protested the termination of her employment based on the "no call, no show" policy. (Arreola Decl., ¶¶ 24, 26.) Plaintiff's argument rests on the theory that her opposition to the termination constitutes a "protected activity," and Defendant's refusal to reinstate her employment constitutes an "adverse employment action."
This argument is unavailing. As stated by the Ninth Circuit, "a discharged employee who seeks to be reinstated is really litigating the unfairness of his original discharge because only if the original discharge [*7]  was discriminatory is he entitled to be reinstated as if he had never ceased working for the employer." Collins v. United Air Lines, Inc., 514 F.2d 594, 596 (9th Cir. 1975). An exception exists where new elements of unfairness, not existing at the time of the termination, attaches to the denial of reinstatement. Josephs v. Pacific Bell, 443 F.3d 1050, 1060 ((th Cir. 2006). Here, there is no evidence showing new elements of unfairness. Therefore, the adverse employment action of which Plaintiff complains is the original termination of employment. The "protected activity" asserted by Plaintiff, however, occurred only after the termination had already occurred. Plaintiff has failed to present evidence that she engaged in protected activity prior to the termination or that any new unfairness occurred with respect to the denial of reinstatement. Therefore, Plaintiff's claim for retaliation under FEHA fails as a matter of law.

B. Claim 4: Failure to Prevent Discrimination and Retaliation in Violation of FEHA
Plaintiff's fourth claim is based on allegations that Defendant both failed to prevent discrimination and failed to prevent retaliation. Defendant challenges only the retaliation portion of this claim. Because Plaintiff's claim for Retaliation in Violation of FEHA fails, Plaintiff's Failure to Prevent also fails [*8]  to the extent it applies to allegations of retaliation. Therefore, the Court grants summary judgment in favor of Defendant, but only to the retaliation portion of this claim.

C. Claim 5: Failure to Provide Reasonable Accommodations in Violation of FEHA
FEHA requires employers to make "reasonable accommodation for the known physical or mental disability of an applicant or employee." Cal. Gov't Code §12940(m). A reasonable accommodation is "a modification or adjustment to the workplace that enables the employee to perform the essential functions of the job held or desired." Nadaf-Rahrov v. The Neiman Marcus Group, Inc., 166 Cal. App. 4th 952, 975-76, 83 Cal. Rptr. 3d 190 (2008). Defendant argues for summary judgment on the ground that there was no failure to accommodate.
According to the evidence, Plaintiff hurt her back in December 2011 and March 2012. (Arreola Decl., ¶ 5.) Plaintiff also became pregnant and advised Defendant of her pregnancy in March or April 2012. (Arreola Decl., ¶7.) As a result of her injuries and pregnancy, Plaintiff's doctor provided a note in March 2012, restricting Plaintiff from lifting "a certain amount of pounds." (Arreola Dep., 63:8-67:9.) Because of this restriction, Defendant reassigned Plaintiff from loading trucks to sorting boxes on a conveyor belt. (Arreola Dep., 74:9-20.) When [*9]  Plaintiff reported that sorting was still too difficult, she was moved to "Smalls," where Plaintiff sorted envelopes and boxes that weighed less than ten pounds. (Arreola Dep. in Worker's Compensation Action ("WC Dep."), 29:7-21.) At "Smalls," Plaintiff found it difficult to bend down from a standing position to reach the packages in a tub. (WC Dep., 34:19-35:10.) In response, Plaintiff's supervisor "would . . . bring [Plaintiff] a chair for her to sit down sometimes." (Arreola Dep., 76:8-25.) There is no evidence that after reassignment to "Smalls," and with the occasional use of a chair, Plaintiff was unable to perform the essential functions of the job. In fact, Plaintiff testified that having a chair was "acceptable" for "a little bit." (Arreola Dep., 77:16-17; Arreola Decl., ¶ 3.) Plaintiff states that, ultimately, the chair did not fully alleviate her pain and difficulty in performing her duties. (Arreola Decl., ¶ 3.) Plaintiff also states, however, that her condition worsened over time as a result of her developing pregnancy. (Arreola Decl., ¶ 6.) This evidence indicates that Plaintiff's disability was evolving. Therefore, it is reasonable to infer that a certain accommodation, [*10]  such as a chair, may be reasonable at one point in time, even if it becomes unreasonable at a later point in time. Plaintiff has not provided evidence to show that Plaintiff made further complaints, or that Defendant otherwise knew or should have known of any further difficulty. There is also no evidence indicating that Defendant stopped, or intended to stop, making adjustments or accommodations for Plaintiff's worsening disability. As such, there is no triable issue of fact regarding reasonable accommodations made prior to Plaintiff's September absence.
In response, Plaintiff argues that, while the evidence shows that Defendant made "adjustments" to her job, Defendant failed to fulfill its ongoing duty to accommodate. Plaintiff states that, contrary to Defendant's argument, Plaintiff made a further request of accommodation when she took the three days off that led to her termination. Plaintiff argues that her absence and subsequent request for reinstatement can be reasonably interpreted as a request for time off due to a disability and a request for modification of the "no call, no show" policy. Plaintiff states that by refusing to accept her doctor's note and refusing to reinstate [*11]  her employment, Defendant wrongfully denied her request for reasonable accommodation.
The Court finds no authority to support the proposition that Plaintiff's conduct relating to the September absence constituted a further request for accommodation. According to the undisputed evidence, Plaintiff failed to show up for work between September 5, 2012 and September 7, 2012 because of debilitating back pain. (Pl.'s Statement of Disputed Facts, No. 20.) It is also undisputed that Plaintiff failed to notify Defendant of her absence during those three days. (Pl.'s Statement of Disputed Facts, No. 21.) Defendant's evidence shows that Plaintiff's termination resulted from her violation of company policy, which requires notification of any absences.1 (Caldero Decl., ¶¶ 3 and 4; Farris Decl., ¶ 11, Ex. H.) As Plaintiff points out, some courts have found a triable issue where the plaintiff had no time to request a modification to company policy due to the plaintiff's disability. See EEOC v. Walgreen Co., 34 F. Supp. 3d 1049 (N.D. Cal. 2014), 2014 WL 1410311 *6 (N.D. Cal. 2014) (finding a triable issue where a diabetic employee suffered low blood sugar and ate a food item for sale, against company policy). Here, however, there is no evidence that the breach of company policy was caused by [*12]  Plaintiff's disability, or that Plaintiff had no time to request modification of company policy because of her disability. Rather, Plaintiff's evidence shows only that she failed to show up at work for three days because of back pain, and the reason she did not notify Defendant of her absence is that she could not do so in person, and did not have ready access to a phone.2 None of Plaintiff's evidence raises a triable issue as to whether Plaintiff made a further request for accommodation.
As to this claim, the Court grants summary judgment in favor of Defendant.

D. Claim 6: Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process in Violation of FEHA
Under FEHA,"[w]here the disability, resulting limitations, and necessary reasonable accommodations, are not open, obvious, and apparent to the employer, ... the initial burden rests primarily upon the employee ... to specifically identify the disability and resulting limitations, and to suggest the reasonable accommodations." Scotch v. Art Institute of California - Orange County, Inc., 173 Cal. App. 4th 986, 1013, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d 338 (2009) (citing Taylor v. Principal Financial Group, Inc., 93 F.3d 155, 165 (5th Cir.1996)). In response to a request for reasonable accommodation, the employer must engage in a timely, good faith, interactive process with the employee to determine effective reasonable accommodations. Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(n).
According to the evidence, [*13]  Plaintiff first suffered a job-related, back injury in December 2011. (Arreola Decl., ¶ 5.) Plaintiff reported the injury, and made "requests" to Defendant relating to her back injury. (Arreola Decl., ¶5.) The evidence fails to specify what requests were made. Nor does the evidence show that Plaintiff specifically identified the limitations, or suggested reasonable accommodations at this point. However, in response to Plaintiff's "requests," Defendant "would have someone assist [Plaintiff] or would sometimes send [her] home to rest." (Arreola Decl., ¶ 5.) In March 2012, Plaintiff hurt her back again. (Arreola Decl, ¶8.) At that time, Plaintiff also learned she was pregnant. Id. In March 2012, Plaintiff's doctor gave Plaintiff a note restricting her from lifting, which she presented to Defendant. This marks the first time in the record that Plaintiff specified her limitation. Defendant responded by reassigning her to a sorting job that required no lifting. When Plaintiff informed Defendant that sorting still caused her pain because the boxes were too heavy, Defendant responded by reassigning her to "Smalls." When Plaintiff complained that the bending and reaching from a standing position [*14]  caused her pain, Defendant responded by bringing a chair for her to sit in sometimes. In her deposition testimony, when asked if the chair was acceptable, Plaintiff responded, "for a little bit, yes." (Arreola Dep., 77:12-15.) This evidence shows that Defendant engaged in the interactive process both timely and in good faith.
Plaintiff states that ultimately, the chair did not fully alleviate the pain or difficulties she was having with the job. (Arreola Decl., ¶ 3). As discussed in Section IV.C. above, Plaintiff's evidence indicates that the severity of her disability was evolving. Therefore, it is reasonable to infer that a certain accommodation, such as a chair, may be reasonable at one point in time, even if it becomes unreasonable at a later point in time. There is no evidence indicating that Plaintiff ever communicated that the accommodations offered were no longer reasonable. (See Arreola Decl., ¶ 3; Arreola Dep., 77:10-78:17.) While not entirely clear, Plaintiff seems to argue that Defendant should have known because, from March 2012 through September 2012, Plaintiff went to the Emergency Room no fewer than four times because of debilitating back pain. (Arreola Decl., ¶ 9.) [*15]  With each emergency room visit, Plaintiff was given a doctor's note for 2-3 days of time off work. Id. This evidence fails to create a genuine dispute, however, because there is no evidence establishing a connection between Plaintiff's job and either the occurrence or reasons for the emergency room visits. The evidence in the record shows that prior to Plaintiff's September absence, Defendant engaged in the interactive process. Plaintiff has offered no evidence to the contrary.
Plaintiff relies heavily on her theory that Defendant failed to engage in the interactive process when it terminated her employment and refused to consider her doctor's notes. However, for the same reasons discussed in Section IV.C. above, this theory fails. There is no evidence indicating that Plaintiff's conduct relating to her September absence constituted a separate or ongoing request for reasonable accommodation. As such, the duty to engage in the interactive process was not triggered by Plaintiff's unnoticed absence.
The Court grants summary judgment in favor of Defendant as to this claim.

E. Punitive Damages
Punitive damages require proof by "clear and convincing evidence that the defendant has been guilty [*16]  of oppression, fraud, or malice." Cal. Civ. Code §3294(a). Malice is conduct intended to cause injury to the plaintiff or despicable conduct carried on with a willful and conscious disregard of the rights or safety of others. Cal. Civ. Code §3294(c)(1). Oppression is despicable conduct that subjects a person to cruel and unjust hardship in conscious disregard of that person's rights. Cal. Civ. Code §3294(c)(2). Despicable conduct is vile, base, or contemptible conduct that has been described as having the character of outrage frequently associated with crime. Scott v. Phoenix Schools, Inc., 175 Cal. App. 4th 702, 715, 96 Cal. Rptr. 3d 159 (2009) (citations omitted). It is well-established that wrongful termination, alone, does not support punitive damages. Id. at 716-717. Without more, termination for an improper reason is insufficient to support a finding of despicable conduct, because such action is not vile, base, or contemptible. Id.
Here, Plaintiff's evidence, at best, shows only that Defendant wrongfully terminated her. There is no evidence in the record to suggest that Defendant's conduct was vile, base, or contemptible. Nor does the evidence show a conscious and deliberate disregard of Plaintiff's interests. As such, the Court finds no triable issue of fact as to punitive damages.
The Court grants summary judgment in favor of Defendant on the issue [*17]  of punitive damages.

V. EVIDENTIARY OBJECTIONS
To the extent the Court relied on evidence to which the parties objected, those objections are overruled.

VI. CONCLUSION
Based on the foregoing, the Court grants Defendant's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment. The only claims remaining for trial are (1) Discrimination in Violation of FEHA; (2) Failure to Prevent Discrimination in Violation of FEHA; (3) Wrongful Termination of Violation of Public Policy; and (4) Declaratory Judgment.
IT IS SO ORDERED.


End of Document

