Bagwell v. Morgan Cty. Comm'n
United States District Court for the Northern District of Alabama, Northeastern Division
October 28, 2015, Decided; October 28, 2015, Filed
Civil Action No. 5:14-CV-00464-CLS

Reporter
2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 192651 *
KATRINA BAGWELL, Plaintiff, vs. MORGAN COUNTY COMMISSION, Defendant.
Subsequent History: Decision reached on appeal by Bagwell v. Morgan Cnty. Comm'n, 676 Fed. Appx. 863, 2017 U.S. App. LEXIS 894 (11th Cir. Ala., Jan. 18, 2017)
Counsel:  [*1] For Katrina Bagwell, Plaintiff: Rocco Calamusa, Jr, LEAD ATTORNEY, WIGGINS CHILDS PANTAZIS FISHER & GOLDFARB, LLC, Birmingham, AL USA; Rachel L McGinley, WIGGINS CHILDS PANTAZIS FISHER GOLDFARB, Birmingham, AL USA.
For Morgan County Commission, Defendant: David J Canupp, LEAD ATTORNEY, LANIER FORD SHAVER & PAYNE PC, Huntsville, AL USA; George W Royer, Jr, LANIER FORD SHAVER & PAYNE, Huntsville, AL USA.
Judges: C. Lynnwood Smith Jr, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: C. Lynnwood Smith Jr
Opinion



MEMORANDUM OPINION AND ORDER
Plaintiff, Katrina Bagwell, filed a complaint asserting claims for disability discrimination and retaliation pursuant to the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. § 701 et seq. (the "Rehabilitation Act"), and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq. (the "ADA"), against her former employer, the Morgan County Commission, as well as the individual members of that Commission: Ray Long, Chairman, and Jeff Clark, Randy Vest, Don Stisher, and Greg Abercrombie, Commissioners.1 By order entered on June 25, 2014, however, all claims asserted against the individual members of the Morgan County Commission were dismissed.2 The case currently is before the court on the remaining defendant's motion for summary judgment.3 Upon [*2]  consideration of the pleadings, briefs, and evidentiary submissions, the court concludes that the motion should be granted.

I. SUMMARY JUDGMENT STANDARD
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56 provides that summary judgment should be rendered if the pleadings, the discovery and disclosure materials on file, and any affidavits show that "there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). In other words, summary judgment is proper "after adequate time for discovery and upon motion, against a party who fails to make a showing sufficient to establish the existence of an element essential to that party's case, and on which that party will bear the burden of proof at trial." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). "In making this determination, the court must review all evidence and make all reasonable inferences in favor of the party opposing summary judgment." Chapman v. AI Transport, 229 F.3d 1012, 1023 (11th Cir. 2000) (en banc) (quoting Haves v. City of Miami, 52 F.3d 918, 921 (11th Cir. 1995)). Inferences in favor of the non-moving party are not unqualified, however. "[A]n inference is not reasonable if it is only a guess or a possibility, for such an inference is not based on the evidence, but is pure conjecture and speculation." Daniels v. Twin Oaks Nursing Home, 692 F.2d 1321, 1324 (11th Cir. 1983). Moreover,
[t]he mere existence of some factual dispute will not defeat summary judgment [*3]  unless that factual dispute is material to an issue affecting the outcome of the case. The relevant rules of substantive law dictate the materiality of a disputed fact. A genuine issue of material fact does not exist unless there is sufficient evidence favoring the nonmoving party for a reasonable jury to return a verdict in its favor.
Chapman, 229 F.3d at 1023 (quoting Haves, 52 F.3d at 921) (emphasis supplied). See also Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 251-52, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986) (asking "whether the evidence presents a sufficient disagreement to require submission to a jury or whether it is so one-sided that one party must prevail as a matter of law").

II. SUMMARY OF FACTS
Plaintiff, Katrina Bagwell, began her employment with the Morgan County Commission on April 11, 2005. She was later assigned, in March of 2006, to the position of "Groundskeeper" at West Park near Danville, Alabama.4 West Park is a community recreational facility with four baseball fields, a soccer field, a football field, a nature trail, and a paved walking path.5 Plaintiff worked as a Groundskeeper at West Park until her employment was terminated on March 7, 2014.6 The job description for the Groundskeeper position states that the "ESSENTIAL FUNCTIONS" of that position are as follows:
Performs manual work functions associated [*4]  with landscaping, grounds keeping and other maintenance tasks (which may include mowing, edging, trimming or weeding landscaped areas; spreading grass seed and fertilizer; planting trees and shrubs; cleaning/watering flowerbeds; spraying chemicals; removing trash/branches from grounds; disposing of litter/trash from grounds; cleaning/sweeping walkways and parking lots; preparing athletic fields for use; installing/maintaining irrigation systems; digging holes/trenches; moving furniture; carrying building materials; etc.).
Performs minor construction, maintenance and repair to buildings, equipment and tools (which may include painting; plumbing; electrical work; carpentry functions; pouring concrete slabs/sidewalks; installing/repairing fences; cleaning concrete areas; etc.).
Performs various housekeeping tasks (which may include cleaning/maintaining restrooms; cleaning shop areas; cleaning pavilions; emptying trash containers; vacuuming, sweeping, mopping or cleaning floor surfaces; dusting/polishing furniture; cleaning windows; etc.).
Operates/maintains various machinery, equipment and tools used in maintenance activities (which may include a utility trailer, tractor, mower, bush hog, [*5]  weed eater, blower, aerator, thatching machine, chain saw, sprayer, spreader, pressure washer, drill, rake, shovel, pick, post hole digger, ladder, carpenter's tools, electrical tools, mechanic tools, hand tools, various landscaping equipment/tools, cleaning tools/supplies, etc.).
Receives and/or prepares various forms, reports, or other documents; reviews, completes, processes and forwards as appropriate. Communicates via telephone and/or two-way radio; provides information; takes and relays messages and/or directs calls to appropriate personnel; responds to requests for service.
Doc. no. 52-2 (Exhibits to Bagwell Deposition), at ECF 183.7
The job description also states, under a heading labeled "physical requirements," that the position entails "very heavy work demands."8
Randy Vest, a Morgan County Commissioner and plaintiff's direct supervisor, attested that District 2 employed two Groundskeepers at West Park, because it "takes two groundskeepers to perform the many daily functions required in order to properly maintain the Park."9 Vest elaborated:
For instance, in my experience, on a given day, both groundskeepers may be fully engaged in cleaning up limbs or picking up trash. [*6]  On other days, both groundskeepers may need to be painting the field house, or riding mowers or the Infield Pro. It has always been my judgment that if one of these two groundskeepers [was] required to spend time assisting the other in performing tasks that otherwise could be handled independently, the Park would not operate as efficiently.
Doc. no. 52-6 (Vest Affidavit) ¶ 9 (alteration supplied).
Plaintiff testified that she rarely, if ever, performed some of the duties listed in the Groundskeeper job description recited in the text preceding note 7, supra.10 She stated that the following duties comprised the "essential functions" of the position as she actually performed it: mowing grass; maintaining ball fields; picking up trash with pinchers; cleaning restrooms; raking leaves out of drainage ditches; and picking up small tree limbs and branches.11 She also testified that the following functions were either "marginal," or never performed by her: climbing stairs or bleachers in order to clean them; using a chainsaw, electrical tools, or a posthole digger; planting trees and shrubs; changing light bulbs using a ladder; installing and maintaining irrigation systems; performing plumbing-related [*7]  tasks; repairing fences; performing tasks that required her to crouch, crawl, squat, or kneel; and picking up large tree branches.12
The incident that ultimately led to the termination of plaintiff's employment occurred on September 13, 2013, when she was badly injured in a motorcycle accident. Her right kneecap was crushed in eight places, and she suffered a broken right femur.13 She underwent surgery to implant seven screws in her knee and a rod in her leg.14 She requested, and was granted, leave pursuant to the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1996, 29 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq. (the "FMLA"), and she remained on FMLA leave until on or about February 7, 2014.
When plaintiff attempted to return to work on or about February 7, 2014, she presented Commissioner Vest a note written by an assistant to Dr. Jason Lowe, her treating physician, stating that she could resume her work duties with no restrictions.15 During their meeting, Commissioner Vest observed that plaintiff walked with a limp, and he stated that she would need to be "cleared" to return to work by Morgan County's doctor.16 (The Morgan County Commission Employee Handbook allows a County Commissioner to request that an employee who has taken a medical leave of [*8]  absence submit to a physical examination before being permitted to return to work.)17 Plaintiff accordingly underwent a physical examination by Dr. Freddy McMurry, Morgan County's physician, who observed that plaintiff's leg was "in very rough shape," and that she exhibited a "bad limp."18 Dr. McMurry spent a total of twenty-nine minutes with plaintiff during her appointment, and referred her to Leslie Pruitt, an occupational therapist, for a functional capacity evaluation ("FCE").19
Pruitt reviewed the Groundskeeper job description provided by the Commission, but was not provided specific information regarding the amount of time Groundskeepers spent on particular tasks, or the "amount of weight [Groundskeepers] actually lifted during specific activities."20 After requiring that plaintiff "perform a series of standard tests such as a floor to waist lift, waist to overhead lift, horizontal lift/carry, push, pull, right hand grip, left hand grip, kneel, crouch, etc,"21 Pruitt determined that plaintiff could not perform a full kneel or more than a half squat, but also stated that plaintiff could "go to only one knee, sit, or use a small stool" to accommodate those limitations.22 Pruitt also concluded [*9]  that plaintiff could not walk more than one-third of the work day, because, "[a]fter 30 minutes [of walking], [plaintiff's] leg [began] to tighten up [and] become stiff."23 Pruitt concluded that plaintiff could not work on or climb to elevated surfaces, because she exhibited "balance problems on uneven surfaces."24 In summary, Pruitt determined that plaintiff, who exerted "maximum, consistent effort" during her functional capacity evaluation, "could tolerate around 45 to 50% of her job requirements," taking into account any available accommodations.25
After reviewing the FCE completed by Leslie Pruitt, Dr. McMurry concluded that plaintiff was not "medically qualified to do the [Groundskeeper] job," and that plaintiff's attempt to carry out the duties of the position would constitute a "definite safety hazard."26 Dr. McMurry added that, "based on the job description and what she's expected to be able to do and based on the FCE, I seriously doubt there would be any type of reasonable accommodations for her."27 Accordingly, on February 21, 2014, Dr. McMurry sent a letter to the Morgan County Commission stating that, based upon his review of the FCE, and "within a reasonable medical certainty[,] [*10]  [plaintiff is] not medically qualified" to perform the Groundskeeper job.28
Upon receiving that letter and a copy of Pruitt's FCE, Commissioner Randy Vest decided to terminate plaintiff's employment.29 Vest testified in his affidavit that he was worried about plaintiff's safety and ability to perform job functions that required walking and/or balancing,30 and was concerned that West Park could not be properly maintained without two Groundskeepers independently performing their job functions on a full-time basis.31 Plaintiff corroborated that statement with her testimony that, even with two Groundskeepers, "it was still hard to keep up sometimes."32
Vest issued a "Notice of Proposed Termination" to plaintiff on February 25, 2014, stating that she was not physically or medically capable of performing her job.33
A termination hearing was held on March 6, 2014, at which plaintiff only specifically requested a stool upon which to sit while weeding flower beds.34 When asked during her deposition whether she requested any accommodation other than a stool at the termination hearing, plaintiff replied that she "just asked for accommodations. And I said like a stool, for instance, if I had to do the flower [*11]  beds."35 One day later, i.e., on March 7, 2014, plaintiff received a formal notice of her termination.
Plaintiff contends that she was discriminated against because of "her disability, her record of disability and/or her perceived disability." Plaintiff also alleges that she was retaliated against for having requested reasonable accommodations under the ADA and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act. When asked to identify "each and every instance of retaliation against [her] for asking for accommodations in violation of the [ADA and the Rehabilitation Act] to which [she had] been subjected," plaintiff responded,
I asked for reasonable accommodations as required under the County's policy and under the law at the March 6, 2014 hearing which was presided over by Chairman Long . . . . Vest attended the meeting as did Belinda Ealey, Chief Administrative Officer of [the Commission]. Chairman Long acknowledged my requests, but refused to provide me any reasonable accommodations at that time.
Doc. no. 52-8 (Bagwell's Response to Interrogatories) ¶ 2 (emphasis, ellipsis, and alterations supplied).

III. DISCUSSION OF DISABILITY DISCRIMINATION CLAIMS
Plaintiff's complaint asserts claims of disability discrimination under [*12]  the ADA and Rehabilitation Act, both of which prohibit discrimination against an "otherwise qualified" individual with a disability. See 42 U.S.C. § 12112; 29 U.S.C. § 794. "Discrimination claims under the Rehabilitation Act are governed by the same standards used in ADA cases . . . ." Cash v. Smith, 231 F.3d 1301, 1305 (11th Cir. 2000) (citing 29 U.S.C. § 794(d)) (footnote omitted); see also Holbrook v. City of Alpharetta, 112 F.3d 1522, 1526 n.2 (11th Cir. 1997). Thus, "[c]ases decided under the Rehabilitation Act are precedent for cases under the ADA, and vice versa." Cash, 231 F.3d at 1305 n.2 (citing Pritchard v. Southern Company Services, 92 F.3d 1130, 1132 n.2 (11th Cir. 1996) (alteration supplied). Plaintiff alleges that the Commission violated the ADA and Rehabilitation Act by refusing to provide her a reasonable accommodation or, alternatively, by wrongfully regarding her as "disabled."

A. Refusal to Provide a Reasonable Accommodation
A plaintiff asserting a claim for refusal to provide a reasonable accommodation must prove the following: (1) that she is "disabled," as that term is defined under the ADA and Rehabilitation Act; (2) that she is otherwise qualified to perform the duties of her former position; and (3) that a reasonable accommodation was not provided by her employer. Lucas v. W.W. Grainger, Inc., 257 F.3d 1249, 1255 (11th Cir. 2001); Palmer v. McDonald, No. 14-15546, 624 Fed. Appx. 699, 2015 U.S. App. LEXIS 14677, at *14-15 (11th Cir. Aug. 21, 2015); Nadler v. Harvey, No. 06-12692, 2007 U.S. App. LEXIS 20272, 2007 WL 2404705, at *5 (11th Cir. Aug. 24, 2007). "An employer's failure to reasonably accommodate a disabled individual itself constitutes discrimination under the ADA [or the Rehabilitation Act], so long as that [*13]  individual is 'otherwise qualified,' and unless the employer can show undue hardship." Holly v. Clairson Industries, L.L.C., 492 F.3d 1247, 1262 (11th Cir. 2007) (emphasis in original, alteration supplied). In contrast to ADA and Rehabilitation Act claims generally, a claim for failure to make reasonable accommodations does not invoke Title VII burden-shifting — that is, a defendant employer has no burden to show a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the allegedly adverse employment action, and the plaintiff has no burden to prove that such a reason is pretextual. See id.; see also Nadler, 2007 U.S. App. LEXIS 20272, 2007 WL 2404705, at *1 ("[T]he Title VII burden-shifting framework of McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973), while appropriate for determining the existence of disability discrimination in disparate treatment cases, is not necessary or useful in determining whether a defendant has discriminated by failing to provide a reasonable accommodation.") (alteration and emphasis supplied).

1. "Disability"
The ADA and Rehabilitation Act define the concept of "disability" in a manner that includes any individual who:
(i) has a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities;
(ii) has a record of such an impairment; or
(iii) is regarded as having such an impairment.
42 U.S.C. § 12102(1); see also 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(g). The phrase [*14]  "major life activities" includes, but is not limited to, "caring for oneself, performing manual tasks, seeing, hearing, eating, sleeping, walking, standing, lifting, bending, speaking, breathing, learning, reading, concentrating, thinking, communicating, and working." 42 U.S.C. § 12102(2)(A) (emphasis supplied). The parties do not dispute that plaintiff was "disabled" as that term is defined by the ADA and Rehabilitation Act from the date of her motorcycle accident until she attempted to return to work on or about February 7, 2014.36 Even so, because plaintiff alternatively alleges that the Commission wrongfully regarded her as disabled (as will be discussed in Part III-B of this opinion, infra), the court will address the issue of whether plaintiff is disabled.
"A physical impairment, standing alone, . . . is not necessarily a disability as contemplated by the ADA [and Rehabilitation Act] . . . . The ADA [and Rehabilitation Act] require[] that the impairment substantially limit one or more of the individual's major life activities." Gordon, 100 F.3d at 911 (emphasis and alterations supplied) (citations omitted). The phrase "substantially limits" is not defined in either the ADA or Rehabilitation Act, but implementing regulations [*15]  instruct that it means a person either is:
(i) Unable to perform a major life activity that the average person in the general population can perform; or
(ii) Significantly restricted as to the condition, manner, or duration under which an individual can perform a particular major life activity as compared to the condition, manner, or duration under which the average person in the general population can perform that same major life activity.
29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(1) (emphasis supplied).
The ADA and Rehabilitation Act identify walking, standing, bending, and working as "major life activities." See 42 U.S.C. § 12102(2)(A). The question is whether the injuries to plaintiff's right leg substantially limited her ability to perform those activities. Plaintiff's FCE revealed that she was unable to stand for longer than thirty minutes at a time; could not perform greater than a half squat; displayed balancing difficulties; and could not walk more than one-third of the work day.37 This court accordingly finds that plaintiff was "disabled."

2. Qualified individual with a disability

a. Essential functions
The first task is to identify the essential functions of the Groundskeeper position. In general, "[t]he term essential functions means the fundamental [*16]  job duties of the employment position [that] the individual with a disability holds or desires," but it does not include "the marginal functions of the position." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(1) (emphasis and alterations supplied). Additionally:
(2) A job function may be considered essential for any of several reasons, including but not limited to the following:
(i) The function may be essential because the reason the position exists is to perform the function;
(ii) The function may be essential because of the limited number of employees available among whom the performance of the job function can be distributed; and/or
(iii) The function may be highly specialized so that the incumbent in the position is hired for his or her expertise or ability to perform the particular function.
(3) Evidence of whether a particular function is essential includes, but is not limited to:
(i) The employer's judgment as to which functions are essential;
(ii) Written job descriptions prepared before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job;
(iii) The amount of time spent on the job performing the function;
(iv) The consequences of not requiring the incumbent to perform the function;
(v) The terms of a collective bargaining agreement; [*17] 
(vi) The work experience of past incumbents in the job; and/or
(vii) The current work experience of incumbents in similar jobs.
29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(2)-(3).
Plaintiff and the Commission disagree about what all of the "essential functions" of the Groundskeeper position are.38 Specifically, plaintiff contends that functions she rarely or never performed do not constitute "essential functions."39 Her testimony is not sufficient to resolve that issue, however. The fact that a task is rarely performed does not automatically render it non-essential, or marginal. C.f., e.g., Holbrook v. City of Alpharetta, 112 F.3d 1522, 1527 (11th Cir. 1997) (duties of driving an automobile and collecting certain types of evidence at crime scenes were "essential functions" of police detective position, even though the plaintiff was rarely called upon to perform those duties, because it was "not possible to anticipate" the extent to which those duties would need to be performed in the future).
Most of the statutory and regulatory factors cited above weigh in favor of the Commission's argument that all of the duties listed in the written Groundskeeper job description are "essential functions" of the position. The position existed for the purpose of performing all of those duties. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(2)(i). Moreover, those job [*18]  duties were distributed between only two Groundskeepers at West Park. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(2)(ii).
The factors recited in 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(3) also weigh in favor of the Commission's argument. In the Commission's judgment, all of the duties listed in the written job description were essential to the position. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(3)(i)-(ii). Plaintiff attempts to group tasks into "essential" and "marginal" categories based solely upon the regularity or irregularity with which she performed them. Plaintiff states that she regularly cared for grass, maintained ball fields, picked up trash, cleaned bathrooms, and disposed of leaves or limbs.40 Accordingly, the "past work experience" factor weighs in favor of finding that those tasks constitute the "essential functions" of the position. Regularity of performance is only one of several factors to be taken into account, however, and it is not determinative. See Holbrook, 112 F.3d at 1527.
After balancing the factors listed in 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(2)-(3), this court finds that all of the duties listed in the Commission's written job description constituted the "essential functions" of the position.

b. Reasonable accommodation
The next question is whether plaintiff could have performed the essential functions of the position if the Commission had provided her with a [*19]  reasonable accommodation. A "reasonable accommodation" includes:
(A) making existing facilities used by employees readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities; and
(B) job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, reassignment to a vacant position, acquisition or modification of equipment or devices, appropriate adjustment or modification of examinations, training materials or policies, the provision of qualified readers or interpreters, and other similar accommodations for individuals with disabilities.
42 U.S.C. § 12111(9).
An employer discriminates against an otherwise qualified individual with a disability when it fails to make "reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who is an applicant or employee, unless such covered entity can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business of such covered entity." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). An "undue hardship" is "an action requiring significant difficulty or expense, when considered in light of" the following factors:
(i) the nature and cost of the accommodation needed under this chapter;
(ii) the overall financial resources [*20]  of the facility or facilities involved in the provision of the reasonable accommodation; the number of persons employed at such facility; the effect on expenses and resources, or the impact otherwise of such accommodation upon the operation of the facility;
(iii) the overall financial resources of the covered entity; the overall size of the business of a covered entity with respect to the number of its employees; the number, type, and location of its facilities; and
(iv) the type of operation or operations of the covered entity, including the composition, structure, and functions of the workforce of such entity; the geographic separateness, administrative, or fiscal relationship of the facility or facilities in question to the covered entity.
42 U.S.C. § 12111(10).
The Eleventh Circuit has held that "[a]n accommodation is reasonable, and thus required under the ADA [and the Rehabilitation Act], only if it allows the employee to perform the essential functions of the job." Earl v. Mervyns, Inc., 207 F.3d 1361, 1365 (11th Cir. 2000) (citing LaChance v. Duffy's Draft House, Inc., 146 F.3d 832, 835 (11th Cir. 1998) (in turn citing 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(2)(ii) (1995)) (alterations supplied); see also Lucas v. W.W. Grainger, Inc., 257 F.3d 1249, 1260 (11th Cir. 2001) (citations omitted) (holding that the elimination of a position's requirements that the occupant be able to squat, bend, lift, or carry bin items "would have changed [*21]  the nature of" the job classification, "and that is not something the ADA requires").
The burden of identifying an accommodation that would allow a qualified employee to perform the essential functions of her job rests with that employee, as does the ultimate burden of persuasion with respect to showing that such accommodation is reasonable. See Stewart v. Happy Herman's Chesire Bridge, Inc., 117 F.3d 1278, 1286 (11th Cir. 1997). Furthermore, "where a plaintiff cannot demonstrate 'reasonable accommodations,' the employer's lack of investigation into reasonable accommodation is unimportant." Willis v. Conopco, Inc., 108 F.3d 282, 285 (11th Cir. 1997). Finally, before an employer has a duty to prove undue hardship, the plaintiff first must show that a reasonable accommodation exists. Id. at 286. "No language in the ADA mandates a pretermination investigation," and, "the ADA provides no cause of action for [an employer's] 'failure to investigate' possible accommodations." Id. at 285 (citing Moses v. American Nonwovens, Inc., 97 F.3d 446, 448 (11th Cir. 1996)) (alteration supplied).
The only accommodation plaintiff requested prior to this litigation was a stool for weeding the flower bed. Plaintiff testified in her deposition that, in fulfilling her duties as a Groundskeeper, she "walked pretty much [the] entire park" on a "daily basis,"41 and was "standing and bending and doing things like that pretty much all day." [*22] 42 Plaintiff's singular request for a stool, for the rare occasions on which she weeded the flower bed,43 would not have better enabled her to perform many of the other essential functions of her job, including: changing light bulbs; knocking down insect nests; painting the exterior of or cleaning windows on tall structures; edging; digging holes or trenches; moving furniture; or raking leaves from wet, uneven drainage ditches.44 To perform those essential functions, it would be necessary for plaintiff to bend or crouch (to some extent); engage in repetitive physical movements with her lower extremities; and balance on a ladder. The Commission was not responsible for exploring accommodations not suggested by plaintiff. See id.
Plaintiff suggests other possible accommodations (besides the stool), in her summary judgment briefing:
Reasonable accommodations that would have allowed [plaintiff] to perform the essential functions of her job include, but are not limited to, using [an] ATV to help [plaintiff] traverse uneven surfaces, adaptive equipment that would allow [plaintiff] to complete many tasks for which a ladder would be required, breaking heavier loads into smaller loads for carrying, [*23]  and simple task restructuring for jobs like cleaning the restrooms.
Doc. no. 56 (Brief in Opposition to Summary Judgment) ¶ 22 (alterations supplied). Plaintiff also argues in her brief that "[r]eallocating minor tasks, like having [her] co-groundskeeper dry the restroom floor, would also be [an] appropriate reasonable accommodation." Id. at 20 (alterations supplied).
Another district court within this Circuit refused to consider "reasonable accommodations" raised by the plaintiff, for the first time, at summary judgment:
[I]t is simply too late to raise suggested accommodations two years later in a summary-judgment response brief. The essence of the ADA claim is discrimination in the work place, which means while the employee is on the job. Hence, the employee must show that [she] requested a reasonable accommodation while on the job (or that the adaptation constituting the suggested accommodation was reasonably apparent) but the employer simply refused to make that accommodation, thereby discriminating against the employee at the time. Without this requirement the employee could casually mention a claimed disability, say nothing, wait to be terminated, then think up new suggested accommodations [*24]  years later while in the midst of ADA litigation. This would unfairly subject the employer to a "retro-discrimination" standard, where the employer "should have thought of" the accommodation at the time even if the employee did not.
Fussell v. Georgia Ports Authority, 906 F. Supp. 1561, 1570 (S.D. Ga. 1995) (alterations and emphasis supplied). This court finds that reasoning persuasive and, accordingly, will not consider reasonable accommodations that plaintiff proposes for the first time at summary judgment. Even if it was not untimely for plaintiff to identify the reallocation of minor tasks as a possible accommodation, the Eleventh Circuit has held "that '[a]n employer is not required by the ADA to reallocate job duties in order to change the essential functions of a job." Earl, 207 F.3d at 1367 (quoting Holbrook, 112 F.3d at 1528) (alteration in original, emphasis supplied).
Finally, plaintiff contends that the Commission "had an obligation to engage in an interactive process with [her] to determine whether and which reasonable accommodations were feasible so that she could return to her job,"45 and that "Vest did not specifically respond to [her] request for accommodations [and] did not discuss whether the small stool was sufficient to address his concerns about [her] limitations [or] explain why or how [*25]  he thought [she] was physically or medically unqualified to perform her job. . . ."46 Vest is not required to engage in such an interactive process:
To determine the appropriate reasonable accommodation it may be necessary for the covered entity to initiate an informal, interactive process with the individual with a disability in need of the accommodation. This process should identify the precise limitations resulting from the disability and potential reasonable accommodations that could overcome those limitations.
See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3) (emphasis supplied). See also Lucas, 257 F.3d at 1256 n.2 (citing Willis, 108 F.3d at 285; Kennedy v. Dresser Rand Co., 193 F.3d 120, 122 (2d Cir. 1999)) ("[The plaintiff] contends that [his employer] failed to engage him in an 'interactive process' with the aim of identifying an accommodation that might allow him to continue working at [his place of employment] after he became disabled. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3). However, 'where a plaintiff cannot demonstrate "reasonable accommodation," the employer's lack of investigation into reasonable accommodation is unimportant.'") (alterations supplied). Plaintiff failed to satisfy her burden of identifying a reasonable accommodation — at or before her termination hearing — that would have enabled her to perform the essential functions of the Groundskeeper position. [*26]  Accordingly, the Commission was not required to engage in an interactive process with her; she is not a "qualified individual with a disability"; and the Commission is not required to demonstrate that the sole accommodation proposed by plaintiff would present an undue hardship.
In conclusion, plaintiff has not met her burden of establishing that she is a qualified individual with a disability, as required under the second prong of the prima facie case for disability discrimination. Accordingly, she cannot succeed on her failure-to-provide-reasonable-accommodation claims, and summary judgment is due to be granted in favor of the Commission.

B. The Contention that the Commission Regarded Plaintiff as "Disabled"
Although plaintiff states that the parties do not dispute her status as a "disabled" individual,47 plaintiff alternatively contends that the Commission violated the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act when it terminated her employment based upon the fact that Commissioner Vest apparently regarded her as disabled.48 "A person is 'regarded as' disabled within the meaning of the ADA [and Rehabilitation Act] if a covered entity mistakenly believes that the person's actual, nonlimiting impairment [*27]  substantially limits one or more major life activities." Murphy v. Ups, 527 U.S. 516, 521-22, 119 S. Ct. 2133, 144 L. Ed. 2d 484 (1999) (emphasis supplied).
A plaintiff may prove that she is a disabled person because the defendant regarded her as being disabled if she
(1) has an impairment that does not substantially limit a major life activity, but is treated by an employer as though it does; (2) has an impairment that limits a major life activity only because of others' attitudes towards the impairment; or (3) has no impairment whatsoever, but is treated by an employer as having a disability as recognized by the ADA.
Gilliard v. Georgia Department of Corrections, 500 F. App'x 860, 867 (11th Cir. 2012) (citing Standard v. A.B.E.L. Services, Inc., 161 F.3d 1318, 1327 n.2 (11th Cir. 1998) (in turn citing 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(l)) (emphasis supplied). The Title VII burden-shifting framework generally applied in ADA and Rehabilitation Act claims applies to claims for an employer's having wrongfully "regarded" a plaintiff as disabled. See Wolfe v. Postmaster General, United States Postal Service, 488 F. App'x 465, 468 (11th Cir. 2012). In other words, plaintiff must first establish a prima facie case. The Commission then has the burden of proffering a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for terminating plaintiff's employment. Finally, plaintiff must demonstrate that the Commission's proffered reason is pretextual.
In that regard, plaintiff states the following:
[Plaintiff] gave Vest the note from her doctor saying she could return to work as a [*28]  West Park groundskeeper with no restrictions. Even if one takes into account Pruitt's restrictions on [plaintiff's] physical abilities, [plaintiff] still would be able to perform the essential functions of her job, without any accommodations. Thus, [plaintiff] presented evidence that she was "qualified" under the ADA [and the Rehabilitation Act]. Vest's termination of [plaintiff] was based on his perception of her as disabled and therefore incapable of doing her job. Plaintiff has established her prima facie case.
Doc. no. 56 (Brief in Opposition to Summary Judgment), at 25-26 (internal citations omitted, emphasis and alterations supplied). First, this court found, in Part III-A-1of this opinion, supra, that plaintiff was substantially limited in her ability to walk, stand, and bend, and that she therefore was "disabled" under the meaning of the ADA and Rehabilitation Act. Moreover, such a conclusory statement that plaintiff "has established" her prima facie case is not only insufficient, but also incoherent: plaintiff stated on the previous page of her brief that she "required" an accommodation.49 Even if plaintiff could establish a prima facie case (and this court finds she cannot), [*29]  the Commission responds that its termination of plaintiff was based upon Vest's "nondiscriminatory, honest belief that [plaintiff] was unable to perform the essential functions of her job, with or without reasonable accommodations."50 Accordingly, plaintiff would be required to demonstrate pretext. The relevant legal standard is "whether the [Commission] made a reasonably informed and considered decision" in terminating plaintiff's employment. See Lowe v. Alabama Power Co., 244 F.3d 1305, 1308 (11th Cir. 2001); Nevitt v. United States Steel Corp., 18 F. Supp. 3d 1322, 1336 (N.D. Ala. 2014).
It was reasonable for Vest to conclude that plaintiff was incapable of carrying out the essential functions of her position, based upon Pruitt's finding that plaintiff struggled to tolerate repetitive activities or bear weight, for longer stretches of time, on her right leg. Plaintiff contends that the opinions of Pruitt and Dr. McMurry were not based upon sufficient evidence, because those individuals had access only to the Commission's written description of the position, and they were not apprised of the actual demands of the job.51 Even so, plaintiff was in the best position to inform Pruitt and Dr. McMurry of the actual, specific demands of her job. Hence, she cannot blame Commissioner Vest or the County Commission for not informing Pruitt [*30]  and Dr. McMurry of details that only a West Park Groundskeeper would know.
It is undisputed that Commissioner Vest relied upon Pruitt's and Dr. McMurry's opinions in making the decision to terminate plaintiff's employment. Plaintiff's concession that she cannot traverse wet or uneven surfaces, or perform tasks that require the use of a ladder, are consistent with the opinions of Pruitt and Dr. McMurry. Based upon the information available to Vest, plaintiff's singular request for a stool, and the fact that Vest had no obligation to reconcile the opinions of Dr. Lowe with those of Pruitt and Dr. McMurry,52 Vest made a reasonably informed decision to terminate plaintiff's employment.

IV. DISCUSSION OF RETALIATION CLAIM
Defendant argues that it is entitled to summary judgment on plaintiff's claims of retaliation under the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act. To establish a prima facie case of retaliation under either statute, a plaintiff must show that: (1) she engaged or participated in statutorily protected expression or activity; (2) she subsequently suffered an adverse employment action; and (3) there is a causal linkage between the protected expression or activity and the adverse action. See Lucas, 257 F.3d at 1260-61 (citing Farley v. Nationwide Mutual Insurance Co., 197 F.3d 1322, 1336 (11th Cir. 1999)); Stewart, 117 F.3d at 1287 (citing Goldsmith v. City of Atmore, 996 F.2d 1155, 1163 (11th Cir. 1993)).
Once a prima facie case is established, the burden then shifts to the defendant employer to come forward with legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons for its actions [*32]  that negate the inference of retaliation. See Goldsmith, 996 F.2d at 1163. The plaintiff must then demonstrate that she will be able to establish at trial that the employer's proffered non-discriminatory reasons are a pretextual ruse designed to mask retaliation. Cf. Isenbergh v. Knight-Ridder Newspaper Sales, Inc., 97 F.3d 436, 440 (11th Cir. 1996).
Stewart, 117 F.3d at 1287.
Plaintiff contends that the Commission retaliated against her for requesting reasonable accommodations, a protected activity.53 She cites Seventh Circuit authority which states, "A request as straightforward as asking for continued employment is a sufficient request for accommodation." Hendricks-Robinson v. Excel Corp., 154 F.3d 685, 694 (7th Cir. 1998). Hendricks-Robinson discussed a request for continued employment in the context of an employee's request to be reassigned "to a vacant position for which the employee is qualified." Id. (citing 42 U.S.C. § 12111(9)(B)). Accordingly, that non-binding authority does not mean that plaintiff's February 7, 2014 request for continued employment as a Groundskeeper was a protected activity for purposes of her retaliation claim. Plaintiff did not ask to be reassigned to a different position, and an employer does not have the burden of considering possible job reassignments if the plaintiff presents no evidence of any vacant position. See Willis, 108 F.3d at 284 ("Reassignment to another position is a required accommodation [*33]  only if there is a vacant position available for which the employee is otherwise qualified.") (citing 42 U.S.C. § 12111(9)(B)) (emphasis supplied); id. at 286 (stating that reassignment to a different position is required as a reasonable accommodation only if there is an available, vacant position, and noting that the plaintiff had presented no evidence of the existence of any vacant positions) (emphasis supplied); Boothe v. Henderson, 31 F. Supp. 2d 988, 995 (S.D. Ga. 1998) ("When transfer to another position is the proffered 'reasonable accommodation,' a plaintiff must identify a specific and vacant position.") (emphasis supplied).
Plaintiff's only protected activity was her request for a stool at her termination hearing, which occurred after Vest issued the Notice of Proposed Termination. Thus, plaintiff's engaging in protected activity could not have led to the Commission's termination of her employment, and plaintiff cannot prove the third element of her prima facie case — i.e., a causal linkage between her request for a stool and her firing. See Drago v. Jenne, 453 F.3d 1301, 1308 (11th Cir. 2006) ("We hold that, in a retaliation case, when an employer contemplates an adverse employment action before an employee engages in protected activity, temporal proximity between the protected activity and the subsequent adverse [*34]  employment action does not suffice to show causation.") (emphasis supplied); see also Saffold v. Special Counsel, Inc., 147 F. App'x 949, 951 (11th Cir. 2005) (citing Clark County School District v. Breeden, 532 U.S. 268, 272, 121 S. Ct. 1508, 149 L. Ed. 2d 509 (2001)) ("When an employer makes a tentative decision before protected activity occurs, the fact that an employer proceeds with such a decision is not evidence of causation.") (emphasis supplied).
Accordingly, the Commission does not have the burden of presenting legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons for terminating plaintiff's employment, and summary judgment is due to be granted on plaintiff's retaliation claims.

V. ORDER
In accordance with the foregoing, it is ORDERED that defendant's motion for summary judgment is GRANTED, and plaintiff's disability discrimination and retaliation claims are DISMISSED. Costs are taxed to plaintiff. The clerk is directed to close this file.
DONE and ORDERED this 28th day of October, 2015.
/s/ C. Lynnwood Smith Jr
United States District Judge


End of Document

