Baldock v. CSX Transp., Inc.
United States District Court for the Southern District of Indiana, Evansville Division
February 23, 2009, Decided
3:07-cv-119-RLY-WGH

Reporter
2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 37012 *; 21 Am. Disabilities Cas. (BNA) 990
ROBERT E. BALDOCK, Plaintiff, vs. CSX TRANSPORTATION, INC., Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For ROBERT E. BALDOCK, Plaintiff: Clinton E. Blanc, Robert S. Rifkin, MAURER RIFKIN & HILL P.C., Carmel, IN.
For CSX TRANSPORTATION, INC., Defendant: David G. Holcombe, Michael Scott McIntyre, BAKER & HOSTETLER LLP, Cincinnati, OH; John B. Lewis, PRO HAC VICE, BAKER & HOSTETLER LLP, Cleveland, OH.
Judges: RICHARD L. YOUNG, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: RICHARD L. YOUNG
Opinion



ENTRY ON DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
Plaintiff, Robert E. Baldock ("Plaintiff"), filed the instant lawsuit against CSX Transportation, Inc. ("CSXT") under the provisions of Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq. Plaintiff alleges that CSXT violated the provisions of the ADA when it withdrew its conditional offer of employment to him as a Conductor Trainee based upon communications it received from Plaintiff's treating psychiatrist, Lawrence M. Katz, M.D. ("Dr. Katz"). CSXT now moves for summary judgment. For the reasons explained below, the court GRANTS CSXT's motion.

I. Facts

A. The Job Requirements of a Conductor for CSXT
1. The position at issue, as noted above, is that of a Conductor Trainee for CSXT.
2. A conductor is responsible for the direction and oversight of the train,  [*2] and the crew is required to follow the conductor's instructions. A conductor is also responsible for the overall safety of the train, and thus, a conductor must be alert and attentive at all times. (Declaration of Don Noell P 3).
3. CSXT is a party to a collective bargaining agreement with the United Transportation Union ("UTU"), which covers employees on the former Louisville & Nashville Railroad Company ("L&N") territory, including those conductors working at the Evansville, Indiana, terminal. (Id. PP 1, 5).
4. Junior conductors at the Evansville terminal work on an "extra board." A conductor on the "extra board" fills in for absences of regularly assigned conductors and extra assignments on a rotating basis. When an extra board conductor "marks up" for duty, his or her name is placed on a list with other available extra board conductors. Absences of regular conductors are filled by the extra board conductors starting from the first qualified person "marked up" (or placed on the list) and proceeding through the list. When a conductor on the extra board is marked up for service, that conductor must be available to report to the assigned location for work within two hours of being called.  [*3] Since the assignments an extra board conductor receives are random, they are of varying lengths. They range from eight to twelve hours in duration. (Id. P 7). As a junior Conductor, Plaintiff would have been required to work weekends, nights, holidays, and to have been available for work on a 24 hour, 7 day per week schedule. (Id. P 9). This extra board assignment could be expected to last for years until Plaintiff accrued sufficient seniority to secure another position. (Id.).

B. Plaintiff Undergoes Training and Applies for a Junior Conductor Trainee Position
5. On November 20, 2005, Plaintiff saw a recruiting advertisement placed in the newspaper by AMDG, Inc. ("AMDG") regarding a railroad conductor training program for positions with CSXT in Evansville, Indiana. (Deposition of Robert Baldock ("Plaintiff Dep.") at 50). AMDG conducts training programs for positions in various industries, including the railroad industry. (Id. at 54).
6. On November 28, 2005, Plaintiff met with a recruiter, Robert Slusher ("Slusher"), for AMDG and was shown a PowerPoint presentation detailing the Conductor Trainee job requirements and expectations if he were hired by CSXT. (Id. at 51-52).
7. Before the  [*4] presentation began, Plaintiff informed Slusher that he was taking medication to treat bipolar disorder. (Id. at 51). Slusher told Plaintiff that he did not foresee a problem, but he advised Plaintiff to review the job requirements described in a document entitled "Tasks, Duties and Responsibilities of a Conductor" with his doctor and get a note from the doctor concerning his ability to perform those job requirements. (Id.).
8. On January 3, 2006, Plaintiff's psychiatrist, Dr. Katz, reviewed the job description for railroad conductors and wrote a letter, which reads in relevant part:
Mr. Baldock is capable [sic] to perform the listed tasks and duties we reviewed today regarding work as a railroad conductor. The importance of regular sleep cannot, however, be over-stated.
(Plaintiff Dep. Ex. G).
9. On January 16, 2006, Plaintiff submitted an application for employment with CSXT for a Conductor Trainee position. (Plaintiff Dep. at 76; Plaintiff Dep. Ex. J).
10. On that same date, Plaintiff also attended AMDG's training program in Cincinnati, Ohio. The program concluded on February 18, 2006. (Plaintiff Dep. at 70, 73).
11. Plaintiff passed all written examinations and field tests and finished  [*5] first in his class with an overall average of 98.1. (Plaintiff Dep. Ex. H).
12. On January 24, 2006, CSXT interviewed Plaintiff for a position and gave him a "new Hire Candidate Letter of Understanding," which outlined the requirements of the Conductor Trainee position. (Plaintiff Dep. at 81-82; Plaintiff Dep. Ex. K).
13. Plaintiff understood that he would be expected to work any day or night when called, to travel away from home, to perform physically demanding labor in all weather conditions, and to work irregular shifts. (Plaintiff Dep. at 87; Plaintiff Dep. Ex. K).
14. On January 31, 2006, Plaintiff received an offer of employment from CSXT, which was contingent upon several factors including, but not limited to, completing a pre-employment physical. (Plaintiff Dep. at 83, 86; Plaintiff Dep. Ex. L).

C. CSXT Withdraws Its Conditional Offer of Employment
15. Soon after receiving the offer of employment from CSXT, Dr. Thomas Neilson ("Dr. Neilson), Chief Medical Officer of CSXT, reviewed Plaintiff's Post-Offer Health Questionnaire, including his medical history and list of medications he was taking. He also reviewed Dr. Katz's January 3, 2006, letter. (Declaration of Dr. Thomas Neilson  [*6] ("Neilson Dec.") PP 1, 2).
16. In January or February 2006, Dr. Neilson telephoned Dr. Katz to discuss Plaintiff's precise needs. (Id. P 3; Plaintiff Dep. at 62).
17. Dr. Neilson testified that Dr. Katz informed him that ". . . Plaintiff needed regular shifts so he could get sufficient sleep to stabilize his moods" and " . . . that an unpredictable work schedule was incompatible with [Plaintiff's] medications and his condition." (Neilson Dec. P 3). Dr. Katz denies making these statements to Dr. Neilson. (Supplemental Affidavit of Dr. Lawrence Katz ("Katz Supp. Aff.") PP 4, 7).
18. Dr. Katz's outpatient notes dated March 3, 2006, reflect that Plaintiff was in need of regular sleep. His notes stated, in relevant part:
He is capable of apparently -- per his academic performance -- of doing the job, but his sleep schedule would be optimally regular. He could be able to work 12-hour shifts, for example, but not repeatedly changing shifts, since his ability to obtain 6-8 hours of regular sleep would be compromised. Irregular sleep tends to induce hypomania or manic symptoms, and the mania induces insomnia, causing further sleep problems, and exacerbating the whole set of manic symptoms (heightened  [*7] insomnia, no appetite, possible hallucinations, delusions, and paranoia, irritability, engaging in serious activities or risky activities, and euphoria possibly for example).
(Plaintiff Dep. Ex. W).
19. After reviewing the above and after speaking with Dr. Katz, Dr. Neilson concluded that Plaintiff did not meet the medical requirements of the Conductor's position and asked that Plaintiff be informed of the same. (Neilson Dec. P 5).
20. On February 28, 2006, CSXT withdrew its conditional offer of employment because Plaintiff was not able to meet the medical requirements of the position. (Plaintiff Dep. at 110; Plaintiff Dep. Ex. U).
21. On June 29, 2006, Plaintiff, by counsel, requested that CSXT reconsider its withdrawal of the offer of employment and provide Plaintiff with the reasonable accommodation of allowing him "to maintain a regular sleep schedule while performing the duties of conductor." (Plaintiff Dep. at 120; Plaintiff Dep. Ex. Y).
22. On August 25, 2006, CSXT responded that Plaintiff's need for regular sleep was not a reasonable accommodation because it would require CSXT to violate the seniority provisions of its collective bargaining agreement with the railroad conductor's  [*8] union. (Plaintiff Dep. at 121; Plaintiff Dep. Ex. Z). Specifically, CSXT reasoned that "If CSXT were to provide [Plaintiff] with regular, stable hours as a Conductor, it would have required more Conductors to work in [Plaintiff's] place in violation of the collective bargaining agreement. . . . The Union could also argue that creating a position so [Plaintiff] would have stable working hours (contrary to seniority) was a unilateral change in pay, rules or working conditions . . . ." (Plaintiff Dep. Ex. Z).
23. Plaintiff, by counsel, responded to CSXT's letter on November 8, 2006, and stated that, " . . . [Dr. Katz] has amended his opinion about the need for a consistent shift with regular hours. Dr. Katz believes his patient can function appropriately and perform safely the job requirements of a railroad conductor even when he does not get the optimal level of regular sleep." (Plaintiff's Dep. Ex. AA).
24. CSXT apparently did not change its position, and on September 10, 2007, Plaintiff filed the instant Complaint in this case asserting violations of the Americans with Disabilities Act.

II. Summary Judgment Standard
Summary judgment is proper only if the record shows "that there is no  [*9] genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." FED. R. CIV. P. 56(c); see Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). The moving party bears the burden of informing the court of the basis for its motion and demonstrating the "absence of evidence on an essential element of the non-moving party's case," Celotex Corp., 477 U.S. at 323, 325. To withstand a motion for summary judgment, the nonmoving party may not simply rest on the pleadings, but rather must "make a showing sufficient to establish the existence of [the] element[s] essential to that party's case, and on which that party will bear the burden of proof at trial. . ." Id. at 322. If the non-moving party fails to make this showing, then the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Id. at 323.
In determining whether a genuine issue of material fact exists, the court must view the record and all reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. See Nat'l Soffit & Escutcheons, Inc. v. Superior Sys., Inc., 98 F.3d 262, 264 (7th Cir. 1996). No genuine issue exists if the record viewed as a whole could not lead a rational trier  [*10] of fact to find for the non-moving party. See Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co., Ltd. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 587, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986); Ritchie v. Glidden Co., 242 F.3d 713, 720 (7th Cir. 2001).

III. Discussion
Title I of the ADA prohibits employers from discriminating "against a qualified individual with a disability because of the disability of such individual in regard to job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a) (Supp.1995). Title I also provides "that an employer discriminates against a qualified individual with a disability by 'not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability.'" 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). "Thus, under the ADA, there are two distinct categories of disability discrimination claims: failure to accommodate and disparate treatment." Basith v. Cook County, 241 F.3d 919, 927 (7th Cir. 2001). Plaintiff brings both types of claims. The court will begin its discussion with Plaintiff's disparate treatment claim.

A. Disparate Treatment
Plaintiff  [*11] alleges that CSXT withdrew its offer of employment to him, and "refused" to hire him, because of a perceived disability, in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. § 12102 et seq. ("ADA"). In this case, Plaintiff does not have direct evidence of discrimination. Therefore, he must employ the tripartite test articulated by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). Leffel v. Valley Fin. Servs.., 113 F.3d 787, 792-94 (7th Cir. 1997).
To state a prima facie case of disability discrimination, Plaintiff must show: (1) that he is disabled within the meaning of the ADA; (2) that he was qualified for the job with or without an accommodation; and (3) he suffered an adverse employment action because of his disability. Timmons v. General Motors Corp., 469 F.3d 1122, 1127 (7th Cir. 2006). If Plaintiff succeeds in making out his prima facie case, the burden then shifts to CSXT to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for terminating Plaintiff. Leffel, 113 F.3d at 792. If CSXT does so, the burden then shifts to Plaintiff to establish that CSXT's reasons are a pretext for discrimination. Id. The court will begin with the threshold  [*12] issue: whether Plaintiff was disabled within the meaning of the ADA.
A "qualified individual with a disability" is defined by the ADA to mean "an individual with a disability who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds or desires." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). The term "disability" is defined under the ADA to mean, with respect to an individual:
(A) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such individual;
(B) a record of such an impairment; or
(C) being regarded as having such an impairment.
42 U.S.C. § 12102(2). To fall within the statutory definition of prong (C) above, a plaintiff must show that "a covered entity mistakenly believes that a person has a physical impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities." Sutton v. United Airlines, Inc., 527 U.S. 471, 489, 119 S. Ct. 2139, 144 L. Ed. 2d 450 (1999); Mack v. Great Dane Trailers, 308 F.3d 776, 780 (7th Cir. 2002). The purpose of the "regarded as" prong is to prohibit employers from making ill-informed decisions based on myth or stereotype. Sutton, 527 U.S. at 489 (citing School Bd. of Nassau City v. Arline, 480 U.S. 273, 284, 107 S. Ct. 1123, 94 L. Ed. 2d 307 (1987)  [*13] ("By amending the definition of 'handicapped individual' to include not only those who are actually physically impaired, but also those who are regarded as impaired and who, as a result, are substantially limited in a major life activity, Congress acknowledged that society's accumulated myths and fears about disability and disease are as handicapping as are the physical limitations that flow from actual impairment")).
Plaintiff's claim is that he is regarded as being substantially limited in the major life activity of working. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(i). With respect to the activity of "working," an individual must be "significantly restricted in the ability to perform either a class of jobs or a broad range of jobs in various classes as compared to the average person having comparable training, skills, and abilities." Toyota Motor Mfg, Kentucky, Inc. v. Williams, 534 U.S. 184, 122 S. Ct. 681, 151 L. Ed. 2d 615 (2002) (quoting 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(3)(i)). "A demonstrated 'inability to perform a single, particular job' does not render an individual substantially limited in the major life activity of working." Squibb v. Memorial Center, 497 F.3d 775, 782 (7th Cir. 2007) (quoting 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(3)(i)).
Plaintiff contends  [*14] that CSXT perceived that he was substantially limited in the ability to perform a class of jobs in the railroad industry. More specifically, he contends that "the training, skills and abilities of conductor trainees are also included in, or a prerequisite to, the different job classes of locomotive engineers and yardmasters." (Plaintiff's Response at 18). In support of this proposition, Plaintiff cites the court to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Outlook Handbook, 2008-09 Edition, Rail Transportation Occupations, as found on the internet at http://www.bls.gov/oco/ocos244.htm. This document relays, in a very general fashion, the job duties and the work environment associated with various rail transportation positions, including that of conductor, yardmaster, and locomotive engineer. This document, however, does not speak to the specific job skills and duties that CSXT would expect of its own employees who fill these positions. Thus, it is difficult for the court to find, even in the light most favorable to the Plaintiff, that Plaintiff's perceived regular sleep requirement would apply equally to the position of locomotive engineer and yardmaster  [*15] so as to preclude him from a class of jobs at CSXT. Moreover, it is even more difficult for the court to find that CSXT believed that Plaintiff had a condition that would disable him from working in a class of jobs just because CSXT found him not medically qualified to perform one position with CSXT. E.E.O.C. v. Schneider Nat'l., Inc., 481 F.3d 507, 511 (7th Cir. 2007) ("In a 'regarded as' case, such as this, the claimant . . . would have to show that the employer believed that the [Plaintiff] had a condition that would disable him from working in a broad range of jobs"). This is true particularly in light of the fact that Plaintiff wholly failed to present evidence of the "number and types of jobs utilizing similar training, knowledge, skills or abilities, within that geographic area, from which the individual is also disqualified" as required by 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(3)(ii)(B). See Kupstas v. City of Greenwood, 398 F.3d 609, 613 (7th Cir. 2005) (finding that except in cases where the plaintiff's impairments are so severe that his substantial foreclosure from the job market is clear, the plaintiff must present evidence of the number of jobs and other types of jobs in the geographic  [*16] locale from which he would be excluded due to his perceived impairments).
Even if Plaintiff could establish that he has a "disability" under the ADA, he must still show he is qualified for the position he sought. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m). The evidence in this case reflects that the position of Conductor Trainee, pursuant to the UTU collective bargaining agreement, requires less senior conductors at the Evansville Terminal, like Plaintiff, to accept random assignments of varying lengths and to be available for work on a 24 hour, 7 day per week schedule. (Noell Dec. PP 7, 9). Such job assignment requirements for a particular job set forth in a collective bargaining agreement are essential functions of that job. Filar v. Board of Educ. of City of Chicago, 526 F.3d 1054, 1067-68 (7th Cir. 2008). The evidence shows that Plaintiff would not be able to conform to that schedule without compromising his health and well-being. (See Plaintiff Dep. Exs. G, W, Y). Thus, because Plaintiff was not able to perform the essential functions of that position, Plaintiff was not qualified for that position with or without an accommodation. Plaintiff's disparate treatment claim therefore fails as a matter of  [*17] law.

B. Reasonable Accommodation
Plaintiff also alleges that CSXT failed to accommodate his disability by refusing to allow Plaintiff to work as a Conductor Trainee with regular hours. To state a prima facie case of a failure to accommodate a disability, Plaintiff must show that: "(1) he was disabled; (2) his employer was aware of his disability; and (3) he was a qualified individual who, with or without reasonable accommodation, could perform the essential functions of the employment position." Basith, 241 F.3d at 927.
Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim is foreclosed for the reason set forth above; namely, that he was not able to perform the essential functions of a Conductor Trainee with or without an accommodation. Moreover, Plaintiff's request that CSXT place him on a consistent shift with regular hours was not reasonable. As noted by CSXT's August 25, 2006, letter, to allow Plaintiff a consistent shift with regular hours would require CSXT to violate its seniority provisions of the collective bargaining agreement between CSXT and the UTU. (Plaintiff Dep. Ex. Z). CSXT is not required to go to such lengths under the ADA. U.S. Airways, Inc. v. Barnett, 535 U.S. 391, 403, 122 S. Ct. 1516, 152 L. Ed. 2d 589 (2002)  [*18] (finding that ordinarily, an employer is not required to accommodate an employee where such accommodation would violate the terms of a seniority system). Stated differently, CSXT is not required to give Plaintiff preferential treatment in order to comply with the ADA. Williams v. United Ins. Co. of America, 253 F.3d 280, 282 (7th Cir. 2001) (An "employer is not required to give the disabled employee preferential treatment, as by . . . waiving his normal requirements for the job in question.").
Plaintiff mounts two arguments in support of his position that CSXT failed to accommodate his perceived disability. They are addressed below.

1. CSXT's Understanding of Plaintiff's Request for Accommodation
Plaintiff argues that CSXT's confusion as to Plaintiff's request for an accommodation is at the heart of the parties' dispute. In essence, he maintains that Dr. Neilson misinterpreted Dr. Katz's requirement of regular sleep to mean that he required a regular sleep schedule, and cites to the Supplemental Affidavit of Dr. Katz 1, dated December 1, 2008, as support. Plaintiff then speculates as to why Dr. Katz may have chosen the language he used in his January 3, 2006, letter. (Plaintiff's Response  [*19] at 7) (stating that although he wasn't sure why, he thought Dr. Katz wrote that "the importance of regular sleep cannot be over-stated" because he wanted to make sure that CSXT knew that "I needed to get the amount of sleep that they advertised I was going to get, to ensure that I would get the eight hours off between shifts.").
To the extent that this is true, the Seventh Circuit instructs that an ADA plaintiff's arguments that his employer engaged in an adverse action out of "confusion," "carelessness," or error is irrelevant. Kariotis v. Navistar Int'l Trans. Corp., 131 F.3d 672, 677 (7th Cir. 1997) ("In other words, arguing about the accuracy of the employer's assessment is a distraction, see Brill v. Lante Corp., 119 F.3d 1266, 1271 (7th Cir. 1997), because the question is not whether the employer's reasons for a decision are 'right' but whether  [*20] the employer's description of its reasons is honest."). The relevant inquiry is Dr. Neilson's -- and thus, CSXT's -- honest construction of the information Dr. Katz provided regarding Plaintiff's ability to perform the job in 2006.
Under Title VII, the ADA, the ADEA, and ERISA, an employer's honest belief is critical; it is not liable under a disparate treatment framework because its decisions (and suspicions) happen to work to the disadvantage of a member of a protected group. Liability results only if the employer intends to disadvantage an individual precisely because he belongs to a protected group.
Kariotis, 131 F.3d at 679. Because there is no evidence that Dr. Neilson (and/or CSXT) did not honestly believe that Plaintiff was restricted in his ability to work inconsistent work shifts, Plaintiff's attempt to recharacterize the nature of his accommodation fails.

2. The Hours of Service Act Has No Impact on Plaintiff's Request
Plaintiff contends that his request for a regular sleep schedule was not unreasonable because all that Dr. Katz required is that Plaintiff be allowed 6-8 hours of sleep between shifts; not more than is provided to all train employees under the Hours of Service  [*21] Act, 49 U.S.C. § 21103(a). Plaintiff mistakes the scope and requirements of the Hours of Service Act. This law does not address the issue of employees working frequently changing shifts, which was the focus of Plaintiff's request for an accommodation. Nor does it mandate that he will not work long hours.
Plaintiff maintains that the Hours of Service law requires an eight hour period of uninterrupted sleep time. (Plaintiff's Response at 9, 23). It does not. Train employees, including conductors, may be called two hours before the state of a job assignment, which may be at hour six of the employee's eight hours of rest. The current Hours of Service Act does not restrict the railroad's ability to call train employees during their time of rest to advise them when to report to work. Those employees would not receive six to eight uninterrupted hours of rest under the law applicable to Plaintiff in 2006. California State Legislative Bd. v. Mineta, 328 F.3d 605, 607 (9th Cir. 2003) (recognizing that duty calls to employees by the railroad were not considered as interruptions of the off duty periods required by the Hours of Service Act). The current law also permits railroad employees to receive  [*22] only four hours of available rest before returning to work an additional four hours (up to twelve). See 49 U.S.C. § 21103(b)(7) and 49 C.F.R. Part 228, App. A (2007) ("When an employee's work tour is broken or interrupted by a valid period of interim release (4 hours or more at a designated terminal), he may return to duty for the balance of the total 12-hour work tour during a 24-hour period."). Thus, the Hours of Service Act does not guarantee Plaintiff, as a Conductor Trainee, eight hours of uninterrupted rest and does not prevent him from receiving CSXT phone calls during this period. For these reasons, Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim fails as a matter of law.

3. The Interactive Process
Because Plaintiff has failed to identify any reasonable accommodation, the court need not address whether CSXT failed to adequately engage in the interactive process. Hammel v. Eau Galle Cheese Factory, 407 F.3d 852, 868 n. 10 (7th Cir. 2005) (citing Mays v. Principi, 301 F.3d 866, 871 (7th Cir. 2002)).

IV. Conclusion
In conclusion, the evidence reflects that CSXT's withdrawal of its offer of employment to Plaintiff did not violate his rights under the ADA. Accordingly, CSXT's Motion for Summary  [*23] Judgment (Docket # 37) must be GRANTED.
SO ORDERED this 23rd day of February 2009.
/s/ RICHARD L. YOUNG
RICHARD L. YOUNG, JUDGE
United States District Court
Southern District of Indiana


End of Document

