Banga v. Kanios
United States District Court for the Northern District of California
December 9, 2020, Decided; December 9, 2020, Filed
Case No. 16-cv-04270-RS

Reporter
2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 252742 *; 2020 WL 9037179
NAVJEET SINGH BANGA, Plaintiff, v. CHRIS GUS KANIOS, et al., Defendants.
Prior History: Banga v. Kanios, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 173016, 2016 WL 7230870 (N.D. Cal., Dec. 14, 2016)
Counsel:  [*1] For Chris Gus Kanios, Defendant: Alison K. Adelman, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak and Stewart PC, San Diego, CA; Yousaf Muniz Jafri, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart P.C., San Diego, CA; Francis Lawrence Tobin, LEAD ATTORNEY, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart LLC, San Diego, CA.
For Dean Barbieri, Defendant: Yousaf Muniz Jafri, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart P.C., San Diego, CA; Sarah Anne Williams, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak and Stewart PC, San Diego, CA; Spencer C. Skeen, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak Stewart PC, San Diego, CA; Francis Lawrence Tobin, LEAD ATTORNEY, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart LLC, San Diego, CA; Alison K. Adelman, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak and Stewart PC, San Diego, CA.
For Eleanor Armstrong, Defendant: Yousaf Muniz Jafri, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart P.C., San Diego, CA; Sarah Anne Williams, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak and Stewart PC, San Diego, CA; Francis Lawrence Tobin, LEAD ATTORNEY, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart LLC, San Diego, CA; Spencer C. Skeen, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak Stewart PC, San Diego, CA.
For John F. Kennedy University, Defendant: Spencer C. Skeen, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak Stewart PC, San Diego, CA; Sarah [*2] Anne Williams, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak and Stewart PC, San Diego, CA; Alison K. Adelman, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak and Stewart PC, San Diego, CA.
John F. Kennedy University, Plaintiff, Pro se, Benicia, CA.
For National University, Defendant: Sarah Anne Williams, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak and Stewart PC, San Diego, CA; Spencer C. Skeen, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak Stewart PC, San Diego, CA; Yousaf Muniz Jafri, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart P.C., San Diego, CA; Alison K. Adelman, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak and Stewart PC, San Diego, CA; Francis Lawrence Tobin, LEAD ATTORNEY, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart LLC, San Diego, CA.
For Navjeet Singh Banga, Defendant: Yousaf Muniz Jafri, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart P.C., San Diego, CA.
For President Debra Bean, Defendant: Francis Lawrence Tobin, LEAD ATTORNEY, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart LLC, San Diego, CA; Yousaf Muniz Jafri, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart P.C., San Diego, CA; Sarah Anne Williams, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak and Stewart PC, San Diego, CA; Spencer C. Skeen, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak Stewart PC, San Diego, CA.
Judges: RICHARD SEEBORG, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: RICHARD SEEBORG
Opinion



ORDER DENYING [*3]  MOTION TO EXCLUDE EXPERT WITNESS

I. INTRODUCTION
Plaintiff Navjeet Singh Banga seeks to exclude the expert testimony of Dr. George Woods. Plaintiff argues Dr. Woods should be excluded for a variety of reasons: he is opining on a subject outside his expertise; he did not use objective, reliable methodology; and his conclusions improperly invade the fact-finding province of the jury. Some of these objections necessitate imposition of limits on the bounds of Dr. Woods 'otherwise admissible testimony. Therefore, while the motion is denied and Dr. Woods may testify, he is limited to opining on Plaintiff's medical condition and the medical efficacy of potential or actual accommodations. He may not act as a conduit for factual development or otherwise pass on Plaintiff's credibility. He is also, and most importantly, prohibited from commenting on the degree to which Defendants' accommodations were legally compliant.1

II. LEGAL STANDARD
Federal Rule of Evidence 702 states that expert opinion evidence is admissible if: (1) the witness is sufficiently qualified by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education; (2) the scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge will help the trier of fact to understand the [*4]  evidence or to determine the fact at issue; (3) the testimony is based on sufficient facts or data; (4) the testimony is the product of reliable principles and methods; and (5) the expert has reliably applied the principles and methods to the facts of the case.
The Ninth Circuit has interpreted Rule 702 as requiring expert testimony to be both relevant and reliable. City of Pomona v. SQM North Am. Corp., 750 F.3d 1036, 1043-44 (9th Cir. 2014). Expert opinion testimony is relevant when the knowledge underlying it has a valid connection to the pertinent inquiry. Id. at 1044. It is reliable when such knowledge "has a reliable basis in the knowledge and experience of the relevant discipline." Id. The court must "screen the jury from unreliable nonsense opinions, but not exclude opinions merely because they are impeachable." Alaska Rent-A-Car, Inc. v. Avis Budget Grp., Inc., 738 F.3d 960, 969 (9th Cir. 2013).

III. BACKGROUND
In short, this long-running case arises out of Plaintiff's assertions that Defendants violated the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") by failing reasonably to accommodate his mental health disability while he was studying at John F. Kennedy University College of Law ("JFK Law"). At the beginning of this year, the parties were engaged in the discovery process. Defendants identified Dr. George Woods, a licensed physician certified by the American [*5]  Board of Psychiatry and Neurology, as an expert witness. He has specialized in neuropsychiatry for the last thirty-six years. He belongs to an abundance of associations focused on Psychiatry and Psychology, sits on numerous related boards, and routinely writes and lectures on issues in both fields.
Defendants' Rule 26 disclosures suggested Dr. Woods was expected to provide testimony regarding Plaintiff's medical condition and its effect on his work, the means by which his condition can be evaluated and managed, the scope and duration of Plaintiff's condition, reasonable accommodations that would accommodate Plaintiff's condition, and the actual accommodations provided by JFK Law during Plaintiff's enrollment. In the actual report, however, Dr. Woods indicated that he was asked to opine on three questions: (1) What reasonable accommodations did Mr. Banga request? (2) Did JFK Law respond to Mr. Banga's requests for accommodations? and (3) Were Mr. Banga's alleged requests for expanded accommodations part of the interactive process?

IV. DISCUSSION
Plaintiff asserts that Dr. Woods' report is unreliable. He first argues that Dr. Woods is a medical doctor, not an expert evaluator of whether accommodations [*6]  are reasonable under the ADA. Then, he attacks Dr Woods' methodology as a mere "record review" that hides his reasoning process, resulting in "blanket proclamations." Motion ("Mot.") at 6.
Based on his education, training, licensure, and experience, Dr. Woods is qualified to opine on Plaintiff's mental health condition and its management. He has not, however, provided any documentation suggesting that he has any special training in ADA law that would allow him to opine on whether an accommodation is reasonable as a matter of law. Moreover, as noted above, Defendants assert that Dr. Woods was never intended to present expert testimony on the ADA. Therefore, he may only provide testimony relating to Plaintiff's health and the medical implications of the various requested and implemented accommodations.
To produce his report, Dr. Woods appears to have conducted a record review of Plaintiff's academic history and medical records. When considering the reliability of an expert's methods, trial courts may consider four non-exclusive factors: (1) whether the theory can be tested; (2) whether the theory has been subject to peer review and publication; (3) the known or potential rate of error; [*7]  and (4) whether the theory or technique is generally accepted in the relevant scientific community. Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharms., Inc., 509 U.S. 579, 593 - 94, 113 S. Ct. 2786, 125 L. Ed. 2d 469 (1993). The reliability inquiry is, however, a flexible one, and trial judges may determine that the Daubert factors are not "reasonable measures of reliability in a particular case." Kumho Tire Co., Ltd. v. Carmichael, 526 U.S. 137, 153, 119 S. Ct. 1167, 143 L. Ed. 2d 238 (1997).
Plaintiff argues that Dr. Woods' method is unreliable because he does not lay out each step of the reasoning process that carries him from the record to his conclusions. The Ninth Circuit has considered at length how to evaluate testimony by physicians, specifically, and observed that "much of medical decision-making relies on judgment — a process that is difficult to quantify or even to assess qualitatively." Primiano v. Cook, 598 F.3d 558, 565 (9th Cir. 2010). Furthermore, A number of courts have considered a record review to be reliable. Kanellakopoulos v. Unimerica Life Ins. Co., 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 27102, 2018 WL 984826, at *2 (N.D. Cal. Feb. 20, 2018). While Dr. Woods does make quite broad generalizations in the summary of his report, his consideration of the records is thorough. He considers each record in context and cross-references Plaintiff's medical records against his accommodation requests. Dr. Woods' report is indeed "shaky" in the sense that it omits the potentially persuasive explanation linking the content of the records to his medical evaluations, but it [*8]  is nonetheless admissible for its medical conclusions. Primiano, 598 F.3d at 564 ("Shaky but admissible evidence is to be attacked by cross examination, contrary evidence, and attention to the burden of proof, not exclusion.")
Plaintiff's last three arguments can be condensed: Dr. Woods' report invades the province of the jury. First, Plaintiff contends the expert report should be excluded because some central topics on which Dr. Woods intends to testify are not too complicated for a lay person to assess without assistance. It is within the discretion of the trial judge to exclude expert testimony where it weighs in on "a matter easily evaluated by laymen within the realm of their common knowledge and experience." See Chesebrough-Pond's, Inc. v. Faberge, Inc., 666 F.2d 393, 398 (9th Cir. 1982).
Here, Plaintiff is concerned that Defendants intend to use Dr. Woods to direct the jury to draw specific, factual inferences from the evidence presented rather than for his medical expertise. For example, the Order granting in part and denying in part the Motion for Summary Judgment determined that there was contradictory evidence as to whether Plaintiff had made a request for a quiet, private room. Dkt. 307. Now, Dr. Woods includes in his report the finding that Plaintiff never requested a quiet [*9]  room. Banga Decl. Exhibit A ("Ex. A") at 11, 12, 14, 17. Defendants insist that all of the "core matters" on which Dr. Woods will opine are medical.
Experts may not "tell the jury what result to reach" and substitute their judgment for that of the jury. See United States v. Diaz, 876 F.3d 1194, 1197 (9th Cir. 2017). Despite Defendants' insistence that Dr. Woods will only offer medical testimony, his report does include some inappropriate factual inferences presented as conclusions. These factual findings gleaned from Dr. Woods' review of the paper record both will not assist the fact finder and improperly invade the jury's fact-finding task. Accordingly, Dr. Woods may not serve as a narrator and is prohibited from relaying Defendants' factual position as if it were his expert one.
Second, Plaintiff objects to Dr. Woods' report inasmuch as it impermissibly assesses his credibility as a witness. Plaintiff correctly asserts that "an expert witness is not permitted to testify specifically to a witness' credibility." See Reed v. Lieurance, 863 F.3d 1196, 1209 (9th Cir. 2017). Therefore, Dr. Woods' statement that Plaintiff's "credibility is substantially in question due to his inaccuracies, omissions, and misrepresentations" is improper. See Banga Decl. Ex. A. at 17. This and all related credibility [*10]  assessments are inappropriate, and Dr. Woods will be prohibited from presenting them at trial.
Third, Plaintiff argues that Dr. Woods' report presents legal conclusions. It is undisputed that expert witnesses may not present legal conclusions. Hangarter v. Provident Life and Acc. Ins. Co., 373 F.3d 998, 1016 (9th Cir. 2004). On this point, Plaintiff takes issue with Dr. Woods' statements that, in his professional opinion, "which [he] hold[s] to a reasonable degree of medical certainty," (1) no evidence supports Plaintiff's allegation that he attempted to expand his request for accommodations and (2) JFK Law accommodated Plaintiff's disabilities. Bang. Decl. Ex. A at 2.
The first statement is nonsensical — no medical training or certainty is required to opine on the existence of evidence to support the conclusion that Plaintiff did or did not communicate with JFK Law asking for additional accommodations. Therefore, much like the conclusion that Plaintiff did not actually request a quiet room in which to take the exam, statements furthering this conclusion will not assist the factfinder — a jury is completely capable of deciding for itself whether any of the evidence suggests that Plaintiff attempted to expand his request for accommodations.
Though the second statement [*11]  could be a medical opinion, it appears, in context, to be legal. The sentence immediately preceding it in Dr. Woods' report advances an equally impermissible legal conclusion that Plaintiff's additional accommodation requests were not part of the interactive process, an ADA-specific, informal mechanism to resolve accommodation disputes. Dr. Woods is thus prohibited from opining, in any legal capacity, about whether JFK Law accommodated Plaintiff's disabilities. That being said, as stated above, he is qualified to opine on the medical sufficiency or applicability of the accommodations.

IV. CONCLUSION
For all the reasons set forth above, the motion is denied, though Dr. Woods' testimony will be strictly limited to opinions related to Plaintiff's medical state and the medical consequences of actual or potential accommodations. Dr. Woods may not opine on any of the three questions enumerated in his report, which present inappropriate legal and factual findings.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
Dated: December 9, 2020
/s/ Richard Seeborg
RICHARD SEEBORG
United States District Judge


End of Document

