Barry v. Illinois Dep't of Corr.
United States District Court for the Central District of Illinois, Peoria Division
October 31, 2017, Decided; October 31, 2017, E-Filed
Case No. 14-3199

Reporter
2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 238835 *; 2017 WL 11747227
MONICA BARRY, Plaintiff, v. ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Illinois Department of Corrections, Defendant: Clayton J Ankney, Dylan P Grady, LEAD ATTORNEY, OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, Springfield, IL.
For Monica Lynn Barry, Plaintiff: Edward M Fox, LEAD ATTORNEY, Jonathan R Ksiazek, ED FOX & ASSOC, Chicago, IL.
Judges: Michael M. Mihm, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Michael M. Mihm
Opinion



ORDER
This matter is now before the Court on a Motion for Summary Judgment (ECF No. 35) filed by Defendant Illinois Department of Corrections ("Defendant" or "IDOC") pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56. For the reasons set forth below Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment (ECF No. 35) is DENIED. The Court will contact the Parties to establish the remainder of the schedule.

PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
On December 17, 2014, Plaintiff Monica Barry ("Barry" or "Plaintiff") filed an Amended Complaint alleging that her requests for accommodations to be transferred, reassigned, and/or to wear an appropriate gas mask were denied without any interactive process. Plaintiff claims that by refusing to provide her any accommodation IDOC constructively discharged her in violation of the American with Disabilities Act, as amended 42 U.S.C. § 12101, et seq. (hereinafter "ADA"). Plaintiff also alleges that IDOC discriminated against her based [*2]  on her disability, asthma, and her gender, female, in violation of Title VII as amended 42 U.S.C. § 2000e, et seq. (ECF No. 13).
On February 24, 2015, IDOC filed a Motion to Dismiss for Failure to State a Claim. (ECF No. 15). On April 30, 2015, this Court denied the Motion, rejecting the IDOC's argument that Plaintiff had failed to allege an adverse employment action and failed to satisfy the similarly situated element of her gender discrimination claim. (ECF No. 19).
On June 4, 2015, IDOC filed its Answer to Amended Complaint. (ECF No. 21). Upon completion of discovery, on June 15, 2017, IDOC filed a Motion for Summary Judgment that is now before the Court. (ECF No. 35). On July 7, 2017, Plaintiff filed her Response to Motion for Summary Judgment. (ECF No. 38). IDOC has elected not to file a reply within the timeframe permitted under the District's Local Rules. See ILCD-LR 7.1(D)(3). As such, the Court considers this matter fully briefed and enters this Order without any further delay.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND
From June 3, 1989, to approximately 2003 and from April 2008 to July 17, 2015, Plaintiff was employed by IDOC as a full-time correctional officer at Logan Correctional Center in Lincoln, Illinois. Plaintiff has been diagnosed [*3]  with asthma that makes it difficult for her breath, especially when the atmosphere contains irritants such as pepper spray. However, Plaintiff has never been exposed to pepper spray during her work at the correctional center. (ECF No. 36-1 at 27).
On July 18, 2013, Plaintiff requested disability leave by submitting a physician's statement. The physician's statement indicated that Plaintiff "need[ed] to be off work until consideration of [her] reassignment [request] to avoid pepper spray exposure" was made. (ECF No. 36-4). On or about July 21, 2013, IDOC placed Plaintiff on a leave of absence.
Since early May 2013, Plaintiff has made multiple requests to IDOC for accommodation. In particular, Plaintiff submitted to IDOC an Employee Request for Reasonable Accommodation on July 29, 2013, seeking to be permanently transferred to Lincoln Correctional Center on her belief that the use of pepper spray is much less likely there. At the same time she also applied to be assigned to work in the guard towers, mailroom, or main gate where she believed the risk of exposure to pepper spray would be lower. (ECF No. 36-6). A supplemental physician's statement was submitted to support the request, indicating [*4]  that Plaintiff "can work but should not be exposed to pepper spray." (ECF No. 36-5).
On August 5, 2013, IDOC formally denied Plaintiff's request. The reasons for the denial included:
(1) A correctional officer is required to work in a myriad of assignments instead of only some duties such as working in the towers, mailroom, or main gate;
(2) According to the collective bargaining agreement, departmental rules and policies, the management has the "right to assign" based on "operational needs" which Plaintiff's request may violate or compromise; and
(3) None of the requested assignments/locations can 100% guarantee that Plaintiff would not be exposed to pepper spray. (ECF No. 36-7).
On August 9, 2013, Plaintiff internally appealed IDOC's denial with additional details of why the proposed assignments/locations had lower risks of pepper spray exposure based on her information and experience. (ECF No. 36-8).
On August 26, 2013, Plaintiff submitted a note from the physician stating that Plaintiff "may return to work if reasonable accommodation is made to prevent exposure to pepper spray inhalation." The note further explained that a reasonable accommodation could be "avoiding work area where and [*5]  when pepper spray is being used or use of an appropriate gas mask." (ECF No. 36-9). In response, on September 9, 2013, IDOC denied the accommodation as recommended by the physician, and rejected Plaintiff's request to return to work with the accommodation as suggested by the physician. In addition to the reasons asserted in its previous decision, IDOC stressed that based on the opinion of the agency's medical director, the alternative of using a gas mask "does not provide full protection once [the chemical] is airborne", thus "pos[ing] a risk to plaintiff's health as well as to the safety and security of staff and inmates". (ECF No. 36-10). The Administrative Code governing Logan Correctional Center provides that precautionary measures such as gas masks shall be available for use by correctional officers prior to and following the use of chemical agents including pepper spray. (ECF No. 38-3, Page 3-4).
On October 1, 2013, Legal Services ADA coordinator of IDOC denied Plaintiff's first appeal, as well as her subsequent request for reconsideration. The ADA coordinator restated that there was no guarantee of absolute insulation from pepper spray, that the job requires rotation of assignment, [*6]  and that the "right of assign" vested in the management based on operational needs such as demanding female officers to supervise female offenders. Also, the proposed mailroom option was allegedly beyond the power of IDOC because these positions were governed by another collective bargaining agreement. The ADA coordinator also pointed out that continually wearing a gas mask during the entire shift would impair the safety of Plaintiff and offenders according to a consultation with the internal training academy. (ECF No. 36-11).
On Oct 10, 2013, Plaintiff submitted a second appeal internally with assistance of her former attorney, clarifying that Plaintiff merely sought accommodations to "mitigate any undue unnecessary exposure" of pepper spray and to make available an appropriate gas mask for emergent situations. Plaintiff argued that these proposed accommodations are effective and would not place an undue hardship on the operation according to her information and her colleague's similar experience. (ECF No. 38-13 at 10-13).
It appears that sometime before February 25, 2014, and on March 17, 2014, IDOC had discussed with Plaintiff about possibilities to work in the mailroom or record [*7]  office with lower salary or at the midnight shift because these options may lessen the likelihood of pepper spray use. However, Plaintiff was not interested in working in the mailroom or the record office because of the lower salary condition. Plaintiff turned down the midnight shift option because she believes that the risk of pepper spray exposure would not be lower during the shift. (ECF No. 36-1, ECF No. 38-13 at 5-8).
On February 26, 2014, IDOC issued its final decision, denying the second appeal and all of her requests. Among all the reasons asserted previously, the decision underscored that Plaintiff's suggestion to wear a gas mask on her duty belt was not reasonable because it would pose danger on the safety and security of operations. (ECF No. 38-13 at 5-8, 14).

STANDARD OF REVIEW
A motion for summary judgment will be granted where there are no genuine issues of material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). A material fact is one that might affect the outcome of the suit. Insolia v. Philip Morris, Inc., 216 F.3d 596, 598-99 (7th Cir. 2000). The moving party may meet its burden of showing an absence of material facts by demonstrating "that there is an absence of evidence to support the non-moving party's case." [*8]  Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 325 (1986). If the moving party meets its burden, the non-moving party then has the burden of presenting specific facts to show that there is a genuine issue of material fact. Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co., Ltd. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586-87 (1986).
On summary judgment, the inferences to be drawn from the underlying facts must be viewed in the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion. Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co., Ltd., 475 U.S. at 588. Any disputed issues of fact are resolved against the moving party. General Electric Co. v. Joiner, 522 U.S. 136, 143 (1997). The moving party has the responsibility of informing the Court of portions of the record or affidavits that demonstrate the absence of a triable issue. Celotex Corp., 477 U.S. at 323. Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56(e) requires the non-moving party to go beyond the pleadings and produce evidence of a genuine issue for trial. Id. at 324. Where a proposed statement of fact is supported by the record and not adequately rebutted, a court will accept that statement as true for purposes of summary judgment; an adequate rebuttal requires a citation to specific support in the record. Drake v. Minnesota Mining & Mfg. Co., 134 F.3d 878, 887 (7th Cir. 1998). This Court must then determine whether there is a need for trial -- whether, in other words, there are any genuine factual issues that properly can be resolved only by a finder of fact because they may be reasonably resolved in favor of either party. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 250 (1986).

DISCUSSION
The ADA defines discrimination as including [*9]  an employer "not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who is an applicant or employee, unless such [employer] can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business of such [employer]...." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). Under the ADA, a plaintiff is required to show that: (1) [she] is 'disabled'; (2) [she] is qualified to perform the essential function of the job either with or without reasonable accommodation; and (3) [she] suffered an adverse employment action because of [her] disability." Gogos v. AMS Mech. Sys., Inc., 737 F.3d 1170, 1172 (7th Cir. 2013).
Defendant IDOC moved for summary judgment on the grounds that (1) Plaintiff is not a qualified individual under the ADA because she cannot perform the essential functions of her job, and (2) even if Plaintiff is a qualified individual under the ADA, Plaintiff failed to establish that there exists a reasonable accommodation for her position. (ECF Nos. 35 and 36).
Specifically, IDOC first asserts that the job description of a correctional officer encapsulates essential duties that would not prevent a correctional officer from contact with pepper spray, and that Plaintiff's disability, [*10]  i.e. asthma, requires total guarantee of insulation from pepper spray. Therefore, IDOC argues that Plaintiff is disqualified to perform the job with or without reasonable accommodation as a matter of law. In addition, IDOC argues that Plaintiff failed to produce and persuade IDOC that any reasonable accommodation to prevent triggering of her asthma is feasible. Hence, IDOC claims that her requests were justifiably denied.

I. Essential Function
IDOC first argues Plaintiff is not a qualified individual under the ADA because she cannot perform the essential job functions of a correctional officer. (ECF No. 36 at 7). Under the ADA, a "qualified individual" is defined as:
[A]n individual who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds or desires. For the purposes of this subchapter, consideration shall be given to the employer's judgment as to what functions of a job are essential, and if an employer has prepared a written description before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job, this description shall be considered evidence of the essential functions of the job.
42 U.S.C.A. § 12111(8).
The term "essential functions" [*11]  is defined in the Code of Federal Regulations as follows:
(n) Essential functions—
(1) In general. The term essential functions means the fundamental job duties of the employment position the individual with a disability holds or desires. The term "essential functions" does not include the marginal functions of the position.
(2) A job function may be considered essential for any of several reasons, including but not limited to the following:
(i) The function may be essential because the reason the position exists is to perform that function;
(ii) The function may be essential because of the limited number of employees available among whom the performance of that job function can be distributed; and/or
(iii) The function may be highly specialized so that the incumbent in the position is hired for his or her expertise or ability to perform the particular function.
(3) Evidence of whether a particular function is essential includes, but is not limited to:
(i) The employer's judgment as to which functions are essential;
(ii) Written job descriptions prepared before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job;
(iii) The amount of time spent on the job performing the function;
(iv) The consequences [*12]  of not requiring the incumbent to perform the function;
(v) The terms of a collective bargaining agreement;
(vi) The work experience of past incumbents in the job; and/or
(vii) The current work experience of incumbents in similar jobs.
29 C.F.R. § 1630.2.
To support the proposition that Plaintiff is unable to perform the essential function of a correctional officer, IDOC relies on the job descriptions of correctional officer in Logan. IDOC explains Plaintiff's position involved security and custodial duties as well as disciplinary, safety, sanitary, security, and custodial measures. (ECF No. 36-3). In addition, IDOC notes that relevant rules and polices stipulate that the "right to assign" vests in the management based on its "operational needs." In sum, IDOC surmises that all these duties inevitably involve frequent contact with offenders, and behind each contact with offenders lurks the danger of using pepper spray to subdue them. Plaintiff does not generally dispute the job duties of a correctional officer. (See ECF No. 38, ad passim). Plaintiff's chief argument is that accommodations could have been made to reduce the chances of pepper spray exposure. Id. Specifically, Plaintiff asserts that permanent [*13]  assignment away from regular prisoner contact was possible. Plaintiff claims that the work experience of past and current colleagues, as well as her own experience, demonstrated that regular prisoner contact was not necessary to all correctional officers in the institution. Because infrequent prisoner contact minimizes the risk of pepper spray exposure, and that working as a correctional officer does not practically require regular contact, Plaintiff claims that she can perform the essential function of the job. But, Plaintiff's position relates to whether or not there is an appropriate accommodation. There appears to be a consensus that prisoner contact is an essential function of the job.

II. Reasonable Accommodation
As noted above, the term "qualified individual" means an individual who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds or desires. 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). IDOC argues that Plaintiff cannot perform the essential functions of her job and thus is not a "qualified individual" simply because "Plaintiff's medical condition affects every aspects of Plaintiff's job duties." (ECF No. 36 at 9). However, the ADA requires [*14]  an employer to make reasonable accommodations that will allow a "qualified individual with a disability" to perform the essential functions of his or her job. Miller v. Illinois Dep't of Transp., 643 F.3d 190, 197 (7th Cir. 2011). It would defeat the very purpose of the ADA to exclude an employee from the class of "qualified individual with a disability" without examining whether her/his medical condition is susceptible to a reasonable solution that could accommodate her/him to perform her/his essential duties. Therefore, in this case, if a reasonable jury could find that pepper spray inhalation can be reduced or eliminated by some reasonable accommodation so as to enable Plaintiff to perform the essential functions of her job, judgment cannot be entered in favor of Defendant at this stage.
The federal regulations define "reasonable accommodation" as including:
(A) making existing facilities used by employees readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities; and
(B) job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, reassignment to a vacant position, acquisition or modification of equipment or devices, appropriate adjustment or modifications of examinations, training materials or policies, the provision of qualified readers or interpreters, [*15]  and other similar accommodations for individuals with disabilities. 42 U.S.C. § 12111(9). It is true that "[a]n employer is not required to provide the particular accommodation that an employee requests." Jay v. Intermet Wagner, Inc., 233 F.3d 1014, 1017 (7th Cir. 2000). However, "[t]he ADA does not give employers unfettered discretion to decide what is reasonable." Miller v. Illinois Dep't of Transp., 643 F.3d 190, 199 (7th Cir. 2011). "The employer must be willing to consider making changes in its ordinary work rules, facilities, terms, and conditions in order to enable a disabled individual to work." Vande Zande v. State of Wisconsin Dep't of Administration, 44 F.3d 538, 542 (7th Cir. 1995).
Under ADA, both employer and employee are responsible for engaging in an "interactive process" to find a reasonable accommodation for the employee's disability. See Spurling v. C & M Fine Pack, Inc., 739 F.3d 1055, 1061 (7th Cir. 2014); Beck v. Univ. of Wis. Bd. of Regents, 75 F.3d 1130, 1135 (7th Cir. 1996). Both parties are required to make a "good faith effort" to determine what accommodations are necessary. But if a breakdown of the process occurs, "courts should attempt to isolate the cause ... and then assign responsibility." Beck, 75 F.3d at 1135.
The Supreme Court has affirmed that a plaintiff/employee (to defeat a defendant/employer's motion for summary judgment) need only show that an "accommodation" seems reasonable on its face, i.e., ordinarily or in the run of cases. Once the plaintiff has made this showing, the defendant/employer then must show special (typically case-specific) circumstances [*16]  that demonstrate undue hardship in the particular circumstances. U.S. Airways, Inc. v. Barnett, 535 U.S. 391, 401-402 (2002).
In light of the above principles, the requests and denials of accommodations are examined below.
a. Request to Transfer and Reassignment
Plaintiff requested accommodations that she argues would decrease her chance of exposure to pepper spray. Based on her knowledge of work conditions and her long-term experience, she specifically proposed to be assigned to work at locations with lower risk of pepper spray exposure such as the guard towers, mailroom, and main gate, and to be permanently transferred to Lincoln Correctional Center. IDOC argued that there is virtually no assignment/location that could absolutely insulate Plaintiff from potential use of pepper spray. IDOC claims that even if those assignments/locations (including transfer to Lincoln Correctional Center) have lower risk of pepper spray use, IDOC could not allow Plaintiff to perform only those lower risk assignments because she must change assignments on a rotating basis as required by "operational needs" stipulated by related rules and policies.
First, there is a genuine dispute as to whether IDOC made a good faith effort in accommodating Plaintiff. It is clear [*17]  that Plaintiff and IDOC reached different results on the risk assessment of proposed accommodation: Plaintiff wants a decreased possibility of exposure of pepper spray, whilst IDOC indicated that only no-risk is reasonable. It is true that IDOC is not required to provide the precise accommodation requested by Plaintiff. However, the process to reach a reasonable accommodation is not an arbitrary one. Identifying reasonable accommodations for a disabled employee requires both employer and employee to engage in a flexible, interactive process. See Stern v. St. Anthony's Health Center, 788 F.3d 276, 292 (7th Cir. 2015), citing Kauffman v. Petersen Health Care VII, LLC, 769 F.3d 958, 963 (7th Cir. 2014). Both parties are required to make a "good faith effort" to determine what accommodations are necessary. Beck, 75 F.3d at 1135. Plaintiff has repeatedly clarified in her requests, appeals, and replies that she did not seek absolute guarantee of avoidance of pepper spray exposure. However, in all rejections, IDOC claimed Plaintiff did not provide sufficient evidence to prove that assignments in Lincoln Correctional Center, the guard towers, mailroom, and main gate entail no risk of exposure. The Court concludes that according to the evidence at this stage, IDOC's insistence on a zero-risk standard and immediate refusal without seeking further information [*18]  from physicians, consultation with Plaintiff, or a genuine investigation on the work conditions of these options reflected insufficient effort to work out an appropriate solution for Plaintiff.
IDOC's strongest basis of the zero-risk standard could be the physician's consistent statements suggesting that Plaintiff should not be exposed to pepper spray. IDOC may perceive the physician's related statements as a blanket prohibition on pepper spray exposure. In Lawler v. Peoria Sch. Dist. No. 150, 837 F.3d 779, 781 (7th Cir. 2016), the school district summarily refused to authorize a transfer after reading doctor's letter in which he opined that the teacher with disability should transfer to another special education job that does not involve behavioral and emotional disorder students. However, the Seventh Circuit held that the school district's outright refusal to accommodate the teacher despite the teacher's request to transfer "belies any contention that [the employer] made a reasonable attempt to explore possible accommodations, such as looking for open positions in other schools or reducing the number of students with behavioral or emotional disorders in the employees classroom." Id. at 786. Similarly, here IDOC appears to rely on its interpretation of doctor's [*19]  advice as total prohibition without considering Plaintiff's request to decrease the risk. Such practice would not constitute "a reasonable effort to explore the possibilities after learning of employee's request for accommodation" without further determination by trier of facts. See Miller v. Ill. Dep't of Corr., 107 F.3d 483, 486 (7th Cir. 1997).
IDOC argues that Brown v. Milwaukee Bd. of Sch. Directors, 855 F.3d 818 (7th Cir. 2017) is analogous to the present case. In Brown, the school determined that the teacher's disability prohibited her from being in the vicinity of any unruly students according to the relevant doctor's suggestions. Due to the fact that all positions in the school are susceptible to contact with unruly students, the Seventh Circuit held that the failure to accommodate the teacher did not violate the ADA. However, the Court finds the case at hand and Brown are factually distinguishable. In Brown the Seventh Circuit recognized the fact that the teacher repeatedly presented her restriction as was understood by the school. Also, she never challenged the school's understanding for four years. The school reasonably relied on its belief of the rigid restriction caused by the teacher's disability even if the teacher challenged the understanding later with updated medical documentation. Brown, 855 F.3d at 826. In contrast, here Plaintiff [*20]  has challenged the understanding of IDOC from the beginning despite the doctor's broad restriction. Because IDOC did not seek clarification of the discrepancy between Plaintiff's risk assessment and that of IDOC's own, a reasonable jury could conclude that IDOC failed to "actively engage in the interactive process by suggesting possible accommodation or requesting information that would help to do so." See EEOC v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 417 F.3d 789, 808 (7th Cir. 2005); Brown, 855 F.3d at 826. ("[W]e would have a different case ... if Milwaukee Schools had not communicated its understanding of Brown's restrictions to her or if it had not sought clarification when it received contradictory information.")
The record is further blurred by evidence that, at some time, IDOC explored possibilities of Plaintiff working at night shift or in the mailroom with lower salary as assignments that would lessen the possibility of pepper spray exposure. In that regard, it seems that IDOC has considered lower risk alternatives. However, on all other occasions including the motion before the Court, IDOC underlined the impossibility of absolute insulation from pepper spray use. As such, the record presents a genuine dispute whether zero-risk tolerance is one of the true reasons of IDOC's [*21]  refusal to the accommodation request.
Additionally, the reason that the job description demands a correctional officer to change assignments on a rotating basis as required by "operational needs" stipulated by related rules and policies is not sufficient to rebut the reasonableness of Plaintiff's proposed accommodation. As the Court has emphasized, for the purpose of compliance with the ADA, an employer must consider making changes in its ordinary work rules, facilities, terms, and conditions in order to enable a disabled individual to work. "The simple fact that an accommodation would provide a 'preference'—in the sense that it would permit the worker with a disability to violate a rule that others must obey—cannot, in and of itself, automatically show that the accommodation is not 'reasonable.'" U.S. Airways, Inc. v. Barnett, 535 U.S. 391, 398 (2002). Moreover, Plaintiff has testified that in practice some correctional officers were designated to limited assignment for years and that she has not encountered any pepper spray use incident during her twenty-four years of experience. There is a genuine dispute as to whether the relevant rules and policies are so inflexible that would eliminate all possibility of a work assignment adjustment [*22]  available to Plaintiff.
Although IDOC argued that certain assignments such as close supervision of female offenders could only be performed by female correctional officers, IDOC failed to demonstrate at this stage that Plaintiff is required to perform these functions based on its "operational needs." In other word, a reasonable jury cannot conclude that the workload peculiar to female officers cannot be fulfilled without undue hardship if Plaintiff does not take on these responsibilities. Based on this record, IDOC has failed to justify its denial of Plaintiff's request to transfer and reassignment on the ground of "operative needs" at summary judgment stage. Because "by definition any special 'accommodation' requires the employer to treat an employee with a disability differently, i.e., preferentially", a reasonable jury could find that IDOC failed to justify its refusal by asserting its neutral rules and policies including the management's right to assign based on operational needs. U.S. Airways, Inc. v. Barnett, 535 U.S. 391, 397 (2002).
b. Request to wear an appropriate gas mask
In addition to a work assignment adjustment, Plaintiff requested permission to wear an appropriate gas mask in case of the use of pepper spray at the institution. [*23]  This request was based on a doctor's note stating that Plaintiff may return to work of reasonable accommodation including "use of an appropriate gas mask." (ECF 36-9). IDOC has listed three reasons to deny the request: (1) A gas mask would not effectively insulate Plaintiff from pepper spray in the air; (2) Wearing a gas mask all day at work would endanger the safety of inmates and staffs and thus not feasible; and (3) Wearing or carrying a gas mask on duty belt at work would jeopardize the security of the correctional center because offenders may get the gas mask from Plaintiff and use it as a weapon. (ECF Nos. 36-10, 36-11, and 38-13).
First, Plaintiff has sufficient evidence at this stage to prove the effectiveness of using an appropriate gas mask to prevent inhalation at this stage. The relevant physician's instruction specifically suggested use of an appropriate gas mask as an equivalent measure to avoid inhalation of pepper spray. In addition, the administrative rules applicable to the IDOC provide that the use of gas mask is a mandatory precaution for correctional officers in case of use of chemical agent including pepper spray. 20 Illinois Admin. Code § 501.70 (2005). Conversely, IDOC claimed that a gas mask [*24]  could not provide full protection from pepper spray once it is airborne. It is true that an employer is obliged to provide an accommodation that effectively accommodates the disabled employee's limitations. See E.E.O.C. v. Sears, Roebuck & Co, citing U.S. Airways, Inc. v. Barnett, 535 U.S. 391, 400 (2002). However, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, there is a genuine dispute of whether an appropriate gas mask could be a reasonable accommodation that was unduly rejected on the ground of its ineffectiveness.
IDOC contended that wearing a gas mask during the entire shift would impair the security of operations as well as Plaintiff's own safety. However, this record supports a conclusion that Plaintiff only requested to wear an appropriate mask in case of emergency and that the physician recommended only "use of an appropriate gas mask." There is no basis to construe either the request or physician's suggestion as wearing a gas mask during the entire shift.
To clarify her request, at some time Plaintiff again specified that she would wear a gas mask attached to her duty belt so that she could use it to insulate herself from pepper spray at emergency. (ECF No. 38-13 at 7). However, IDOC raised concerns that the gas mask can be taken off her belt by any [*25]  offender and be used to harm her, her colleagues, or other offenders. Id. IDOC was arguing that allowing Plaintiff to carry a gas mask on her duty belt would impose a significant difficulty on IDOC's operation, and thus such request was justifiably denied on the ground of "undue hardship" as defined by 42 U.S. Code § 12111(10). This record does not support such a conclusion. Virtually any device, equipment, apparatus, tool, or object that can be taken from the correctional officers by an inmate with or without permission and can increase the security hazard in a correctional center. The records is not clear why a gas mask would be any more problematic than other equipment used by correctional officers. Again, notably, the Administrative Code provides that gas masks shall be available for correctional officers to use at the time of chemical agent including pepper spray is used.
In addition,
[T]he duty of reasonable accommodation requires more than a willingness on the part of the [IDOC] to listen to Plaintiff's suggestions. The employer will often know more about the feasibility of such adaptations than the employee, so if the employee requests accommodation the employer must make a reasonable effort to explore [*26]  the possibilities.
Miller v. Illinois Dep't of Corr., 107 F.3d 483, 486 (7th Cir. 1997). The Court finds this record does not provide sufficient evidence that such a request was appropriately considered. Since gas masks are required to be available for all correctional officers prior and following the use of pepper spray, IDOC has not explained why a gas mask could not be made available to Plaintiff.
In sum, in viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, a genuine dispute exists as to whether Plaintiff could have performed the essential functions of the correctional officer position with or without reasonable accommodation.
The Court hereby denies the Motion for Summary Judgment and leaves the following questions concerning Plaintiff's claim under the Americans with Disability Act to the jury:
(1) Whether Plaintiff can perform the essential functions of the correctional officer with or without reasonable accommodation;
(2) Whether there are reasonable accommodations; and
(3) Whether Defendant has fulfilled its responsibility to engage in an interactive process to find a reasonable accommodation for the employee's disability.

CONCLUSION
For the reasons set forth above Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment (ECF No. 35) is DENIED. Plaintiff's [*27]  claim under the Americans with Disability Act will proceed to trial in addition to Plaintiff's gender discrimination claim under Title VII as amended 42 U.S.C. § 2000e which was not subject to Defendant's Motion. The Court will contact the Parties to establish the remainder of the schedule.
Entered this 31st day of October 2017.
/s/ Michael M. Mihm
Michael M. Mihm
United States District Judge


End of Document

