Bezzina v. United Airlines, Inc.
United States District Court for the Central District of California
February 24, 2022, Decided; February 24, 2022, Filed
CV 21-05102-JFW(JPRx)

Reporter
2022 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 36243 *; 2022 WL 878921
Robert Bezzina -v- United Airlines, Inc.
Prior History: Bezzina v. United Airlines, Inc., 2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 119341 (C.D. Cal., June 24, 2021)
Counsel:  [*1] For Robert Bezzina, an individual, Plaintiff: Paul Andrew Campbell, Stephen W Hogie, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Hogie and Campbell Lawyers Inc, Tustin, CA.
For United Airlines, Inc., a Delaware corporation, Defendant: LaLonnie Villa Gray, LEAD ATTORNEY, Kristen Jeannine Nesbit, Fisher and Phillips LLP, Los Angeles, CA.
Judges: JOHN F. WALTER, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: JOHN F. WALTER
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES -- GENERAL

PROCEEDINGS (IN CHAMBERS): ORDER GRANTING DEFENDANT UNITED AIRLINES, INC.'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT, OR IN THE ALTERNATIVE MOTION FOR PARTIAL JUDGMENT [filed 1/14/2022; Docket No. 27]
On January 14, 2022, Defendant United Airlines, Inc. ("United") filed a Motion for Summary Judgment or in the Alternative, Partial Summary Judgment. On January 24, 2022, Plaintiff Robert Bezzina ("Plaintiff") filed his Opposition. On January 31, 2022, United filed a Reply. Pursuant to Rule 78 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and Local Rule 7-15, the Court found the matter appropriate for submission on the papers without oral argument. The matter was, therefore, removed from the Court's February 14, 2022 hearing calendar and the parties were given advance notice. After considering the moving, opposing, and reply papers, and the arguments therein, the Court rules as follows: [*2] 

I. FACTUAL BACKGROUND1
United hired Plaintiff in 1992 as a Ramp Service employee based at Los Angeles International Airport ("LAX"). As a Ramp Service employee, Plaintiff is responsible for processing baggage, boxes, and cargo between the baggage/cargo areas in the airport facilities and the aircraft. Plaintiff's position requires him to work at LAX on a daily basis. Although he primarily works outside, Plaintiff's position also requires him to enter United's airport terminals to perform many of his job duties.2 Beginning in May 2020, all employees, including Ramp Service employees at LAX were required to wear face masks at all times. In September 2021, Ramp Service employees, who were fully vaccinated for COVID-19, were no longer required to wear face masks when working outdoors.

A. COVID-19 & United's Mask Policy
Since March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in hundreds of thousands of deaths in the United States alone. COVID-19 is a highly contagious disease that spreads mainly from person to person through respiratory droplets that travel into the air when someone coughs, sneezes, or simply talks. The Center for Disease Control ("CDC"), based on studies, determined that face masks [*3]  "are a simple barrier to help prevent respiratory droplets from reaching others." The CDC advises that "masks should completely cover the nose and mouth and fit snugly against the sides of the face without gaps." The CDC has expressly stated that it does not recommend face shields as a substitute for masks because "face shields are not as effective at protecting you or the people around you from respiratory droplets." This is because face shields have "large gaps below and alongside the face, where your respiratory droplets may escape and reach others around you and will not protect you from respiratory droplets from others."
United has remained vigilant in complying with local, state, and federal guidance and requirements concerning COVID-19. On March 4, 2020, Governor Newsom issued an Executive Order, proclaiming a State of Emergency in California as a result of the threat of COVID-19. On June 18, 2020, the California Department of Public Health issued guidance for the use of face coverings at work. On November 20, 2020, the California Occupational Safety and Health Standards Board voted to adopt Emergency Temporary Standards to Protect Workers from COVID-19. The Emergency Temporary [*4]  Standards required employers to "establish, implement, and maintain an effective, written COVID-19 Prevention Program" that included, among other requirements, preventing or reducing the risk of transmission of COVID-19. On January 21, 2021, President Biden issued an Executive Order, Promoting COVID-19 Safety in Domestic and International Travel, that required federal agencies, including the Transportation Security Administration ("TSA"), to require masks to be worn in compliance with CDC guidelines in airports. On January 29, 2021, the CDC issued an order requiring all people on the premises of an airport to wear a face mask that covers the nose and mouth of the wearer, excluding face shields. On January 31, 2021, the TSA issued a security directive to implement the President's January 21, 2021 Executive Order. The directive required that all aircraft operators "ensure that direct employees and contractor employees wear a mask at all times when in conveyances or in or around transportation facilities under their control." The Los Angeles County Department of Health issued an order, effective October 7, 2021, that "continues to require that all persons wear face masks while in indoor [*5]  settings and businesses, with limited exceptions, as a precautionary measure with the high level of community transmission."
United consulted with experts at the Cleveland Clinic to obtain guidance on the airline's policies and procedures concerning mandatory face coverings. In May 2020, United began requiring that all of its employees and customers wear a face mask. On July 21, 2020, United reaffirmed its mandatory face mask policy to all of its employees. In this communication, United made it clear that if an employee did not receive an exemption from United, employees who did not wear face masks would be subject to discipline. In August 2020, United updated its Working Together Guidelines to include its face mask policy. This face mask policy required all employees to properly wear a face mask at all times in public spaces in and around the airports and on its aircraft, and in non-public areas when social distancing is not possible. The policy states: "As recommended by the CDC, face shields should not be used in place of a face covering or mask." United's policy also states that if "you are unable to wear a face covering due to a medical condition, we may be able to assist you through [*6]  a Reasonable Accommodation Program." United's policy applies to all of its employees nationwide. United has placed non-disabled and disabled employees on a leave of absence as a form of accommodation when they are unable to wear a face mask and has terminated employees with no exemption on file for refusing to comply with its face-mask policy.
United has updated its face mask policy several times in response to changing guidance and scientific data regarding COVID-19. The most recent update, September 2021, permits fully vaccinated employees to work without their face masks when outdoors but continues to require masks for employees working indoors or in an enclosed area.

B. Plaintiff's Disability
On July 29, 2020, Plaintiff was working in the baggage handling area when his supervisor, Stephen Hill, approached him and told him to put on his face mask. Plaintiff advised Mr. Hill that he cannot wear a face mask. Mr. Hill advised Plaintiff to get his union representative and to meet Mr. Hill in his office. During the meeting with Plaintiff, his union representative, and Mr. Hill, Mr. Hill informed Plaintiff that he did not have a face mask exemption on file and that Mr. Hill would have to [*7]  send him home because Plaintiff refused to wear a face mask.
On July 30, 2020, Plaintiff contacted United's human resources department, who informed him that he needed to have his healthcare provider complete certain forms so that United could work with Plaintiff to identify reasonable accommodations. On August 14, 2020, Plaintiff obtained a medical note from a psychiatrist, Dr. Gordon Globus, that stated Plaintiff suffers from PTSD and anxiety and that, as a result, Plaintiff is unable to wear a face mask. During his deposition, Plaintiff testified that prior to this date, he never treated with any mental health professional for any condition, including PTSD. He found Dr. Globus by conducting an internet search, and Dr. Globus diagnosed him with PTSD during their second online meeting on August 14, 2020. On or about September 3, 2020, United created an Assessment of Functional Capabilities ("AFC") Form for Plaintiff based on information United received from Dr. Globus.3

C. Interactive Process & United's Reasonable Accommodation Program
On September 2, 2020, United confirmed that it would have a Reasonable Accommodation Program ("RAP") meeting with Plaintiff on September 16, 2020. On September [*8]  16, 2020, Plaintiff attended the RAP meeting with his union representative, his local managers, a human resources representative, and the RAP administrator. During this meeting, as an accommodation, Plaintiff requested to either work without a face mask or wear a face shield instead of a mask either in his current position or in other positions at LAX. At this meeting, United's representatives told Plaintiff that they would have to investigate his requested accommodation and the parties continued the RAP meeting to September 28, 2020. After this meeting, United representatives reviewed the face shield that Plaintiff requested he be allowed to wear and discussed Plaintiff's requested accommodation internally.
On September 28, 2020, Plaintiff attended another RAP meeting with United to discuss his request to wear a face shield instead of a face mask. At this meeting, the parties discussed other possible accommodations for Plaintiff, such as wearing less restrictive masks. Ultimately, Plaintiff was informed that United could not agree to his requested accommodation. However, in an effort to accommodate Plaintiff, United agreed to place Plaintiff on an approved medical leave of absence [*9]  or extended illness status and provided Plaintiff with the option to apply for other job opportunities at United.4
On October 1, 2020, United sent Plaintiff correspondence, wherein it memorialized its RAP meetings with Plaintiff. Specifically, this letter stated: "the company currently requires all employees to use a face mask even when using a face shield." The letter also confirmed that, as a form of accommodation, United placed Plaintiff on an approved medical leave of absence and provided Plaintiff the option to apply for other job opportunities at United. Between October 6, 2020 and the present, United and Plaintiff have continued to engage in the interactive process. United, since placing Plaintiff on leave, consistently sends Plaintiff correspondence requesting that his healthcare provider provide medical documentation supporting his continued absence, and Plaintiff has provided such documentation. Plaintiff is still unable to wear a face mask and still requests to wear a face shield as an accommodation.5 Plaintiff remains a current United employee who has exhausted his sick leave and is on extended illness status until such time that he is no longer required to wear a mask to [*10]  work.

II. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
On December 8, 2020, Plaintiff filed a complaint against United with the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing ("DFEH") and Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC") alleging discrimination in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended.6 United filed a position statement with the EEOC on March 5, 2021. Plaintiff received a Right to Sue Letter on March 19, 2021. On May 14, 2021 Plaintiff filed this action against United in Los Angeles County Superior Court. Plaintiff's Complaint alleges causes of action for: (1) Disability Discrimination [Government Code §§ 12940(a) and 12926(j)]; (2) Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process [Government Code § 12940(n)]; (3) Failure to Provide Reasonable Accommodation [Government Code § 12940(m)]; (4) Failure to Investigate [Government Code § 12940(k)]; (5) Failure to Take All Reasonable Steps to Prevent Discrimination [Government Code § 12940(k)]; and (6) Retaliation [Government Code § 12940(h)].
United removed this action on June 23, 2021 alleging diversity jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1332(a). Before the Court is United's motion for summary judgment, or in the alternative, partial summary judgment, filed on January 14, 2022.

III. LEGAL STANDARD
Summary judgment is proper where "the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and [*11]  the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). The moving party has the burden of demonstrating the absence of a genuine issue of fact for trial. See Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 256, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). Once the moving party meets its burden, a party opposing a properly made and supported motion for summary judgment may not rest upon mere denials but must set out specific facts showing a genuine issue for trial. Id. at 250; Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c), (e). In particular, when the non-moving party bears the burden of proving an element essential to its case, that party must make a showing sufficient to establish a genuine issue of material fact with respect to the existence of that element or be subject to summary judgment. See Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986).
An issue is genuine if evidence is produced that would allow a rational trier of fact to reach a verdict in favor of the non-moving party. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248. The Court must assume the truth of direct evidence set forth by the opposing party. See Hanon v. Dataproducts Corp. 976 F.2d 497, 507 (9th Cir. 1992). However, where circumstantial evidence is presented, the Court may consider the plausibility and reasonableness of inferences arising therefrom. See Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249-50; TW Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Pacific Elec. Contractors Ass'n, 809 F.2d 626, 631-32 (9th Cir. 1987). In that regard, "a mere 'scintilla' of evidence will not be sufficient to defeat a properly supported motion for summary judgment; rather, the nonmoving party [*12]  must introduce some 'significant probative evidence tending to support the complaint.'" Summers v. Teichert & Son, Inc., 127 F. 3d 1150, 1152 (9th Cir. 1997).
In ruling on a summary judgment motion, "the judge's function is not himself to weigh the evidence and determine the truth of the matter but to determine whether there is a genuine issue for trial." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249. "Credibility determinations, the weighing of the evidence, and the drawing of legitimate inferences from the facts are jury functions . . .." Id. at 255.

IV. DISCUSSION
United moves for summary judgment as to each of Plaintiff's causes of action. For the reasons set forth below, the Court finds there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact, and United is entitled to judgment as a matter of law on each of Plaintiff's claims.

A. United is Entitled to Summary Judgment as to Plaintiff's First Cause of Action for Disability Discrimination
In the first cause of action, Plaintiff alleges a claim for disability discrimination in violation of California Government Code § 12940, California's Fair Employment and Housing Act ("FEHA"). Specifically, Plaintiff alleges that United discriminated against him because of his disability by placing him on unpaid extended leave for asserting his right to accommodation and by failing to engage in an interactive [*13]  process.

1. Legal Standard
Pursuant to FEHA, it is illegal "[f]or an employer, because of . . . physical disability, mental disability, medical condition . . . to discharge the person from employment . . . or to discriminate against the person in compensation or in terms, conditions, or privileges of employment." In evaluating discrimination claims brought pursuant to FEHA, courts apply the "three-stage burden shifting test established by the United States Supreme Court for trying claims of discrimination" brought under federal law. Guz v. Bechtel Nat'l, Inc., 24 Cal. 4th 317, 354, 100 Cal. Rptr. 2d 352, 8 P.3d 1089 (2000). "This so-called McDonnell Douglas test reflects the principle that direct evidence of intentional discrimination is rare, and that such claims must usually be proved circumstantially." Id.; see also McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973).
Under the McDonnell Douglas analysis, a plaintiff must initially establish a prima facie case of discrimination. Id. at 354. Generally, a plaintiff must provide evidence that: (1) he was a member of a protected class, (2) he was qualified for the position she sought or was performing competently and according to the terms of her employment in the position he held; (3) he suffered an adverse employment action, such as termination, demotion or denial of an available job, and (4) some other circumstance [*14]  suggests discriminatory motive. Id. at 355. Under the McDonnell Douglas framework, the requisite degree of proof necessary to establish a prima facie case . . . on summary judgment is minimal and does not even need to rise to the level of preponderance of the evidence. Chuang v. Univ. of California, Davis, 225 F. 3d 1115, 1124 (9th Cir. 2000); see also Ibarbia v. Regents of Univ. of California, 191 Cal. App. 3d 1318, 1327-28, 237 Cal. Rptr. 92 (1987) (holding that to establish a prima facie case on summary judgment, a plaintiff must demonstrate "'actions taken by the employer from which one can infer, if such actions remain unexplained, that it is more likely than not that such actions were based on a [prohibited] discriminatory criterion") (internal citations omitted).
If a plaintiff succeeds in establishing a prima facie case, a presumption of discrimination arises, and the employer must then identify a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse action. Id; Reeves v. MV Transp., Inc., 186 Cal. App. 4th 666, 673, 111 Cal. Rptr. 3d 896 (2010). "If the employer sustains this burden, the presumption of discrimination disappears." Guz, 24 Cal. 4th at 356. "To avoid summary judgment, the employee must then offer substantial evidence that the employer's stated nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse action was untrue or pre-textual, or evidence the employer acted with a discriminatory animus, or a combination of the two, such that a reasonable trier of fact could conclude the employer [*15]  engaged in intentional discrimination." Reeves, 186 Cal. App. 4th at 673 (quotations and citations omitted). "[T]here must be evidence supporting a rational inference that intentional discrimination, on grounds prohibited by the statute, was the true cause of the employer's actions." Guz, 24 Cal. 4th at 361 (emphasis in original)

2. Plaintiff Fails to Make a Prima Facie Showing of Discrimination
In this case United argues that it is entitled to summary judgment on the grounds that Plaintiff has failed to establish that he is a qualified individual within the meaning of Green v. State of California, 42 Cal. 4th 254, 64 Cal. Rptr. 3d 390, 165 P.3d 118 (2007), and that United properly accommodated his disability. In Green, the California Supreme Court held that "[b]y its terms, section 12940 makes it clear that drawing distinctions on the basis of physical or mental disability is not forbidden discrimination in itself. Rather, drawing these distinctions is prohibited only if the adverse employment action occurs because of a disability and the disability would not prevent the employee from performing the essential duties of the job, at least not with reasonable accommodation. Therefore, in order to establish that a defendant employer has discriminated on the basis of disability in violation of the FEHA, the plaintiff employee bears the burden of [*16]  proving he or she was able to do the job, with or without reasonable accommodation." 42 Cal. 4th at 262.
The essential functions of a job are "the fundamental . . . duties of the employment position the individual with a disability holds or desires," not including "the marginal functions of the position." Cal. Gov. Code § 12926(f); see also 2 Cal. Code Regs. § 7293.8(g) (an "essential job function" is a job duty that is fundamental to the position, as opposed to marginal or peripheral). An employer's job description is considered to be the most reliable evidence of what a particular job's essential functions are. See Dark v. Curry County, 451 F.3d 1078, 1087 (9th Cir. 2006) (interpreting analogous provision of the ADA). However, other relevant evidence that may be considered in determining the essential functions of a job includes the actual work experience of current or past employees in the job, the amount of time spent performing a function, and the consequences of not requiring that an employee perform a function. See Cal. Gov. Code § 12926(f)(2); 2 Cal. Code Regs § 7293.8(g)(2).
In this case, Plaintiff is unable to establish a prima facie case of disability discrimination because he cannot demonstrate that he is able to perform the essential duties of his position without endangering himself or others. It is undisputed that Plaintiff's position requires that he wear [*17]  a mask in order to protect his own health and safety of those around him. Plaintiff is unable to wear a mask due to his disability, and is therefore not a qualified individual within the meaning of FEHA. As a result, Plaintiff has failed to establish a triable issue of fact as his disability discrimination claim and United's Motion is granted with respect to that claim.

3. There is No Evidence of Discriminatory Intent
Even if Plaintiff had presented sufficient evidence to establish a triable issue as to his prima facie claim of disability discrimination (which he did not), the undisputed evidence nonetheless supports the conclusion that United had a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for denying Plaintiff's accommodation request.7 United implemented a mandatory mask policy for all employees. Plaintiff was unable to wear a mask at work due to PTSD, and requested an accommodation. The parties engaged in United's Reasonable Accommodation Process in an attempt to resolve Plaintiff's accommodation issues. In the RAP process, Plaintiff made a request to wear a face shield in lieu of a mask, which was contrary to United's policy. United's mandatory mask policy specified that face shields were [*18]  not to be used in place of a mask, and any employee in violation of the policy would be subject to discipline. United's decision not to allow Plaintiff's requested accommodation was made after consideration of Plaintiff's circumstances and in accordance with its policy. After completion of the RAP process, United accommodated Plaintiff by placing him on extended unpaid leave until he is able to return to work without having to wear a mask. United also gave him an opportunity to apply for other positions at United.
The Court concludes that United has demonstrated that it has a legitimate and nondiscriminatory basis for its mask policy—the protection of its employees and customers from the highly contagious, air-borne virus, COVID-19. See Hernandez v. El Pasoans Fighting Hunger, 2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 124078, 2021 WL 2763827 at *6 (exempting plaintiff from mask policy would pose a "direct threat to the health and safety of others, including Plaintiff himself, due to COVID-19 pandemic"). Under FEHA, an employer is not prohibited from adverse employment action with respect to a disabled employee who is "unable to perform his or her essential duties with reasonable accommodation, or cannot perform those duties in a manner that would not endanger his health or safety or [*19]  the health or safety of others even with reasonable accommodations." Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(a)(1).
The undisputed evidence shows that the mask policy, including the decision not to permit a face shield mask alternative, was grounded in a reasonable judgment based on current medical knowledge and public health guidance. United consulted with medical experts at the Cleveland Clinic in formulating its face covering policy. The abundance of public health guidance on wearing masks that prevent airborne droplets to prevent the transmission of COVID-19 is beyond question and well established in the record before the Court. This same guidance, including federal and local orders, not only mandates that United require its employees wear masks, it counsels against the use of face shields as mask substitutes. See Bragdon v. Abbott, 524 U.S. 624, 650, 118 S. Ct. 2196, 141 L. Ed. 2d 540 (1998) (noting that views of public health authorities carry great weight in determining whether a threat exists for purposes of the ADA).
Nor is there is evidence of any discriminatory intent in United's consideration of and decision denying Plaintiff's accommodation request.8 To the contrary, Plaintiff admits that he believes that United applied its policy to all employees unable to wear a mask. The undisputed evidence [*20]  confirms that belief—employees unable to wear a mask were either placed on unpaid leave or terminated. Simply stated, it is undisputed that Plaintiff was treated just like any other employee who could not wear a mask, consistent with United's policy. See Nicholson v. Federal Express Corp., 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 38860, 2010 WL 1607832 at *6 (C.D. Cal. 2010) (plaintiff failed to establish a prima facie case of discrimination; no inference of discrimination because of his disability where plaintiff admitted he does not know of any other employee treated differently); Cf. Moore v. Regents of Univ. Of Calif., 248 Cal. App. 4th 216, 239-40, 206 Cal. Rptr. 3d 841 (suggesting that departure from normal policies and procedures might support a finding of discriminatory intent).
Plaintiff also argues that United's decision not to allow him to wear a face shield in lieu of a mask was unreasonable and thus evidence of discriminatory intent. Plaintiff's argument is based on the same set of federal, state and local orders and regulations relied upon by United in support of its Motion. These mandates generally suggest that face shields may be an acceptable substitute when a person is unable to wear a face mask. Contrary to Plaintiff's contention, however, none of these mandates "allowed" or "required" United to permit him to work without a face mask. Plaintiff's employer, United, is the [*21]  entity responsible for making that decision, and in this case, United made the reasonable business decision to require every employee wear a face mask without exception. See Giles v. Sprouts Farmers Market, Inc., 2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 97995, 2021 WL 2072379 at *6 (public health documents' references to mask exceptions for those who have problems breathing not germane to business decision weighing risk of infection). Under FEHA, an accommodation is not reasonable if it would pose undue hardship on an employer. California Government Code § 12940(m). The Court concludes that United has demonstrated that permitting exceptions to its masking policy would unduly burden United's business by increasing the risk of the spread of COVID-19. See Doe v. San Diego Unified Sch. Dist.,19 F.4th 1173, 1180 (9th Cir. 2021); EEOC v. UPS, 424 F.3d 1060, 1075 (9th Cir. 2005) (citing cases demonstrating that even a modest increase in risk that a problem will occur is significant when the potential consequences of that problem are very serious).
United is one of the largest airlines in the world, with more than 90,000 employees, attempting to operate in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic. The uncontroverted evidence shows that in order to protect the health and safety of its employees and customers, and in order to comply with local and federal mandates, United adopted a mask mandate for all employees. United's decision was based on consultation [*22]  with experts and known medical evidence that snug-fitting masks that cover the mouth and nose help to prevent the spread of a deadly disease. Face shields were not permitted under its policy in accordance with CDC guidance. This policy applied to all United employees and was enacted prior to Plaintiff's request for accommodation. Under these circumstances, the Court concludes that United's policy requiring a mask for every employee was a reasonable business decision, enacted for legitimate, non-discriminatory purposes. In other words, the employment "qualification" standard at issue—having to wear a mask at work-- is not based on an attempt to target any individual's disability, but on a legitimate, non-discriminatory business reason.9 The Court also concludes that Plaintiff has failed to show that United's legitimate business reasons for placing him on leave were a pretext for discrimination or retaliation. Plaintiff's subjective belief without any factual basis is insufficient to preclude summary judgment. See Nelson v. Pima Community Collective, 83 F. 3d 1075, 1081-82 (9th Cir. 1996).10
The Court thus concludes that United is entitled to summary judgment as to Plaintiff's first cause of action.

B. United is Entitled to Summary Judgment as to Plaintiff's [*23]  Second Cause of Action for Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process and Third Cause of Action for Failure to Provide Reasonable Accommodations
In the second cause of action, Plaintiff alleges a claim for failure to engage in good faith interactive process. In the third cause of action, Plaintiff alleges a claim for failure to provide reasonable accommodations. Specifically, Plaintiff alleges that even though United knew he was disabled, it failed to reasonably accommodate his disability and failed to engage in a good faith interactive process in order to identify a reasonable accommodation. United argues that Plaintiff's claims fail because it engaged in the RAP in good faith, and reasonably accommodated his disability.
Under FEHA, an employer must "make reasonable accommodation for the known physical or mental disability" of an employee. Cal. Government Code § 12940(m)(1). The elements of a failure to accommodate claim are: (1) the plaintiff has a disability under FEHA; (2) the plaintiff is qualified to perform the essential functions of the position; and (3) the employer failed to reasonably accommodate the plaintiff's disability.11 Lui v. City & County of San Francisco, 211 Cal. App. 4th 962, 971, 150 Cal. Rptr. 3d 385 (2012) (quoting Scotch v. Art Inst. of Cal., 173 Cal. App. 4th 986, 1009-10, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d 338 (2009)). A reasonable accommodation is "a modification or adjustment to the workplace [*24]  that enables the employee to perform the essential functions of the job held or desired." Nadaf—Rahrov v. Neiman Marcus Grp., Inc., 166 Cal. App. 4th 952, 974, 83 Cal. Rptr. 3d 190 (2008); see also Taylor v. Trees, Inc., 58 F. Supp.3d 1092, 1111 (E.D. Cal. 2014). However, a defendant may only be liable for failing to reasonably accommodate a plaintiff's disability if aware of the disability. See King v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 152 Cal. App. 4th 426, 443, 60 Cal. Rptr. 3d 359 (2007).
In addition, under FEHA, it is unlawful for an employer to "fail to engage in a timely, good faith, interactive process with the employee . . . to determine effective reasonable accommodations, if any, in response to a request for reasonable accommodation by an employee [with a disability]." Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(n). The duty to engage in the interactive process is triggered once an employer "becomes aware of the need to consider an accommodation." Scotch, 173 Cal. App. 4th at 1013. Once this duty is triggered, FEHA requires that the employer engage in an informal process with the employee to attempt to identify a reasonable accommodation that would allow her to perform the job effectively. See Scotch, 173 Cal. App. 4th at 1013 (holding that "[r]itualized discussions are not necessary").
Plaintiff's argument that United failed to consider his request in good faith is based on his contention that United failed to meaningfully consider his request and simply relied on its policy, and thus unreasonably denied his accommodation request [*25]  to wear a face shield in lieu of a mask. However, it is undisputed that United engaged in its RAP, considered and then determined that it could not accommodate Plaintiff's request, and placed him on extended leave, with an opportunity to apply for other positions at United. The Court concludes that Plaintiff has failed to demonstrate that the United did not engage in the interactive process in good faith and United is entitled to summary judgment as to the second cause of action. See Prilliman v. United Air Lines, Inc., 53 Cal. App. 4th 935, 950, 62 Cal. Rptr. 2d 142 (1997) (Reasonable accommodation envisions a process where parties seek and share information to achieve resolution).
Plaintiff next argues that United's refusal to permit him to wear a face shield in lieu of mask was unreasonable. The Court has already addressed this argument and concludes that United's decision to deny Plaintiff's requested accommodation was reasonable. In addition, the Court concludes that under the circumstances of this case, the accommodation offered to Plaintiff—extended leave without pay until he is able to return to work without having to wear a mask and the opportunity to apply for other positions—was reasonable, and United is entitled to summary judgment as to Plaintiff's third cause [*26]  of action on both grounds. See Humphrey v. Memorial Hosps. Ass'n, 239 F.3d 1128, 1135-36 (9th Cir. 2001) (finding extended leave a reasonable accommodation); Nunes v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 164 F. 3d 1243, 1247 (9th Cir. 1999) (leave need not be paid to be reasonable accommodation).

C. United is Entitled to Summary Judgment as to Plaintiff's Fourth Cause of Action for Failure to Investigate and Fifth Cause of Action for Failure to Take All Steps to Prevent Discrimination
Plaintiff's fourth and fifth causes of action for Failure to Investigate and Failure to Take All Reasonable Steps to Prevent Discrimination pursuant to California Government Code § 12940(k) are derivative, and depend on the success of his disability discrimination claim. These claims thus fail, as the Court has determined that Plaintiff cannot establish a claim for disability discrimination. Sneddon v. ABF Freight Sys., 489 F. Supp. 2d 1124, 1132-1133 (2007) (holding that "absent a showing of actionable discrimination, there can be no violation of Government Code § 12940(k)"); Trujillo v. Cnty. Trans. Dist., 63 Cal. App. 4th 280, 289, 73 Cal. Rptr. 2d 596 (1998) (employers cannot be held liable for failing to investigate or prevent discrimination that does not exist).

D. United is Entitled to Summary Judgment as to Plaintiff's Sixth Cause of Action for Retaliation
Plaintiff's sixth cause of action alleges that United retaliated against him after he requested accommodation for his disability under California Government Code §§ 12940(h) and 12945.2(l). To establish a claim for retaliation Plaintiff must establish a prima [*27]  facie case that demonstrates: (1) he engaged in a "protected activity", (2) that an adverse employment action was taken thereafter, and (3) a causal link existed between the protected activity and the employer's action. Yanowitz v. L'Oreal USA, Inc., 36 Cal.4th 1028, 1042, 32 Cal. Rptr. 3d 436, 116 P.3d 1123 (2005). Once an employee establishes a prima facie case, the employer is required to offer a legitimate reason for the adverse employment action. Id. If the employer produces a legitimate reason for the adverse employment action, the presumption of retaliation "drops out of the picture," and the burden shifts back to the employee to prove intentional retaliation. Id. (quoting Morgan v. Regents of University of California, 88 Cal. App. 4th 52, 68, 105 Cal. Rptr. 2d 652 (2000)).
Plaintiff's claim fails as a matter of law because, as discussed earlier, Plaintiff cannot demonstrate that he was able to perform the essential functions of his position with or without reasonable accommodation. Even if Plaintiff were able to make this showing, Plaintiff has offered no evidence of a causal link between the alleged protected activity and United's actions based on the Court's conclusion that United's actions in this case were based on a legitimate, non discriminatory business decision, and not based on Plaintiff's disability or request for accommodation. United is thus entitled to summary [*28]  judgment as to Plaintiff's sixth cause of action for retaliation.

IV. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, United's Motion for Summary Judgment or in the Alternative, Partial Summary Judgment is GRANTED as to each cause of action alleged in Plaintiff's Complaint. The parties are ordered to meet and confer and agree on a joint proposed Judgment which is consistent with this Order. The parties shall lodge the joint proposed Judgment with the Court on or before February 28, 2022. In the unlikely event that counsel are unable to agree upon a joint proposed Judgment, the parties shall each submit separate versions of a proposed Judgment along with a Joint Statement setting forth their respective positions on or before February 28, 2022.
IT IS SO ORDERED.

JUDGMENT IN FAVOR OF DEFENDANT UNITED AIRLINES, INC. AND AGAINST PLAINTIFF ROBERT BEZZINA
Plaintiff Robert Bezzina ("Plaintiff") brought the present action against Defendant United Airlines, Inc. ("Defendant"). Plaintiff's operative Complaint alleges causes of action for: (1) Disability Discrimination; (2) Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process; (3) Failure to Provide Reasonable Accommodation; (4) Failure to Investigate; (5) Failure to [*29]  Take All Reasonable Steps to Prevent Discrimination; and (6) Retaliation.
On January 14, 2022, Defendant filed a Motion for Summary Judgment, Or In The Alternative Partial Summary Judgment. (Dkt. 27.) The Court found the matter appropriate for submission on the papers without oral argument. The matter was, therefore, removed from the Court's February 14, 2022 hearing calendar and the parties were given notice. After considering the moving, opposing, and reply papers and all supporting evidence therein, and all other matters presented to the Court, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED, AND DECREED THAT:
1. Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment, Or In The Alternative Partial Summary Judgment is GRANTED.
2. Plaintiff's Complaint is DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE.
3. Plaintiff takes nothing from Defendant, the action is dismissed in its entirety, and Defendant may submit a cost bill in accordance with the requirements of law.
4. Judgment is entered in favor of Defendant and against Plaintiff on the Plaintiff's Complaint.
Dated: March 1, 2022
/s/ John F. Walter
HONORABLE JOHN F. WALTER
United States District Court Judge


End of Document

