Bizzle v. Ill. Dep't of Human Servs.
United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois, Eastern Division
August 8, 2018, Decided; August 8, 2018, Filed
Case No. 16-cv-9403

Reporter
2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 240445 *; 2018 WL 11188833
A.C. HOMER L. BIZZLE III, Plaintiff, v. ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Ac Homer Lee Bizzle, III, Plaintiff: Michael T. Smith, LEAD ATTORNEY, Michael T. Smith & Associates, Schaumburg, IL USA; Joshua D. McCann, Law Offices of Michael T. Smith, Schaumburg, IL USA.
For State of Illinois - Department of Human Services, Defendant: Patrick Daniel Morris, LEAD ATTORNEY, Cook County State's Attorney's Office, Chicago, IL USA; Hellin Jang, Office Of The Illinois Attorney General, Chicago, IL USA.
Judges: SHARON JOHNSON COLEMAN, United States District Court Judge.
Opinion by: SHARON JOHNSON COLEMAN
Opinion



ORDER
Defendant IDHS' motion for summary judgment [60] is granted with respect to plaintiff A.C. Homer L. Bizzle III's disability discrimination claim, retaliation claim, and claim of failure to accommodate based on the denial of his request to use his personal vehicle for work purposes. It is denied in all other respects.

STATEMENT
The plaintiff, A.C. Homer L. Bizzle III, suffers from, among other conditions, Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder and a Traumatic Brain Injury. Bizzle brought this action against his employer, the Illinois Department of Human Services, alleging that IDHS failed to accommodate his disabilities, failed to promote him because of his disabilities, and retaliated against [*2]  him. IDHS now moves for summary judgment on Bizzle's claims.
The Court notes, as an initial matter, that Bizzle has abandoned his claims of disability discrimination and retaliation, as well has his failure to accommodate claims arising from his request to use his personal vehicle for work purposes. The Court accordingly grants summary judgment on those claims. The Court also notes that IDHS' administrative exhaustion arguments have been rendered moot by Bizzle's subsequent amended complaint reflecting receipt of a notice of right to sue for his failure to accommodate claims. Finally, the Court takes note of IDHS numerous objections to Bizzle's Rule 56.1 statement of additional facts. The Court will accordingly consider Bizzle's additional statements of fact only to the extent that they are relevant and are adequately supported by competent evidence.
In order to prevail at summary judgment, IDHS must establish that, drawing all reasonable inferences in Bizzle's favor, there is not a genuine issue as to any material facts. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c); Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986); Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). Bizzle's remaining claims allege that IDHS failed to reasonably accommodate his disability. In order to survive summary judgment, Bizzle must identify evidence establishing [*3]  that (1) he is a qualified individual with a disability; (2) his employer knew of that disability; and (3) his employer failed to reasonably accommodate that disability. EEOC v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 417 F.3d 789, 797 (7th Cir. 2005).
Here, Bizzle claims that IDHS unreasonably rejected his requests to bring his support animal to work and to transfer him back to IDHS' Naperville location, and that IDHS unreasonably delayed in fulfilling his requests for assistive software and necessary office furniture.
As a general matter, IDHS contends that Bizzle has failed to establish that he is entitled to his requested accommodations. Under the ADA, an employer is only required to accommodate a disability if the accommodation is necessary to enable the disabled individual to work. Brumfield v. City of Chicago, 735 F.3d 619, 632 (7th Cir. 2013). IDHS contends that Bizzle has failed to establish that a change of location or his service dog are necessary to enable him to perform his job. Although there is no direct evidence linking the requested accommodation's to Bizzle's ability to perform his job, there is ample evidence establishing that Bizzle suffers from symptoms that would interfere with his work, such as panic attacks, irritability, and attentional difficulties. There is also evidence from his treating physicians [*4]  that the accommodations he requested were clinically supported or were components of his treatment program to manage those symptoms. Thus, there is sufficient evidence before the Court to establish a dispute of material fact as to whether the requested accommodations were necessary in order for Bizzle to perform his job.
IDHS contends that it was not required to accommodate Bizzle's request to bring his emotional support animal to work because emotional support animals do not fall within the ADA's definition of the term "service dog." The definition of "service dog" that IDHS relies on, however, is from Title III of the ADA and is irrelevant to determining whether an employer has failed to reasonably accommodate an employee's disability under Title I of the ADA. Schultz v. Alticor/Amway Corp., 177 F. Supp. 2d 674, 678 (W.D. Mich. 2001); see also Bhogaita v. Altamonte Heights Condo. Ass'n, Inc., 765 F.3d 1277, 1289 (11th Cir. 2014) (affirming a jury verdict concluding that allowing an emotional support dog in excess of a condo board's weight limit on pets was a reasonable accommodation of the plaintiff's PTSD). IDHS alternatively contends, in its reply, that Bizzle failed to participate in the interactive process. This argument, raised for the first time in reply, is not properly before this Court. Peterson v. Vill. of Downers Grove, 103 F. Supp. 3d 918, 925 (N.D. Ill. 2015). Even if it were, moreover, this Court is [*5]  not persuaded that Bizzle's failure to provide specific documents constituted a failure to engage in the interactive process generally. Accordingly, a dispute of material fact remains as to whether IDHS failed to reasonably accommodate Bizzle's request to bring a service dog to work.
IDHS also contends that it was not required to accommodate Bizzle's request to change locations, because his request was based solely on his commute. Activities outside the scope of employment, such as commuting to and from a job, are generally considered to be outside the scope of the ADA. See, e.g., Blickle v. Ill. Dept. of Children & Fam. Servs., No. 12 C 9795, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 129882, 2015 WL 5693081, at *4 (N.D. Ill. Sept. 28, 2015) (Kendall, J.); Bull v. Coyner, No. 98 C 7583, 2000 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 1905, 2000 WL 224807, at *9 (N.D. Ill. Feb. 23, 2000) (Coar, J.). Bizzle, however, has introduced at least some evidence suggesting that his request was based on the circumstances of his office situation in Chicago. In light of the somewhat unique factual situation presented by this case and Bizzle's asserted disability, the Court believes that this more general evidence of anxiety induced by an urban work-location is sufficient to survive summary judgment.
Finally, IDHS asserts that it provided Bizzle with many of his requested accommodations, including assistive software and a better office chair. Although this is true, Bizzle has offered evidence [*6]  establishing that these accommodations were not provided in a timely manner. Accordingly, there is a dispute of material fact as to whether the accommodations that Bizzle did ultimately receive were unreasonably delayed. See EEOC Enforcement Guidance: Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship under the Americans with Disabilities Act, EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (Oct. 17, 2002) (recognizing that unreasonable delay in providing an accommodation can constitute a violation of the ADA). Accordingly, IDHS' request for summary judgment on those claims must be denied.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
Date: 8/8/2018
Entered: /s/ Sharon Johnson Coleman
SHARON JOHNSON COLEMAN
United States District Court Judge


End of Document

