Burke v. City of New York
United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York
September 30, 2009, Decided; September 30, 2009, Filed
06-CV-0581 (RRM) (JO)

Reporter
2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 154175 *
KAESTNER BURKE, Plaintiff, - against - CITY OF NEW YORK, et al., Defendants.
Counsel:  [*1] For Kaestner Burke, Plaintiff: Alan E. Wolin, LEAD ATTORNEY, Wolin & Wolin, Esqs., Jericho, NY.
For City of New York, New York City Department of Education, Defendants: Isaac Klepfish, LEAD ATTORNEY, NYC Law Department Office of Corp Counsel, New York, NY.
Judges: JAMES ORENSTEIN, United States Magistrate Judge.
Opinion by: JAMES ORENSTEIN
Opinion



REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION
JAMES ORENSTEIN, Magistrate Judge:
Plaintiff Kaestner Burke ("Burke"), a former special education teacher, filed this action against the City of New York and its Department of Education ("DOE" or, collectively with the City of New York, the "City"), alleging that they discriminated against him based on his disability and his age, in violation of federal, state, and local law. See Docket Entry ("DE") 1 (Complaint). Following the close of discovery, the City moved for summary judgment pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure ("Rule") 56. DE 34. Upon a referral from the Honorable Roslynn R. Mauskopf, United States District Judge, I now make my report and, for the reasons set forth below, respectfully recommend that the court grant the City's motion and dismiss the case. Briefly stated, after examining the evidence in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, I conclude that Burke is not "disabled" [*2]  within the meaning of the pertinent federal statute, that he cannot establish a prima facie case of any manner of unlawful discrimination on the basis of the evidence in the record, that the record cannot support a conclusion that the City's proffered legitimate reasons for the actions about which Burke complains were pretextual, and that it likewise cannot support a claim that Burke was subjected to a hostile work environment. As a result, the City is entitled to judgment in its favor on each of the claims in Burke's complaint.
I. Background
A. Factual Background
In reviewing the record for purposes of assessing the City's motion for summary judgment, I construe the evidence in the light most favorable to Burke, draw all reasonable inferences in his favor, and eschew any attempt to determine credibility. See, e.g., Vazquez v. Southside United Hous. Dev. Fund Corp., 2009 WL 2596490, at *6 (E.D.N.Y. Aug. 21, 2009) (quoting Wevant v. Okst, 101 F.3d 845, 854 (2d Cir. 1996) (citations omitted)). I provide a summary of the relevant facts as to which the parties generally agree without citation to the record (but noting the evidence as to certain areas of disagreement).1 To the extent that some of the facts in issue relate exclusively to the question of whether Burke was disabled within the meaning of the Americans with Disabilities Act, [*3]  42 U.S.C. § 12101, et seq. ("ADA"), I postpone to the discussion of that issue a recitation of the relevant record.
The parties agree that Burke was a Special Education Teacher in the New York City public school system from September 12, 1989 until his retirement on November 1, 2005. He was born on December 25, 1937, and was therefore in his mid-to late-sixties at the time of the events at issue. Burke alleges that he suffers from, and has received treatment for, a variety of maladies including "hypertension [i.e., high blood pressure], dyslipidemia, [*4]  chest pains, and shortness of breath" as well as "stress and anxiety." Complaint ¶ 24. Burke claims that these ailments have rendered him "physically disabled[,]" id., although the parties disagree about the extent to which he is "disabled" within the meaning of the pertinent statutes as well as the extent to which Burke has successfully treated the conditions of which he complains.
As a Special Education teacher within the City's schools, Burke was eligible to teach in a variety of classroom settings, the differences among which are pertinent to his claims of discrimination. The parties agree about the relevant characteristics of these various available assignments, and I summarize them here. In a "Resource Room," later called "Supplemental Instruction I (Academic)," a teacher works with up to 32 students each day. The special needs students in a Resource Room are "mainstreamed," meaning that they are assigned to classes along with students who have no such special needs, and obtain supplemental support for their special needs through an Individualized Educational Plan ("IEP"). In a class designated as "MIS I," or "Modified Instruction I (Basic)," a teacher works with up to twelve [*5]  special needs students and provides their entire curriculum in a setting appropriate to the students' development. In a class designated as "MIS II," the assignment about which Burke now complains, one teacher and one paraprofessional assistant teach up to twelve students with more severe academic, emotional, behavioral or psychological problems than students assigned to an MIS I class. See Statement ¶¶ 4-6; Counter-Statement ¶¶ 4-6.
After teaching for several years in Brooklyn, Burke transferred to Intermediate School ("I.S.") 192Q in Queens, New York, which is located in District 29 and Region 3 of the City's school system. Upon his transfer, Burke claims that he asked to teach in a Resource Room but was told that no such position was available and was instead assigned to teach "an experimental MIS II class" that he now characterizes as the "worst Special Education class" at I.S. 192Q. Complaint ¶ 32. Burke complains that during this first year at I.S. 192Q, he was observed an "inordinate" amount and ultimately given an "unsatisfactory" rating by the school's principal that he claims he did not deserve. Complaint ¶ 33. In the next school year (2001-2002), under a new principal, Burke [*6]  remained in the MIS II class but this time received a "satisfactory" rating at the year's end. Complaint ¶ 34. In 2002, when a Resource Room position at I.S. 192Q became available, Burke successfully applied for it. He remained in that position until late 2003, when he was reassigned to an MIS II class — a reassignment that Burke now claims was discriminatory. Complaint ¶ 34.
At the end of 2003-2004 school year, the I.S. 192Q school at which Burke had been teaching was found to have performed below applicable standards. As a result, it was subjected to a "redesign" procedure, pursuant to which no more than half of its teachers could be rehired for the following school year. Statement ¶¶ 15-16; Counter-Statement ¶¶ 15-16. It was during this redesign period and its aftermath that Burke claims the City's "discriminatory and hostile treatment really escalated." Complaint ¶ 35.
On June 6, 2004, Burke submitted a letter to the personnel committee at I.S. 192Q applying for a variety of special education positions. Burke included in his letter an application for an MIS II position, but specified that it was the least preferred of the positions for which he was applying. Klepfish Dec. Ex. G. [*7]  The personnel committee did not select Burke for any position at I.S. 192Q; however, it did select a candidate for an open Resource Room assignment at the school who was younger than Burke, see 29 U.S.C. 631(a)), and whom Burke believed to be less qualified than himself. Complaint ¶ 35.
Without an assignment to teach any class at I.S. 192Q, Burke was assigned for the 2004-2005 school year to Region 3 at full salary pending placement into an available teaching position within the region. Thereafter, he was briefly assigned to an MIS II position at a I.S. 109Q (a different school than the one at which he had previously taught). After one day in that assignment, the parties had certain interactions, the details of which are in dispute.
It is undisputed, however, that on September 22, 2004, shortly after his assignment to the MIS II class at I.S. 109Q, Burke submitted a Reasonable Accommodation Request to the DOE's Medical Bureau. In his request — which Burke marked as "urgent" and to which he added a request that the Medical Bureau "please rush" its processing — Burke described his "diagnosis and disability" as follows: "s[c]iatica (pain in left [and] right leg)[;] shortness of breath climbing stairs[;] [*8]  [and] high blood pressure[.]" Klepfish Dec. Ex. W (the "First Accommodation Request"). Burke went on to request the following accommodations for the conditions he had described: "limited stair climbing[;] no pushing or pulling[;] [and] no heavy lifting." Id. In describing his job duties on the request form, Burke wrote that the Special Education classroom at I.S. 109Q to which he had been assigned was "on the 5th floor which is hard for me to climb[.]" Id. Burke indicated on the form that he had not discussed his request with the relevant administration officials and that they had not denied his request for accommodation. Id. Although Burke asserts that he "continuously requested to be assigned" to a Resource Room or IEP position, Counter-Statement ¶ 24 (citing Burke Aff. ¶¶ 14-22), the record includes no evidence that, as of the date of the First Accommodation Request, Burke had ever requested that the City accommodate any disability by excluding an MIS II position from the range of assignments for which he should be considered.
Following the submission of the First Accommodation Request, the City assigned Burke to teach an MIS II class at P.S. 268Q, which was housed in a building [*9]  with an elevator. See Statement ¶ 25; Counter-Statement ¶ 25. The class had six students and Burke was assigned a paraprofessional assistant to help him teach it.
Burke asked to be assigned instead to a Resource Room or IEP position. Rather than grant that request, the City assigned a less experienced teacher, Tamara Clarke ("Clarke"), to the Resource Room class at P.S. 268Q that Burke sought.2 Although the City did not displace Clarke in order to accommodate Burke's request for an assignment he preferred, the parties agree that Burke did not contest the City's decision at the time it was made, but instead accepted the assignment to the MIS II position at P.S. 268Q.
After four months teaching that MIS II class, Burke again submitted a request for an accommodation to the DOE's Medical Bureau. In the area on the request form that directed him to list the relevant "diagnosis" and "disability" and to describe the "functions [he was] unable to perform and [the] accommodation requested[,]" Burke provided the following information:
High blood pressure, possible heart problems, mental stress brought about by MIS II Special Ed. students. (Also SEIS VII students put in 12:1:1 classes [i.e., classes [*10]  with a ratio of 12 special education students to one special education teacher and one paraprofessional assistant].) Insensitive administrators that continuously observe me and make unnecessary request[s], such as typing reports. Recently, I was transferred from a school that was under redesign and placed in another school as a MIS II teacher. I had requested to be assigned a Resource Room Teacher or as a I.E.P. Teacher. (This request was denied.) I work[ed] in this capacity for 2 years. I am a Tenured Teacher 15 yrs with the dept. of Ed. 3 yrs military + 10 yrs prior with social agencies [sic].
Klepfish Dec. Ex. X (the "Second Accommodation Request"). Under the heading "Description of Job Duties[,]" Burke entered the following information: "My present job as a Spec. Ed. Teacher of a class, 12:1:1 at P.S. 268." Id. Burke indicated that he had discussed his request with an administrator and that it had been denied. Id. 3
On April 19, the DOE determined that no accommodation was medically warranted and therefore denied the request. In doing so, it invited Burke to submit "any new or additional medical documentation to support [his] accommodation request ... and have [it] re-evaluated." [*11]  Klepfish Dec. Ex. R. Burke agrees that the Second Accommodation Request was denied on that basis, but adds that "he believes that his request was medically warranted." Counter-Statement ¶ 29 (citing Burke Aff. ¶ 38; Complaint ¶ 56). The evidence he cites, however, does not support such a belief.
First, Burke relies on his own affidavit, which includes no more than a conclusory statement that his "requests [sic] to be accommodated were supported by medical documentation." Burke Aff. ¶ 38. He does not cite any such documentation, and the record contains no evidence of any such documentation offered in support of the Second Accommodation Request. The Complaint likewise alludes to no specific medical evidence supporting the Second Accommodation Request. Finally, I note that there is no evidence that Burke ever took the DOE up on its invitation to provide new or additional medical documentation in support of his request. Accordingly, the record establishes no more than that Burke made a request for an accommodation on the basis of a disability, and that it was denied for lack of medical support. There is no additional evidence, as to this request for accommodation, of any further effort [*12]  by either side to engage in an interactive process, nor is there any reason to conclude that the DOE thought that any such process was warranted in light of its finding that no accommodation was needed and Burke's failure to submit new or additional evidence to the contrary.
Burke claims that during the 2004-2005 school year, while he taught the MIS II class at P.S. 268Q and was under the supervision of its Principal, Lissa Stewart ("Stewart"), "the harassment and hostile work environment intensified." Complaint ¶ 42. In attempting to support that assertion, Burke to some extent relies on the frequency with which school administrators observed his teaching. The record establishes that Burke was subjected to three formal classroom observations during the 2004-2005 school year. The parties agree that at least one such observation is required under the CBA, but disagree as to whether three formal observations of a senior teacher such as Burke is within a normal range (there is no expected number of informal observations). In support of its contention that three observations is "well within the range of what any teacher should expect[,]" Statement ¶ 42, the City relies on the declaration [*13]  of Charles Peeples ("Peeples"), an official in the DOE's Human Resources who was responsible for all schools within Region 3 at all relevant times. Kelpfish Dec. Ex. AA ¶¶ 1, 26. Burke, on the other hand, relies on the testimony of Principal Stewart, who stated that "[a] senior teacher usually receives two" observations. Stewart Dep. at 34 (emphasis added). The two positions are not at odds: the record shows that the number of times Burke was subjected to formal observation was unusual but within the discretion of the responsible administrators.
In addition to the frequency of observation, Burke also cites the following examples of specific incidents from the 2004-2005 school year that he believes demonstrate discrimination on the basis of age and disability, as well as of a hostile work environment:
! On December 3, 2004, Burke received a memo from Stewart asking him to comply with an earlier request to submit weekly "homework sheets" and asked Burke to see her if he was having trouble "putting one together."
! Principal Stewart observed Burke teaching a lesson in early February 2005, found it to be unsatisfactory, and thereafter implemented a "plan of action" that Burke found to be [*14]  "insulting and degrading" in light of his greater experience.4
! In a memo dated March 3, 2005, the Assistant Principal of P.S. 268Q asked Burke to attend a meeting to discuss his attendance record. Stewart followed up with a letter dated March 9, 2005, warning Burke of possible disciplinary action if he failed to improve his attendance.5
! In a letter dated April 4, 2005, Stewart accused Burke of failing to comply with a provision of the action plan that she had imposed in February 2005 that required him to submit weekly lesson plans.
! On April 14, 2005, Stewart sent Burke a letter warning him that she might give him an "unsatisfactory" rating at the end of the school year.
! Stewart observed Burke teaching on April 13, 2005, and issued a report dated May 11, 2005, rating his lesson as "unsatisfactory."6
! On May 9, 2005, Carol Elk ("Elk"), the Region 3 Director of Special Education, observed Burke teaching and issued a report dated June 24, 2005, rating his lesson as "unsatisfactory" and finding it "necessary for [Burke] to continue to receive assistance in order to improve [his] instructional and behavior management skills."7
! In a letter dated May 16, 2005, Elk discussed perceived inadequacies [*15]  in Burke's lesson plans for two classes in April 2005.8
! In a letter dated June 15, 2005, Stewart noted that Burke's attendance had not improved since the meeting of March 9, 2005, but had instead continued. Stewart noted that Burke's absences, which he attributed to his hypertension and treatment for that condition, tended to occur primarily on Mondays and Fridays surrounding weekends and vacation times.9
! In June 2005, Stewart gave Burke an "unsatisfactory" rating for the 2004-2005 school year. Burke was the only teacher at P.S. 268Q to receive that rating for that school year.10
Complaint ¶¶ 43-51;11 see also Klepfish Decs. Exs. B-C, J-Q, S-V (copies of documents reflecting observations, reports, ratings, and action plans).
In September 2005, the City assigned Burke to teach a second grade MIS II class. Complaint ¶ 52. In Burke's view, this was a difficult assignment, suggesting that "defendants were setting up plaintiff to fail." Id. Burke also claims that the assignment violated his right under applicable regulations and contractual provisions to be rotated into a less difficult class for the 2005-2006 school year, Complaint ¶ 53, but he has not cited any [*16]  evidence to support the conclusion that there is a material issue of fact on that matter. Instead of completing the school year, Burke retired on November 1, 2005. Complaint ¶ 57.12
Throughout all of the conduct that Burke cites as evidence of discrimination and harassment, the parties agree that neither Stewart nor Elk (nor any other City employee) "made any comments or remarks that indicate that [Burke's] age or alleged disability played a role in their employment decisions." Statement ¶ 55; see Counter-Statement ¶ 55.
B. Procedural History
Burke initiated this action by filing the Complaint on February 9, 2006. In it, he asserted six causes of action. First, he claimed that the City discriminated against him on the basis of his age and created a hostile work environment, in violation of the ADEA, 29 U.S.C. 623. Complaint ¶¶ 63-70. Second, Burke alleged that the City discriminated against him on the basis of a disability and refused to provide a reasonable accommodation for that disability, in violation of the ADA. Complaint ¶¶ 71-76. Burke's third and fourth causes of action asserted age-and disability-based discrimination, respectively, in violation of Sections 296 and 297 of New York State's Executive Law. Complaint [*17]  ¶¶ 77-90. Similarly, Burke's fifth and sixth causes of action asserted age-and disability-based discrimination, respectively, in violation of Section 8-107 of New York City's Administrative Code. Complaint ¶¶ 91-102. The parties conducted full discovery in the following year, and the City filed the instant motion for summary judgment on May 13, 2008. Some six months later, the court referred the motion to me for a report and recommendation. Order dated November 17, 2008.
II. Discussion
The court should grant summary judgment "if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c); see also Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23 (1986). In considering a motion for such relief, a court does not weigh the evidence and resolve factual issues but rather determines as a threshold matter whether there are genuine unresolved issues of material fact to be tried. Owens v. New York City Hous. Auth., 934 F.2d 405, 408 (2d Cir. 1991) (quoting Gibson v. American Broadcasting Cos., 892 F.2d 1128, 1132 (2d Cir. 1989)). A fact is material if it might affect the outcome of the suit under governing law. Holtz v. Rockefeller & Co., Inc., 258 F.3d 62, 69 (2d Cir. 2001) (quoting Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248 (1986)). A genuine issue is presented if a reasonable jury considering the evidence could return [*18]  a verdict for the non-moving party. Id. In assessing that evidence, the court must draw all available factual inferences in favor of the non-moving party. Wellesley v. Debevoise & Plimpton LLP, 2009 WL 3004102, at *1 (2d Cir. Sept. 21, 2009). A party opposing summary judgment may not rely solely on allegations in the complaint to establish a genuine issue of material fact. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e); Graham v. Lewinski, 848 F.2d 342, 344 (2d Cir. 1988). Moreover, pursuant to this court's local rules, the non-moving party must explicitly state the specific material facts as to which it contends there is or is not a genuine issue to be tried, and must support each such specification with a citation to admissible evidence in the record. Loc. Civ. R. 56.1.
I apply those legal standards to each of the City's cited reasons for dismissing each of Burke's claims. I start with Burke's disability discrimination claims, and turn first to the City's contention that Burke is not "disabled" within the meaning of the ADA. I note that its argument on that score relates only to Burke's second cause of action; as the parties correctly recognize, there is no dispute that Burke is disabled for purposes of the state and local statutes that he cites in support of his fourth and sixth causes of action. I next assess the City's contention that to the extent Burke purports to raise a [*19]  claim under the ADA on the ground that the City failed to accommodate his disability, he has failed to identify any accommodation that would have allowed him to continue working for the DOE.
I then turn to the City's arguments as to why none of Burke's claims of discrimination — on the basis of either age or disability — should proceed to trial pursuant to the familiar three-step inquiry announced in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 802 (1973). Finally, I examine the City's argument that Burke has failed to adduce sufficient evidence to warrant a trial on his claim of a hostile work environment.
A. "Disability" Under The ADA
The City seeks summary judgment on Burke's ADA claim in part because it contends that Burke does not have a "disability" within the meaning of the ADA — and is therefore not within the class of persons the statute protects — because his high blood pressure is controlled and does not substantially impair Burke's ability to perform a major life activity.
The parties agree that one of Burke's tasks in establishing a prima facie case under the ADA is to demonstrate that he suffers from a disability within the meaning of the ADA. See Adams v. Master Carver of Jamestown, Ltd., 91 Fed. Appx. 718, 720 (2d Cir. 2004) (cited in Memo. at 4); Opp. at 8 (citing cases). That in turn requires him to prove that he suffers [*20]  from "a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more [of his] major life activities[.]" 42 U.S.C. § 12102(1)(A).13
To satisfy that standard, Burke must prove that he is either "[u]nable to perform" a given major life activity or that, as compared to an average person, he is "significantly restricted" as to "condition, manner, or duration" in performing it. Capobianco v. City of New York, 422 F.3d 47, 57 (2d Cir. 2005) (citing 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(1)); DeCastro v. Lahood, 2009 WL 1067030, at *4 (E.D.N.Y. Apr. 21, 2009). Burke must prove that any limitation on which he relies is "considerable" rather than "minor." Toyota Motor Mfg., Kentucky, Inc. v. Williams, 534 U.S. 184, 196-97 (2002) (cautioning that "substantially limits" should be "interpreted strictly to create a demanding standard"), superseded by the ADA Amendments Act of 2008, Pub. L. 110-325, 122 Stat. 3553 (2008).14 In determining whether there is sufficient evidence of disability to withstand summary judgment, the courts should consider the nature and severity of the impairment, its duration, and its impact over time. See id. (citing 29 C.F.R. § 1630(j)(2)). Moreover, the court must take into account both the positive and negative effect of any "measures to correct for, or mitigate, a physical or mental impairment[.]" Sutton, 527 U.S. at 482-83; DeCastro, 2009 WL 1067030, at *4.
Burke argues that he has established that he suffers from three physical impairments: hypertension, dyslipidemia, and chest pains. Opp. at 10 (citing Wolin Dec. Ex. 5 (medical records)).15 The City [*21]  does not seriously contest that he has been diagnosed with such conditions, but instead argues that Burke has not established that they impaired him in the performance of any major life activity. Memo. at 5-6.16
Burke asserts that the record creates a triable issue of fact with respect to several distinct life activities: working, driving, "performing functions at home ... and engaging in his leisure activities." Opp. at 11 (citing Klepfish Dec. Ex. A ("Burke Dep.") at 131-33). Although he does not explicitly assert that the following also qualify as impaired life activities, it appears that Burke intends to argue that his condition impaired his ability to engage in "stair climbing, ... pushing and pulling, and ... heavy lifting." Id. (citing First Accommodation Request). As explained below, Burke has not established a genuine dispute of material fact as to any of the activities he cites.
Working. Working is plainly a major life activity. See Bragdon v. Abbott, 524 U.S. 624, 638-39 (1998). However, under the law in effect at relevant times, an individual is not substantially limited in that major life activity for purposes of the ADA unless he is "significantly restricted in the ability to perform either a class of jobs or a broad range of jobs." See [*22]  29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(3)(I); see also Ryan v. Grae & Rybicki, P.C., 135 F.3d 867, 872 (2d Cir. 1998); Giallanza v. Time Warner Cable, 2009 WL 857502, at *8 (W.D.N.Y. Mar. 30, 2009) (evidence that "plaintiff's anxiety disorder made performing his job functions difficult, but not impossible" did not suffice to establish a substantial limitation of plaintiff's major life activity of working).
There is no evidence in the record to suggest that Burke's condition significantly restricted his ability to perform a range or class of jobs. Rather, he claims only that his high blood pressure "at times" prevented him from going to school and "sometimes" prevented him from conducting his class during the working hours. Such vague statements do not suffice to permit a fact-finder to conclude that Burke was substantially limited in his ability to work in general. See, e.g., Ragusa v. Malverne Union Free Sch. Dist., 582 F. Supp. 2d 326, 344 (E.D.N.Y. 2008). To the contrary, all of the medical evidence in the record suggests that to the extent any medical intervention was necessary, it was on a few isolated occasions and did not impair his ability either to teach generally, or to teach special education classes in particular. Indeed, the only evidence on which Burke relies for the proposition that his hypertension was uncontrolled is a letter from a doctor who nevertheless opined on February 15, 2005, that Burke would likely "be fit to return [*23]  to work" three days later. Wolin Dec. Ex. 5 (letter from Frantz Jasmin, M.D.). Moreover, to the extent that Burke blames his poor attendance record — which was one of the reasons for the unsatisfactory rating about which he now complains — on his various maladies, he has failed to adduce sufficient evidence from which a jury could find that his absences were medically necessary.
Driving. Driving is not a major life activity for purposes of the ADA. See Capobianco, 422 F.3d at 58 n.7; Colwell v. Suffolk County Police Dept., 158 F.3d 635, 643 (2d Cir. 1998). In any event, Burke has not sufficiently established that his hypertension or any other malady has significantly impaired his ability to drive on a long-term or permanent basis.
Household functions. Burke relies on testimony that his high blood pressure prevented him "from doing chores in the house that needed to be done." Burke Dep. at 132. The only such chore that Burke named is "washing the dishes." Id. While dish-washing is a basic household chore that can qualify as a major life activity, see, e.g., Toyota Motor Mfg., 534 U.S. at 202, a plaintiff purporting to establish it must demonstrate that the disability at issue prevents him from engaging in the activity to such an extent that it implicates his ability to live in a healthy or sanitary environment. See Marinelli v. City of Erie, Pa., 216 F.3d 354, 362-63 (3d Cir. 2000); [*24]  Mikell v. Waldbaum, Inc., 2003 WL 21018844, at *5 (S.D.N.Y. May 5, 2003) (dismissing ADA claim despite plaintiff's claim that her carpal tunnel syndrome and bursitis significantly restricted her ability to work, perform household chores, walk, or get dressed). Burke has not adduced sufficient evidence to support a finding that his physical condition significantly impairs his ability to wash dishes. He testified only that he is unable wash the dishes "not every day, but some days." Burke Dep. at 132. "A 'substantial limitation' is not a mere difference in an ability to perform a particular act." Albertson's, Inc. v. Kirkingburg, 527 U.S. 555, 565 (1999). The ADA is concerned only "with limitations that are in fact substantial." Id.
Leisure activities. Burke's attempt to rely on leisure activities as a basis for avoiding summary judgment fails for two reasons. First, engaging in leisure activities is not a major life activity for purposes of the ADA. See Kirkendall v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 964 F. Supp. 106, 111 (W.D.N.Y. 1997); Cannon-Stokes v. Potter, 2005 WL 2978713, at *8 (N.D. Ill. Nov. 3, 2005); Popko v. Pennsylvania State Univ., 994 F. Supp. 293, 298 (M.D. Pa. 1998). Second, Burke testified only that he is "sometimes" unable to go to the library or out to movie as a result of his physical condition — and that he is "sometimes not" so affected. Such evidence does not suffice to establish a disability.
Activities mentioned in the First Accommodation Request. As noted above, it is not clear that Burke even tries to argue that [*25]  he should be considered disabled because of significant impairment to his ability to climb stairs, push and pull, or lift heavy objects; rather, he merely notes that he sought an accommodation with respect to those activities without ever explicitly arguing that any of them qualify as a "major life activity" for purposes of the ADA.
To the extent Burke does wish to make such an argument, it — like the others Burke raises more explicitly — fails for two basic reasons. First, climbing stairs is not a sufficiently significant or essential function to qualify as major life activity under the ADA. See, e.g., Addoo v. New York City Bd. of Educ., 2006 WL 5838977, at *6 (E.D.N.Y. Dec. 18, 2006) (quoting Piascyk v. City of New Haven, 64 F. Supp. 2d 19, 26 (D. Conn. 1999)); but see Kriskovic v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 948 F. Supp. 1355, 1364-65 (E.D. Wis. 1996) (assuming without deciding that climbing stairs is a major life activity). Pushing and pulling and lifting likewise appears to fall outside the category of major life activities that the ADA covers, at least to the extent that such exertion is not necessary for maintaining health and sanitation. Lifting can generally qualify as a major life activity, Colwell, 158 F.3d at 642 (quoting Ryan, 135 F.3d at 870), but Burke cites no authority for the proposition that lifting heavy objects in particular is a major life activity, and I am aware of none.17 Second, Burke has not shown that he was "substantially limited" [*26]  as to any of these activities. With respect to stairs, he stated only that he experienced "shortness of breath climbing stairs." First Accommodation Request. That is not a sufficient impairment to qualify as a disability. See Addoo, 2006 WL 5838977, at *6 ; Milford v. New York City Bd. of Health, 2005 WL 195561, *6 (E.D.N.Y. Jan. 27, 2005); Watson v. Arts & Entm't Television Network, 2008 WL 793596, at *11 (S.D.N.Y. Mar. 26, 2008); Wood v. Crown Redi-Mix, Inc., 339 F.3d 682, 685 (8th Cir. 2003); Kriskovic, 948 F. Supp. at 1364-65. The evidence of limitation with respect to the remaining activities is even more sparse: Burke did not mention any such limitation in his deposition, and his First Accommodation Request merely asked for a position that did not require pushing and pulling or heavy lifting, without making any attempt to explain why such an accommodation was necessary. On this evidence, there is no basis for finding Burke disabled, within the meaning of the ADA, with respect to any of the activities mentioned in his First Accommodation Request.18
I thus conclude that the record does not contain sufficient evidence to support a finding that Burke is disabled within the meaning of the ADA. On this basis alone, I respectfully recommend that the court can and should partially grant the City's motion and dismiss the second cause of action. See Ragusa, 582 F. Supp. 2d at 344.
B. Reasonable Accommodation Under The ADA
The City further argues that the court should dismiss Burke's ADA claim to the extent [*27]  he relies on a theory that the defendants failed to accommodate his request for a reasonable accommodation of his disability. Memo. at 6-10. I agree.
The parties generally agree about the applicable legal standard: Burke bears the burden of proving the existence of an accommodation that would have permitted him to perform the essential functions of his job, and his reasonable accommodation claim fails unless he establishes that an effective accommodation existed that would have rendered him otherwise qualified. Jackan v. New York State Dept. of Labor, 205 F.3d 562, 566 (2d Cir. 2000) (quoting Borkowski v. Valley Cent. Sch. Dist., 63 F.3d 131, 137-38 (2d Cir. 1995)). Moreover, it is Burke's burden to establish that he informed the City that he needed an accommodation and that the City thereafter failed to engage in the required interactive process to attempt to meet Burke's reasonable needs. Burke himself quotes from applicable case law to acknowledge his responsibility to "suggest the existence of a plausible accommodation, the costs of which, facially, do not clearly exceed its benefits." Opp. at 17 (quoting Borkowski, 63 F.3d at 138).
After acknowledging his burden, however, Burke does literally nothing to demonstrate that he has met it. The entirety of his argument as to why the record in this case precludes summary judgment on the failure-to-accommodate theory is the following: [*28] 
An application of these principles of law to the facts and circumstances of the instant action makes it clear that defendants did not fulfill their obligations and that plaintiff has presented sufficient evidence to create genuine issues of material fact with regard to the reasonable accommodation issue.
Opp. at 17 (citing nothing).
Just what those genuine issues of material fact might be, Burke never explains. Nor could he do so: the record conclusively establishes that Burke cannot prevail on his reasonable accommodation claim. First, the City granted Burke's first request for an accommodation — in which he claimed that he had problems climbing stairs to his fifth-floor classroom — by transferring him to a school with an elevator. See Giallanza, 2009 WL 857502, at *9 (finding failure-to-accommodate claim insufficient where defendant granted plaintiff's request).
Second, although Burke did later submit a Second Accommodation Request, he has never identified precisely what accommodation existed, or that he was denied, that would have allowed him to succeed as a Special Education teacher. Whatever accommodation Burke might now think would have been appropriate, it is clear that one such accommodation he did not request was an assignment [*29]  to a class other than MIS II. Although Burke may be able to prove that he preferred some such other assignment, and may even be able to prove that he was entitled to it as a matter of seniority, the record is clear that Burke consistently expressed his willingness, notwithstanding any disability, to teach an MIS II class if necessary. Indeed, he explicitly requested such an assignment in advance of the 2004-2005 school year. Klepfish Dec. Ex. G. The fact that an MIS II position was his least preferred assignment is, in this context, irrelevant — the fact that he requested it at all demonstrates that he could not have perceived such an assignment to be one that would preclude him from the successful performance of his duties. Moreover, even when he finally did submit his Second Accommodation Request, he did not ask to be accommodated by excluding MIS II classes from the range of possible teaching assignments — indeed, he did not propose any specific accommodation at all. See Second Accommodation Request.19
Finally, the record does not support the idea that the City refused to engage in an interactive process to accommodate Burke's perceived need for an accommodation. No such process was [*30]  needed after the First Accommodation Request: rather than engage in any process, the DOE simply granted Burke's request. Nor did the City fail to fulfill any such obligation with respect to the Second Accommodation Request: in light of its finding that Burke had failed to establish medical necessity for any accommodation, it was under no obligation to suggest something other than what Burke had requested (even assuming that Burke had requested anything in particular). To the extent that the DOE might have had some obligation to engage in an interactive process with respect to its determination that there was no medical necessity warranting accommodation, it plainly did so: it invited Burke to renew his request by submitting new or additional medical evidence.20 As far as the record shows, Burke never did so.
Accordingly, I conclude that the record cannot support a finding in Burke's favor on his failure-to-accommodate claim under the ADA. For this reason as well, I respectfully recommend that the court partially grant the City's motion by dismissing the second cause of action.21
C. The Discrimination Claims
In the absence of any direct evidence [*31]  of discriminatory animus, the City correctly analyzes both the federal age-and disability-discrimination claims under the McDonnell Douglas test, and Burke does not take issue with that approach. See, e.g., Galabya v. New York City Bd. of Educ., 202 F.3d 636, 639 (2d Cir. 2000). Moreover, the City asserts that the court should apply the same approach in assessing Burke's claims under New York State's Human Rights Laws, and Burke does not argue to the contrary. See Sista v. CDC IXIS North Am., Inc., 2005 WL 356973, at *6 n.7 (S.D.N.Y. Feb. 15, 2005) (cited (albeit with incorrect citation information) in Memo. at 10 n.8). And although no party mentions it, the decision in Sista also held that the same analysis should be applied to discrimination claims under corresponding New York City laws. Id. (citing cases). Accordingly, I apply the three-part McDonnell Douglas analysis to each of Burke's discrimination claims in all six causes of action.
Under that test, the court first assesses whether the plaintiff has established a prima facie case of discrimination. Ryan, 135 F.3d at 869. The burden then shifts to the employer to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its employment action. McDonnell Douglas Corp., 411 U.S. at 802. If the employer meets this burden, the presumption of intentional discrimination disappears, but the plaintiff can still prove disparate treatment by offering evidence demonstrating [*32]  that the employer's explanation is pretextual. See Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products, Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143 (2000). "Although intermediate evidentiary burdens shift back and forth under this framework, '[t]he ultimate burden of persuading the trier of fact that the defendant intentionally discriminated against the plaintiff remains at all times with the plaintiff.'" Ragusa, 582 F. Supp. 2d at 339 (quoting Reeves, 530 U.S. at 143).
1. The Prima Facie Case
In order to establish a prima facie case of discrimination, Burke must establish, among other things, that he was a member of the relevant protected class and that he was subjected to an adverse employment action on the basis of his membership in that class. There is no question that Burke was within the protected class for purposes of his age discrimination claims or his disability discrimination claims under state and city law, and I have addressed above the City's contention that Burke was not within the protected class for purposes of the ADA. The City contends, however, that Burke cannot establish a prima facie case of discrimination both because he was not subjected to a cognizable adverse employment action and because the circumstances of the actions about which he complains do not give rise to an inference of discrimination. See Memo. at 10-17. I disagree [*33]  as to the former but agree as to the latter.
Adverse employment action. An adverse employment action can be any "materially adverse change in the terms and conditions of [a plaintiff's] employment[,]" Kassner v. 2nd Avenue Delicatessen Inc., 496 F.3d 229, 238 (2d Cir. 2007), but cannot be established with proof of nothing more disruptive than inconvenience or a change in job responsibilities. Terry v. Ashcroft, 336 F.3d 128, 138 (2d Cir. 2003) (quoting Galabya, 202 F.3d at 640). Materially adverse changes must be significant and may include "a termination of employment, a demotion evidenced by a decrease in wage or salary, a less distinguished title, a material loss of benefits, significantly diminished material responsibilities, or other indices ... unique to a particular situation." Galabya, 202 F.3d at 640. Under this expansive standard, I conclude that Burke has adduced sufficient evidence from which a fact-finder could conclude that he was subjected to an adverse employment action, either based on his assignment to the MIS II position despite his request for a different assignment, or based on the extent to which his performance in that position at P.S. 268Q was monitored and criticized. See Bernheim v. Litt, 79 F.3d 318, 324-26 (2d Cir. 1996) (adverse employment actions may include negative evaluations or classroom assignments that aggravate a physical disability).
Inference of discrimination [*34] . In opposing the City's motion for summary judgment, Burke never clearly explains the circumstances from which a fact-finder could infer that the adverse employment actions about which he complains were the result of either age-or disability-based animus. See Opp. at 18-22. As best I can discern from his argument, Burke believes a jury could infer such animus based on two factual propositions: that the observations and criticisms of Burke's performance were unjust, and that he was the sole teacher subjected to such treatment. For the reasons set forth above in describing the factual record, I conclude that Burke has not demonstrated the existence of any evidence tending to show that he was treated unjustly aside from his subjective perception. That is not enough to create a triable issue of fact. Nor has Burke adduced sufficient evidence to allow a jury to find discriminatory intent simply because no other teacher was similarly monitored and criticized. Such a conclusion would require the jury to compare the DOE's treatment of Burke with its treatment of others — and although he has established that no other teacher was similarly disciplined, he has not cited any evidence to support a conclusion [*35]  that the reason for the difference was anything other than that no other teacher's performance was as poor as Burke's. In this context, Judge Hurley's reasoning in a recent similar case is instructive:
Summary judgment is generally inappropriate where questions of the defendant's state of mind are at issue, Gelb v. Board of Elections of the City of New York, 224 F.3d 149, 157 (2d. Cir. 2000), and should thus be granted with caution in employment discrimination cases. Gallo v. Prudential Residential Servs., Ltd. P'ship, 22 F.3d 1219, 1224 (2d Cir. 1994); Carlton v. Mystic Transp., Inc., 202 F.3d 129, 134 (2d Cir. 2000). Nonetheless, "summary judgment remains available to reject discrimination claims in cases lacking genuine issues of material fact." Chambers v. TRM Copy Ctrs. Corp., 43 F.3d 29, 40 (2d Cir. 1994). "The summary judgment rule would be rendered sterile ... if the mere incantation of intent or state of mind would operate as a talisman to defeat an otherwise valid motion." Meiri v. Dacon, 759 F.2d 989, 998 (2d Cir. 1985). "[T]he salutary purposes of summary judgment — avoiding protracted, expensive and harassing trials — apply no less to discrimination cases than to commercial or other areas of litigation." Id. "When no rational jury could find in favor of the nonmoving party because the evidence to support its case is so slight, there is no genuine issue of material fact and a grant of summary judgment is proper." Gallo, 22 F.3d at 1224.
Ragusa, 582 F. Supp. 2d at 338-39. I therefore conclude that the court can and should grant the City's motion for summary judgment [*36]  as to all of Burke's claims on the ground that he has failed to adduce sufficient evidence to establish a prima facie case of discrimination on any impermissible basis.
2. The Proffered Legitimate Reason For The Actions At Issue
The City has proffered a variety of facially legitimate reasons for the employment actions about which Burke complains. To the extent that Burke complains of his assignment to the MIS II class at P.S. 268Q, the City notes that Burke was qualified for an MIS II assignment and included it in the list of positions he would accept when he was not selected to continue at I.S. 192Q when the latter school went into redesign. The City also notes that it only assigned Burke to P.S. 268Q, which had an elevator, as an accommodation of Burke's request for an assignment that would not entail climbing stairs. To the extent Burke complains that he was given the assignment he least preferred, and that the better assignments went to teachers with less experience, the City points to union rules that prevented it from displacing such teachers to satisfy Burke. Finally, in response to Burke's complaints about the extent and results of the monitoring of his teaching and the criticism [*37]  of his attendance record, the City contends that Burke simply did not perform well at P.S. 268Q, that it was required to conduct some monitoring, and that Burke's performance justified its criticisms. See generally Memo. at 11-19. Burke offers no argument to the contrary, and for good reason. Regardless of whether the City's proffered explanations are true, they are facially legitimate and non-discriminatory. Accordingly, Burke focuses his argument on the evidence that he claims demonstrates that the City's proffered reasons for the actions at issue are pretextual, and I now turn to that portion of the dispute.
3. Pretext
The City having produced evidence tending to show that the employment actions about which Burke complains were taken for legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons, it has rebutted any presumption of discrimination that would have arisen even if Burke could establish a prima facie case. As a result, the burden shifts back to Burke to show the existence of evidence from which a jury could infer that the City's proffered reasons are pretextual. See Raytheon Co. v. Hernandez, 540 U.S. 44, 53 (2003); Kemp v. Metro-North R.R., 316 Fed. Appx. 25, 27 (2d Cir. 2009); Mandell v. County of Suffolk, 316 F.3d 368, 380-81 (2d Cir. 2003); Mario v. P.C. Food Markets, Inc., 313 F.3d 758, 767 (2d Cir. 2002). Burke need not show that the City's "proffered reasons were false or played no role in the employment decision, but only that they [*38]  were not the only reasons and that the prohibited factor was at least one of the 'motivating' factors." Cronin v. Aetna Life Ins. Co., 46 F.3d 196, 203 (2d Cir. 1995); see also Renz v. Grey Adver. Inc., 135 F.3d 217, 222 (2d Cir. 1997) (plaintiff need only prove that prohibited consideration "played a motivating role in, or contributed to, the employer's decision."). Moreover, even though the presumption of discrimination attendant to the establishment of a prima facie case "drops out of the picture" once a defendant proffers a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason to meet its burden of production, St. Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 511 (1993), Burke may nevertheless rely on (and the fact-finder may consider) evidence supporting the prima facie case in connection with his attempt to show the City's explanation to be pretextual. See Texas Dept. of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 255 n.10 (1981); see also Reeves, 530 U.S. at 142.
Burke's claims of discrimination cannot withstand the application of these standards. In attempting to demonstrate that the City's explanations were pretextual, he again rehearses essentially the same recitation of evidence that does not even suffice to establish a prima facie case. See Opp. at 23-26. Burke starts with evidence that P.S. 268Q Principal Stewart was surprised at Burke's assignment to her school, and unhappy that it came about when she was in the process of hiring another person to fill the MIS II position [*39]  there. Opp. at 23 (citing Stewart Dep. at 14, 20-23). In light of the fact that Burke's assignment to P.S. 268Q occurred after the start of the school year as a result of the DOE's decision to accede to Burke's own First Accommodation Request, such evidence can hardly establish pretext.
Similarly insufficient is Burke's attempt to refute the City's explanations concerning the monitoring of his teaching or the criticisms of his poor attendance. Burke may be able to prove that he was monitored slightly more than other teachers, but there is nothing in the record that remotely suggests the City's explanation masks discrimination on the basis of age or disability. Nor can Burke reasonably claim that the criticism of his absenteeism was pretextual simply by demonstrating that he did not use all of his available sick days: the City relied not just on the number of absences, but also on the fact that they were unsupported by evidence that a doctor had advised Burke to remain at home and that the absences frequently occurred before or after weekends or holidays. Finally, even if Burke can prevail in litigating the question of whether he was entitled to the assignment of his preference under union rules, [*40]  that would not establish that the City's view to the contrary was pretextual.
In short, even if Burke could establish a prima facie case of discrimination on any of his claims, the record conclusively demonstrates that he could not meet the additional burden of rebutting as pretextual the City's legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons for the treatment about which he complains. I therefore respectfully recommend that the court can and should grant the City's motion to dismiss all of Burke's claims on summary judgment on this ground as well.
D. The Hostile Work Environment Claim
In order to withstand summary judgment on his hostile work environment claim, Burke must point to evidence that his workplace "permeated with discriminatory intimidation, ridicule, and insult, that [was] sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of [his] employment." Aulicino v. New York City Dept. of Homeless Servs.,     F.3d    , 2009 WL 2854028, at *7 (2d Cir. Sept. 8, 2009) (internal citations omitted).22 The court must consider the totality of the circumstances, including such factors as "(1) the frequency of the discriminatory conduct; (2) its severity; (3) whether the conduct was physically threatening or humiliating, or a 'mere offensive utterance'; (4) whether the conduct unreasonably interfered with [*41]  plaintiff's work; and (5) what psychological harm, if any, resulted." Id. (internal quotations omitted). The frequency and severity factor are the "principal focus" of the analysis; the remaining factors are subsidiary considerations within the inquiry into severity. Id. Moreover, Burke cannot succeed if he merely demonstrates the existence of a hostile environment; he must also demonstrate that he was subjected to the hostility because of his membership in a protected class. See Kassner, 496 F.3d at 238; Brennan v. Metro. Opera Ass'n, 192 F.3d 310, 318 (2d Cir.1999).
Burke largely acknowledges this standard, but makes no substantive effort to show that he can survive its application. See Opp. at 27-28. After setting forth the applicable legal principles, the entirety of his argument is the following conclusory sentence: "An application of these principles to the record herein reveals that plaintiff can survive summary judgment on his hostile work environment claim." Opp. at 28. Just what evidence in the record might suffice for this purpose, Burke does not say. In my view, the omission is understandable: there is no such evidence. Burke's hostile work environment claims largely track his diffuse claims of discrimination on the basis of age and disability: he contends that [*42]  he was subjected to a hostile environment because he was frequently observed trying to do his job and subjected to substantive criticism for the way he did it and the frequency with which he failed to show up and try. Moreover, Burke does not cite a single abusive comment concerning his age or physical condition, and my review of the record reveals none. Such is simply not the stuff of a hostile work environment claim. I respectfully recommend that the court grant this aspect of the City's motion and dismiss on summary judgment all of Burke's hostile work environment claims.
III. Recommendation
For the reasons set forth above, I respectfully recommend that the court grant the defendants' motion to dismiss all of plaintiff Kaestner Burke's claims on summary judgment.
IV. Objections
Any objections to this Report and Recommendation must be filed with the Clerk no later than October 19, 2009. Failure to file objections within this period waives the right to appeal the District Court's order. See 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1); Fed. R. Civ. P. 72(b)(2); Beverly v. Walker, 118 F.3d 900 (2d Cir. 1997); Savoie v. Merchants Bank, 84 F.3d 52 (2d Cir. 1996).
SO ORDERED.
Dated: Brooklyn, New York
September 30, 2009
/s/ James Orenstein
JAMES ORENSTEIN
U.S. Magistrate Judge


End of Document

