Burnell v. Tealwood Care Ctrs., Inc.
United States District Court for the District of Minnesota
July 10, 2018, Decided; July 10, 2018, Filed
Civil File No. 16-3001 (MJD/KMM)

Reporter
2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 152351 *
NATALIE BURNELL, Plaintiff, v. TEALWOOD CARE CENTERS, INC., doing business as Tealwood Senior Living; HELEN STREET SENIOR HOUSING, LLC, doing business as Polar Ridge Senior Living; and TEALWOOD MANAGEMENT, LLC, Defendants.
Counsel:  [*1] Heather M. Gilbert and Terra L. Frazier, Gilbert Law PLLC, Counsel for Plaintiff.
Alex Rubenstein, Elizabeth A. Patton, and Robert C. Castle, Fox Rothschild LLP, Counsel for Defendants.
Judges: Michael J. Davis, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Michael J. Davis
Opinion



MEMORANDUM OF LAW & ORDER

I. INTRODUCTION
This matter is before the Court on Defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment. [Docket No. 25] The Court heard oral argument on February 22, 2018. The motion for summary judgment is granted in part and denied in part.

II. BACKGROUND

A. Factual Background

1. The Parties
Defendant Tealwood Management, LLC ("Tealwood") is a Minnesota limited liability company that does business in Minnesota and maintains its principal place of business in Minnesota. (Compl. ¶ 11; Ans. ¶ 11.)
In 2014 and early 2015, Tealwood prepared to open a new senior living facility in North St. Paul, Polar Ridge Senior Living ("Polar Ridge"), in April 2015. (Patton Aff., Ex. 16, Video Tour of Polar Ridge at 00:35.) Polar Ridge has two connected buildings with 21 memory care units, 54 assisted living units, and 39 independent living units. (Id. at 0:55-1:14) It is approximately 154,000 square feet with multiple stories and long hallways. (Id. [*2]  at 1:44.) All of the employees who work at Polar Ridge are employed by Tealwood. (Pl. Ex. 66, Groff Dep. 14.)
Defendant Tealwood Care Centers, Inc. d/b/a Tealwood Senior Living ("TCC") is a Minnesota corporation that does business in Minnesota and maintains its principal place of business in Minnesota. (Compl.¶ 9; Ans. ¶ 9.) TCC provided assistance to Tealwood regarding employment decisions. (Patton Aff., Ex. 45, Defs. Resp. to Req. for Admission No. 43.)
Defendant Helen Street Senior Housing, LLC d/b/a Polar Ridge Senior Living ("Helen Street") is a Minnesota limited liability entity that does business in Minnesota and maintains its principal place of business in Minnesota. (Compl. ¶ 15; Ans. ¶ 15.) Helen Street owns the Polar Ridge facility building. (Pl. Ex. 66, Groff Dep. 13.) Helen Street has no employees. (Id. 22-23.) Tealwood provides management services to Helen Street. (Groff Dep. 18, 21, 24-25, 28-29.)
Erin Immel was Director of Human Resources and employed by TCC. (Patton Aff., Ex. 1, Defs. Ans. to Interrog. No. 1.) David Lucia was Vice President of Human Resources for TCC. (Id.) Chris Krebsbach was Vice President of Operations, was employed by TCC, and was Plaintiff's supervisor. (Patton [*3]  Aff., Ex. 1, Defs. Ans. to Interrog. Nos. 2, 12.) Gail Sheridan was Chief Clinical Operations Officer. (Id. No. 2.) Greg Brown was Chief Operating Officer for TCC. (Id. No. 12.)

2. Plaintiff's Position as Executive Director
On August 7, 2014, Plaintiff Natalie Burnell received a letter from Krebsbach stating: "On behalf of Tealwood Senior Living, I am pleased to offer you a position as the Executive Director of Polar Ridge Senior Living. This position is an Exempt position with a salary of $80,000 per year." (Pl. Ex. 3.) The letter lists the benefits package provided by "Tealwood Senior Living, Inc." (Id.) Burnell signed the letter, thus accepting the offer, on August 8, 2014. (Id.)
On August 28, 2014, Burnell began working as Polar Ridge's Executive Director. (Patton Aff., Ex. 17.) According to Defendants, Burnell was employed by Tealwood. (Patton Aff., Ex. 1, Defs. Ans. to Interrog. No 3.)
When Burnell started her employment, she signed a Job Description for the Executive Director position that provided the following "General Description:"
Overall management of the building. Monitors the delivery services provided to the residents. Initiates ongoing assessment of resident needs. Assists [*4]  in developing services and/or programs to meet the needs of the resident community. This includes public relations, marketing and oversight of the building and its programs.
(Pl, Ex. 4, Job Description.) The Job Description also included a long list of "Responsibilities/Duties," including "Provides tours and explanation of services to potential clients, families and referrals;" "Is willing to carry cell phone and be 'on call' for emergencies;" and "Routinely inspects building, grounds, and equipment for update and condition." (Id.) Burnell knew that her position sometimes required work on weekends. (Patton Aff., Ex. 3, Burnell Dep. 142.) Burnell's benefit package included 30 days paid time off and 24 days of extended sick leave. (Pl. Exs. 3, 6.)
From August 28, 2014, until March 28, 2015, Burnell worked to prepare Polar Ridge for residents and to hire and train staff. (Patton Ex. 1, Defs. Ans. to Interrogs. 3, 6.) No residents had yet moved into the building as of March 27, 2015. (Pl. Ex. 1, Burnell Dep. 53-54.) Krebsbach told Burnell that her job would increase in intensity during the opening period. (Patton Aff., Ex. 4, Krebsbach Dep. 37-38.)
Polar Ridge has ramps, extra-wide door frames, [*5]  automatic door openers at all entrances, and three elevators. (Pl. Ex. 5, Krebsbach Dep. 344-48.) During March 2015, Burnell sometimes used the stairs to get around Polar Ridge because they were faster than walking to the center of the building and then using the elevator. (Patton Aff., Ex. 3, Burnell Dep. 360.)
On April 1, 2015, Polar Ridge opened and new residents began to move in. (Patton Aff., Ex. 3, Burnell Dep. 142.) At that time, Polar Ridge was completing its infrastructure, hiring employees, giving tours to prospective residents and their families, and assisting residents as they moved in. (Patton Aff., Ex. 1, Defs. Ans. to Interrog. No. 3.)

3. Burnell's Injury
On Saturday, March 28, 2015, Burnell slipped on stairs and fractured her left tibia and fibula. (Patton Aff., Ex. 3, Burnell Dep. 63, 76; Pl. Ex. 10.) Burnell received medical care at the emergency room and was referred to an orthopedic surgeon. (Pl. Ex. 1, Burnell Dep. 77, 80-81.)
On March 28, Burnell emailed Tealwood that she was in the emergency room with a "broken ankle," would need surgery, and would probably not be able to do tours because she would need to elevate her leg and would be in "a high level of pain for [*6]  several days." (Patton Aff., Ex. 20.) On March 29, she emailed Tealwood and told them that she had broken her "tibia and fibula" and that it was "possible that [she] [wouldn't] be able to come in this week." (Pl. Ex. 29.)
In internal communications, multiple Tealwood employees acknowledged that Burnell had suffered a serious injury and would be out for a significant period of time. (See, e.g., Pl. Ex. 15, Gail Sheridan March 28 Email ("Unbelievable. She will be out a long time!!!"); Pl. Ex. 17, Sheridan March 29 Email ("[Burnell] will be off a very long time . . . . and will be non weight bearing for some time."); Pl. Ex. 18, Greg Brown Mar. 29 Email ("It sounds like [Burnell] messed her leg up pretty bad and won't be of any use to us for awhile.").)
On March 30, Burnell visited an orthopedic surgeon who sent her to the emergency room at Woodwinds Hospital to see the on-call orthopedic surgeon. (Pl. Ex. 1, Burnell Dep. 80-81; Pl. Ex. 10.) She was kept overnight for surgery the following day. (Pl. Ex. 1, Burnell Dep. 82-83.) On March 31, orthopedic surgeon Lori Reed placed multiple pins in Burnell's leg. (Pl. Ex. 9, Schosheim Report at 3.)
On April 2, Greg Brown met David Lucia to discuss [*7]  options for Burnell, including moving her to an interim Executive Director position and hiring a new Executive Director at Polar Ridge, while only paying Burnell until she had exhausted her paid time off and extended sick leave and then being able to move her back into a Tealwood position in the future when appropriate. (Pl. Ex. 20, Lucia Dep. 60; Pl. Ex. 21.)
On April 3, Burnell informed Tealwood that her doctor estimated her "recovery after surgery to be 4 to 6 weeks" but that she "might be able to work from home or work partial days" before that. (Patton Aff., Ex. 22.) Later on April 3, Sheridan asked Lucia to draft a letter to notify Burnell that she had to move to an "unscheduled or interim status" without pay and without benefits. (Pl. Ex. 21; Pl. Ex. 22.)
During Burnell's April 3 orthopedic appointment, Reed scheduled her for an April 6 surgery to insert two metal plates. (Pl. Ex. 1, Burnell Dep. 85-87; Pl. Ex. 9, Schosheim Report at 3-4.) Reed placed a controlled ankle motion ("CAM") boot on Burnell and released her to work from home beginning April 13, 2015. (Burnell Aff. ¶ 9.)
On April 5, 2015, Lucia circulated a draft letter for Sheridan, Brown, and Krebsbach to review. (Pl. [*8]  Ex. 23.) The letter stated: "Unfortunately, due to your short term of employment, your physician information, prognosis for pain management and rehabilitation, and these demands for this role, we will need to replace you as the Executive Director at Polar Ridge Senior Living." (Pl. Ex. 23.) The letter offered a position in an "Interim Executive Director status following the end of your accrued PTO [paid time off] and ESL [extended sick leave] time." (Id.) The draft letter further stated that the interim status would be unpaid and that, when she was "able to return to performing the essential functions of Executive Director . . . [she] would be considered for assignment to facilities that may need Executive Director support" and "would also be eligible to apply for consideration for other regular Executive Director positions that may be open at that time, or become available in the future." (Id.)
According to Defendants, an interim status employee is not "guaranteed a position" within Tealwood in the future. (Pl. Ex. 20, Lucia Dep. 266.) Lucia testified that Tealwood "routinely" places employees who were in interim status "noncompetitively," "simply placed in the [new] position" with [*9]  no "need to be a process of a competitive pool." (Pl. Ex. 20, Lucia Dep. 228.) "It's usually a dialogue." (Id.)
On April 14, 2015, Tealwood sent Burnell a Family and Medical Leave Act ("FMLA") notice informing her that she was not eligible to take FMLA leave because she had not worked at Tealwood for 12 months. (Patton Aff., Ex. 24.)

4. First Doctor's Note
On April 16, 2015, Tealwood received a letter from Burnell's doctor from the April 6 appointment and electronically signed on April 16, 2015. (Patton Aff., Ex. 25.) The letter stated that Burnell could "work from home and with limited mobility" "as tolerated" starting April 13, 2015. (Id.) It further stated that Burnell was "expected to make a full recovery." (Id.)
On April 16, Burnell emailed Tealwood and asked if she could start working from home. (Pl. Ex. 34.)

5. Burnell's Second Doctor's Note
On April 20, 2015, Burnell received a note from her doctor permitting her to return to work with certain restrictions and, so, Burnell returned to work on that date. (Burnell Aff. ¶ 3(v).) Burnell did not inform Tealwood or get permission to return to work at Polar Ridge before she arrived. (Patton Aff., Ex. 1, Defs. Ans. to Interrog. No. 3.)
 [*10] At 12:46 p.m., Burnell emailed Krebsbach a summary of her injury, surgeries, and accommodation requests. (Pl. Ex. 12.) Attached to the email was the second doctor's note from Reed, based on an April 17 appointment and signed April 20. (Id.) The doctor's note stated that Reed had reviewed the Job Description for the Executive Director position and
released [Burnell] to perform the essential functions of her job with the following accommodations:
• MUST NOT BEAR WEIGHT ON HER LEFT LEG FOR THE NEXT 8 WEEKS AND US[E] AMBULATORY AID TO MOVE-SUCH AS A SCOOTER, WHEELCHAIR OR OTHER.
• NO LIFTING ITEMS GREATER THAN 10LBS.
• ALLOWED EXTRA TIME FOR ANY REQUIRED ATTENDANCE OUTSIDE OF HER OFFICE AND FOR ANY DRIVING TO ANOTHER SITE THAN WHERE SHE IS OFFICED.
Ms. Burnell is approved to work 8 hours per day, 5 days per week effective April 20th, 2015 with the above accommodations. I will re-evaluate Ms. Burnell's condition and need for accommodations within the next 5-6 weeks and it[']s expected that Ms. Burnell will make a full recovery in the near future.
Please do not hesitate to call us with any questions or concerns. . . .
(Id.)
Once Krebsbach learned that Burnell was at Polar Ridge, he called Burnell to ascertain her status. (Patton Aff., Ex. 1, Defs. Ans. to Interrog. No. 3.) Burnell told Krebsbach that her [*11]  doctor had released her to return to work with certain restrictions. (Id.) Krebsbach told Burnell that she needed to go home and could not return to work until Tealwood evaluated her new restrictions in light of her duties related to opening Polar Ridge and could schedule a meeting with her regarding whether the restrictions could be met. (Id.; Pl. Ex. 5, Krebsbach Dep. 246-47.) At 4:37 p.m., Burnell sent Krebsbach an email summarizing their telephone conversation and stating that she wanted to work with the accommodations listed in her doctor's note. (Pl. Ex. 35.)
Tealwood understood Reed's reference to "8 hours per day, 5 days per week," to be restrictions imposed on Burnell. (Patton Aff., Ex. 6, Lucia Dep. 221; Patton Aff., Ex. 4, Krebsbach Dep. 238; Patton Aff., Ex. 8, Sheridan Dep. 137-38.) According to Plaintiff's expert, "[p]hysicians refer to full time work as '8 hours a day, 5 days a week'. This is a general term that implies that a patient can return to their normal employment hours." (Pl. Ex. 9, Schosheim Report at 4.) Burnell understood Reed's note to mean that she could return to work full-time. (Burnell Aff. ¶ 10.)

6. Transfer to Interim Status
On April 22, 2015, Lucia prepared [*12]  a letter to Burnell summarizing Tealwood's assessment of Burnell's injury, restrictions, and ability to perform the essential functions of the Executive Director position during the opening of Polar Ridge. (Patton Aff., Ex. 27.) The letter noted that Burnell would exhaust her PTO and ESL on Friday, April 24, 2015. (Id.) The letter stated that Tealwood concluded that Burnell could not perform the essential functions of the Executive Director position, which required "on-site leadership" "as well as unusually long hours and multi-tasking physical requirements." (Id.) It also offered to transfer Burnell to Interim Executive Director status for no pay, in order to continue as a Tealwood employee and, once she was able to perform the essential functions of the Executive Director, "be considered for assignment to facilities that may need Executive Director support" and "be eligible to apply for consideration for other regular Executive Director positions that may be open at that time, or become available in the future." (Id.) The letter concluded that, if Burnell was not interested in the interim status, her employment would end at the end of the business day on April 24, 2015. (Id.)
Later [*13]  on April 22, Krebsbach, Burnell, and Immel met. (Patton Aff., Ex., 4, Krebsbach Dep. 278-80, 300.) During the meeting, Krebsbach read and provided the letter to Burnell. (Id.) The meeting lasted fifteen minutes. (Pl. Ex. 41, Immel Dep. 64-65.) Krebsbach does not recall discussing Burnell's specific accommodation requests or why they could not be accommodated. (Patton Aff., Ex., 4, Krebsbach Dep. 281-82.) Burnell kept trying to ask about her requested accommodations but Krebsbach and Immel refused to discuss them and said she could not work until she had no medical restrictions. (Pl. Ex. 1, Burnell Dep. 143-44.) Immel told Burnell that Burnell's six-week recovery period could turn into six months. (Id. 144.)
Burnell asserts that, as of April 22, 2015, Tealwood had 14 open paid positions for which Burnell was qualified. (Burnell Aff. ¶ 3(bb); Pl. Ex. 42, List of Vacant Positions.) Immel and Lucia did not discuss the possibility of moving Burnell to one of those open positions. (Pl. Ex. 1, Burnell Dep. 174; Pl. Ex. 20, Lucia Dep. 260-61.) Burnell asserts that she would have been receptive to a transfer to some of the open positions if that option had been offered. (Pl. Ex. 1, Burnell Dep. 145-48.) [*14]  Defendants assert that, if Burnell had accepted the interim status offer, Tealwood would have considered her for other positions. (Patton Aff., Ex. 6, Lucia Dep. 130-32, 224-26.) However, Burnell did not accept the interim offer or express interest in any position other than the Polar Ridge Executive Director. (Id. 137, 182.)
On April 24, 2015, Burnell sent Tealwood an email stating:
I'm able to perform my essential job functions with reasonable accommodations as identified by my medical provider on April 20th 2015. While I understand that you are unwilling to accept (claiming hardship) or even to discuss my need for accommodations as a person of disability, I have NO intention of resigning my position as Executive Director at Polar Ridge. I am ready, willing and able to return to work immediately.
(Pl. Ex. 43.)
On April 24, Tealwood posted an open job position for Executive Director of Polar Ridge. (Patton Aff., Ex. 2, Defs. Ans. to Second Interrog. No. 3.)
On April 29, Lucia sent Burnell a letter stating that Tealwood thought Burnell was unable to perform the essential functions of her job and that her short-term injury did not constitute a disability. (Patton Aff., Ex. 29.) The letter further stated [*15]  that Tealwood would continue to employ her on an inactive basis. (Id.) The letter asked Burnell to tell Lucia when her doctor eliminated the "very short duration, transient hours, lifting, and mobility restrictions reflected in [the] April 20, 2015 communication," so they could work together to "find a position in [the Tealwood] organization commensurate with [her] skills, ability, experience, licensure, and other job-related consideration." (Id.)
After April 24, 2015, Burnell began applying for jobs outside Tealwood. (Patton Aff., Ex. 3, Burnell Dep. 164-65.)
On May 1, 2015, Burnell sent Lucia an email stating that the U.S. Department of Labor Job Accommodation Network would "verify that [her] broken leg is covered under ADA." (Patton Aff., Ex. 34.) Lucia responded that the employer makes the assessments for allegedly disabled employees and that Tealwood had made that assessment. (Id.) Burnell did not respond. (Patton Aff., Ex. 3, Burnell Dep. 170.)
On May 5, 2015, Lucia sent Burnell an email stating that, due to demands related to the opening of Polar Ridge, Tealwood had had to hire another person to serve as the Executive Director. (Patton Aff., Ex. 35.) The email continued that Tealwood [*16]  would continue her employment on inactive status and, once her doctor had released her "to return to work as an Executive Director, without the transient hours, lifting, and mobility restrictions which he previously established, [they] can work together on finding a position for [her] commensurate with [her] skills, abilities, experience, and licensure." (Id.) The letter ended by asking her to "please let [him] known when [she] [was] interested in pursuing her return to active employment in another position." (Id.) Burnell did not respond. (Patton Aff., Ex. 3, Burnell Dep. 164.)
On May 11, Tealwood hired Nathan Pearson as the new Executive Director of Polar Ridge. (Patton Aff., Ex. 11, Pearson Dep. 43-44.)
On May 21, 2015, Lucia sent Burnell an email asking her to "please keep [him] advised regarding [her] progress" and telling her to notify him when her doctor released her to work without the "very short duration, transient hours, lifting, and mobility restrictions" so that he could work with her to try to find a position within Tealwood. (Patton Aff., Ex. 38.) Burnell did not respond. (Patton Aff., Ex. 3, Burnell Dep. 185-86.)
On May 15, 2015, Burnell accepted a job as campus director [*17]  with SilverCrest Properties LLC. (Patton Aff., Ex. 37; Patton Aff., Ex. 3, Burnell Dep. 177.) She started work there on May 26. (Id.)
On June 12, 2015, through LinkedIn, Tealwood learned that Burnell had accepted other employment. (Pl. Ex. 52.)
On July 15, 2015, Lucia sent Burnell a letter stating that he expected she had been fully released to work by that time but she had not contacted him about returning to active employment and he understood that she had a new job, so he was prepared to convert her status from "inactive" to "resigned" unless Burnell informed him otherwise. (Patton Aff., Ex. 39.)

7. Burnell's Recovery
Burnell was still using a CAM boot through July 2015. (Pl. Ex. 9, Schosheim Report at 5.) During the fall of 2015, Burnell used a scooter to get around her new employer's multi-level facility with long halls. (Burnell Aff. ¶ 17.) In September 2015, Burnell was weight-bearing in a regular shoe but still experienced intermittent pain. (Pl. Ex. 9, Schosheim Report at 6.) Her long recovery period was not uncommon for the type of injury Burnell experienced. (Id. at 8.)
In March 2016, Burnell had a third surgery to remove the metal plates. (Pl. Ex. 9, Schosheim Report at 8.) She again [*18]  had to use ambulatory aids for several weeks after the surgery. (Burnell Aff. ¶ 20.) Burnell's restrictions were lifted in July 2016. (Id. ¶ 21.)

B. Procedural History
On September 6, 2016, Burnell filed a Complaint against Tealwood, TCC, and Helen Street in this Court. The Complaint alleges: Count 1: Violation of Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"); Count 2: Violation of the Prohibition of Retaliation in the ADA; Count 3: Violation of the Minnesota Human Rights Act ("MHRA"); Count 4: Violation of the Prohibition of Retaliation in the MHRA; and Count 5: Violation of Minnesota's Workers' Compensation Statutes. Count 5 was dismissed based on the parties' stipulation. [Docket Nos. 22, 24]
Defendants have now filed a motion for summary judgment on all counts.

III. DISCUSSION

A. Summary Judgment Standard
Summary judgment is appropriate if, viewing all facts in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact, and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a); Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). The party seeking summary judgment bears the burden of showing that there is no disputed issue of material fact. Celotex, 477 U.S. at 323. "A dispute is genuine if the evidence [*19]  is such that it could cause a reasonable jury to return a verdict for either party; a fact is material if its resolution affects the outcome of the case." Amini v. City of Minneapolis, 643 F.3d 1068, 1074 (8th Cir. 2011) (citing Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 252, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986)).

B. Disability Discrimination in Violation of the ADA and MHRA (Counts 1 and 3)

1. Legal Standard for Disability Discrimination
The ADA and MHRA prohibit an employer from discharging or otherwise discriminating against an employee because of the employee's disability. 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a); Minn. Stat. § 363A.08, subd. 2. Generally, a disability discrimination claim under the MHRA is analyzed in the same manner as a claim under the ADA. Kobus v. Coll. of St. Scholastica, Inc., 608 F.3d 1034, 1038 (8th Cir. 2010). Plaintiff can prove her claim under the direct evidence framework or the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework. See Kratzer v. Rockwell Collins, Inc., 398 F.3d 1040, 1044 (8th Cir. 2005).
To establish a prima facie case of disability discrimination, "an employee must show that she (1) is disabled within the meaning of the ADA, (2) is a qualified individual under the ADA, and (3) has suffered an adverse employment decision because of the disability." Kallail v. Alliant Energy Corp. Servs., Inc., 691 F.3d 925, 930 (8th Cir. 2012). "The burden then shifts to the employer to articulate some legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the employer's actions. If the employer articulates such a reason, the burden returns to the employee to show the employer's justification is a pretext." Lors v. Dean, 595 F.3d 831, 834 (8th Cir. 2010) [*20]  (citations omitted).
To demonstrate pretext, a plaintiff must present sufficient evidence to demonstrate both that the employer's articulated reason for the adverse employment action was false and that discrimination was the real reason. . . . [T]he plaintiff must do more than simply create a factual dispute as to the issue of pretext; he must offer sufficient evidence for a reasonable trier of fact to infer discrimination.
Id. (citation omitted).

2. Whether Burnell Was Disabled
The Court concludes that there is a genuine question of material fact regarding whether Burnell was disabled during the spring and summer of 2015.
Under the ADA, "disability" means "a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities of [an] individual." 42 U.S.C. § 12102(1)(A). "[M]ajor life activities include, but are not limited to, caring for oneself, performing manual tasks, seeing, hearing, eating, sleeping, walking, standing, lifting, bending, speaking, breathing, learning, reading, concentrating, thinking, communicating, and working." Id.(2)(A). Congress intended that the definition of disability "be construed in favor of broad coverage of individuals under this chapter, to the maximum extent [*21]  permitted by the terms of this chapter." Id.(4)(A). Under the MHRA, a disability is a condition that "materially" limits a major life activity, which is a "less stringent" standard. Hoover v. Norwest Private Mortg. Banking, 632 N.W.2d 534, 543 n.6 (Minn. 2001).
An impairment is "substantially limiting" if it renders an individual unable to perform a major life activity that the average person in the general population can perform, or if it significantly restricts the condition, manner, or duration under which an individual can perform a particular major life activity as compared to an average person in the general population.
Fjellestad v. Pizza Hut of Am., Inc., 188 F.3d 944, 948-49 (8th Cir. 1999) (citation omitted). "[T]he determination of whether an individual is substantially limited in a major life activity must be made on a case by case basis." Id. at 949.
A broken bone can constitute a disability by substantially impairing a major life activity, such as walking, standing, or working, for a period of a few months. See e.g., Summers v. Altarum Inst., Corp., 740 F.3d 325, 330, 333 (4th Cir. 2014) (holding that, when "accident left [the plaintiff] unable to walk for seven months and that without surgery, pain medication, and physical therapy, he 'likely' would have been unable to walk for far longer," plaintiff had "stated a claim that this impairment 'substantially limited' his ability to walk"); Orr v. City of Rogers, 232 F. Supp. 3d 1052, 1065, 1065 n.6 (W.D. Ark. 2017) (finding jury [*22]  question regarding whether broken arm constituted a disability by substantially limiting the major life activity of working, but explaining that "[t]he Court believes that, typically, broken limbs will not constitute disabilities under the ADA. It is only the unique circumstances of [the plaintiff's] injury—that it required corrective surgery, impairing her ability to work for a full year—that render it a disability under the Act. Even so, the Court views this as a borderline case, just barely falling within the ADA's protections."), reconsideration denied, No. 5:15-CV-05098, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 27733, 2017 WL 772913 (W.D. Ark. Feb. 27, 2017); Consedine v. Willimansett E. SNF, 213 F. Supp. 3d 253, 261 (D. Mass. 2016) (holding there was a fact question regarding whether plaintiff, who was employed by a long-term care facility as the director of admissions and business development, was disabled when she fractured her right leg because she had "significant limitations" in the activities of walking and lifting).
Here, there is evidence that Burnell was, for several months, limited in the major life activities of walking, standing, and lifting as compared to the average person in the general population. She used a CAM boot three to four months after her injury and still used a scooter for long distances five to six months after [*23]  her injury. Although Burnell was not impaired for a long period of time, the ADA does not require a specified minimum duration that an impairment must last in order to be substantially limiting. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(1)(ix) ("The effects of an impairment lasting or expected to last fewer than six months can be substantially limiting within the meaning of this section."). See also 29 C.F.R. Pt. 1630, App., at § 1630.2(j)(1)(ix) ("For example, as noted above, if an individual has a back impairment that results in a 20-pound lifting restriction that lasts for several months, he is substantially limited in the major life activity of lifting, and therefore covered under the first prong of the definition of disability.").

3. Whether Burnell Was a Qualified Individual
"To be a qualified individual under the ADA, an employee must (1) possess the requisite skill, education, experience, and training for [her] position; and (2) be able to perform the essential job functions, with or without reasonable accommodation." Kallail, 691 F.3d at 930 (citation omitted). The parties do not dispute that Burnell met the first prong. Their arguments focus on whether she could perform the essential job functions with or without reasonable accommodation.

a) Definition of Essential Job Duties

 [*24] Essential functions of a position are the fundamental duties of the job, but not its marginal functions, and much of the information which determines those essential functions lies uniquely with the employer. A job function may be essential if the reason the position exists is to perform that function, or if a limited number of employees are available among whom the performance of that job function can be distributed. To determine whether a job function is essential, the governing regulations call for us to consider the following:
(i) The employer's judgment as to which functions are essential; (ii) Written job descriptions prepared before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job; (iii) The amount of time spent on the job performing the function; (iv) The consequences of not requiring the incumbent to perform the function; (v) The terms of a collective bargaining agreement; (vi) The work experience of past incumbents in the job; and/or (vii) The current work experience of incumbents in similar jobs.
Hill v. Walker, 737 F.3d 1209, 1217 (8th Cir. 2013) (citations omitted). "[A] task may be an essential function even if the employee performs it for only a few minutes each week, and even if other employees are available to perform [*25]  the task for the disabled employee." Minnihan v. Mediacom Commc'n Corp., 779 F.3d 803, 812 (8th Cir. 2015). An "employer's judgment about an essential function is highly probative." Id. (citation omitted).
The Court concludes that there is a genuine question of material fact regarding whether Burnell could perform the essential functions of the Executive Director position.

b) Hours Onsite
Working long, flexible hours onsite during the opening of Polar Ridge was an essential function, as was being an onsite leader. Pearson testified that his Executive Director job duties require him to be onsite more than 40 hours per week, work nights and weekends, and be available at all times for emergencies. (Patton Aff., Ex. 11, Pearson Dep. 72-73, 131-33, 141.) Burnell, herself, testified that she understood that her job would sometimes require her to work on Saturdays and/or Sundays, particularly during the time surrounding the opening. (Patton Aff., Ex. 3, Burnell Dep. 142.)
The fact that, while Burnell was unavailable, Krebsbach attempted to cover the Executive Director position in fewer than 40 hours per week as a short-term solution with other full-time Polar Ridge employees pitching in to give tours (Patton Aff., Ex. 8, Sheridan Dep. 174-75), does not detract [*26]  from long flexible hours being an essential job function. "[A]n employer does not concede that a job function is non-essential simply by voluntarily assuming the limited burden associated with a temporary accommodation, nor thereby acknowledge that the burden associated with a permanent accommodation would not be unduly onerous." Minnihan, 779 F.3d at 812 (citation omitted). Similarly, evidence that some employees did not personally observe Pearson working fewer than 40 hours per week onsite (see Bland Aff. ¶ 17; Pl. Ex. 61, Gross Dep. 80), does not belie the long, flexible hours requirement, particularly when it is uncontradicted that the Executive Director position required work at odd hours and that the position's requirements were more intense during the opening of Polar Ridge. (See, e.g., Patton Aff., Ex. 8, Sheridan Dep. 140-41; Patton Aff., Ex. 13, Boldt Report ¶¶ 7-8, 11-12.)
There is a fact question regarding whether Burnell could have performed the function of working long, flexible hours onsite during the opening of Polar Ridge. Burnell points to evidence that, as of April 20, she did not have a restriction on the number of hours and days she could work onsite and she did not ask to work from home [*27]  in any capacity. While Tealwood may have understood the reference to "8 hours per day, 5 days per week," to be restrictions imposed on Burnell, according to Plaintiff's expert, the phrase is used in the medical field to mean that a patient can return to her normal employment hours. Burnell avers that she understood Reed's note to mean that she could return to work full-time. Additionally, there is evidence that Burnell could build relationships with tenants, their families, and staff in a scooter just as well as on foot. (See Pl. Ex. 7, Pearson Dep. 139-40.)

c) Tours and Moving Efficiently Around the Campus
Another essential function of the Executive Director position was to give tours and move efficiently around the Polar Ridge Campus. Although other employees performed those functions, they are included in the written job description, Pearson does them now, Burnell expected to do them, and tours were clearly numerous and vital during the opening. However, there is a fact question regarding whether Burnell could perform those functions by using a scooter on a large, multi-story, yet ADA-compliant, campus. On the one hand, Burnell's expert, orthopedic surgeon Dr. Peter Schosheim, opined [*28]  that, based on Reed's April 20 restrictions for Burnell, Burnell could not "perform tours in a large campus," even with a scooter. (Patton Aff., Ex. 12, Schosheim Dep. 52.) On the other hand, Polar Ridge was accessible and had elevators, ramps, and automatic door openers. Burnell told Defendants that she could lead tours with her manual scooter and would use a motorized scooter if necessary. (Pl. Ex. 1, Burnell Dep. 144.) Burnell asserts that she could move more quickly with a knee scooter that she could walk before her injury. (Pl. Ex. 65, Schosheim Dep. 73; Burnell Aff. ¶ 8.) The question of whether Burnell could perform this essential function cannot be answered on summary judgment.

d) Multitasking and Performing Physically Demanding Tasks
Defendants assert that another essential function of the Executive Director position was to multitask and perform various physically demanding tasks, such as helping new residents move in. However, these functions are not listed in the job description and Pearson testified that it is his choice to not delegate those tasks. (Pl. Ex. 7, Pearson Dep. 67-69.) There is a genuine issue of material fact regarding whether these tasks were essential functions. [*29] 

4. Adverse Action
"An adverse employment action is one that causes a material change in the terms or conditions of employment." Kammueller v. Loomis, Fargo & Co., 383 F. 3d 779, 788 (8th Cir. 2004) (citation omitted). "Termination, cuts in pay or benefits, and changes that affect an employee's future career prospects are significant enough to meet the standard [for an adverse employment action], as would circumstances amounting to a constructive discharge." Kerns v. Capital Graphics, Inc., 178 F.3d 1011, 1016 (8th Cir. 1999) (citations omitted) (discussing Title VII claim).
In this case, Burnell has pointed to evidence that she suffered an adverse employment action in that, on April 24, 2015, against her wishes, Defendants moved her from her Executive Director position into a status with no pay and no benefits. Cuts in pay or benefits constitute an adverse employment action.

5. Causal Connection
The causal connection prong has been met because Defendants admittedly moved Burnell to the unpaid position based on their perception that she could not perform her job because of her injury.

6. Legitimate, Nondiscriminatory Reason
Defendants have articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for moving Burnell to interim status: they believed that she could not fulfill the essential functions of the Executive Director position. [*30]  Whether that reason was discriminatory depends on whether, in fact, Burnell was disabled, and whether she could fulfill the essential functions of the position. As previously explained, these are fact questions for the jury. The previously discussed evidence also sufficiently raises the question of pretext because Burnell has pointed to evidence that she could fulfill her role and that she had articulated that fact to Defendants.

C. Failure to Reasonably Accommodate
Burnell also asserts failure to accommodate as a basis for liability. She argues both a general failure to accommodate and a failure to engage in the interactive process.

1. Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process

a) Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process Standard

There is no per se liability under the ADA if an employer fails to engage in the interactive process. However, at the summary judgment stage the failure of an employer to engage in an interactive process to determine whether reasonable accommodations are possible is prima facie evidence that the employer may be acting in bad faith. An employee with a disability must show the following elements to establish his employer failed to participate in the interactive [*31]  process:
(1) the employer knew about the employee's disability; (2) the employee requested accommodation or assistance for his or her disability; (3) the employer did not make a good faith effort to assist the employee in seeking accommodation; and (4) the employee could have been reasonably accommodated but for the employer's lack of good faith.
Minnihan v. Mediacom Commc'ns Corp., 779 F.3d 803, 813 (8th Cir. 2015) (citations omitted).

b) Whether Tealwood Knew About Burnell's Disability
Burnell has presented sufficient evidence to survive summary judgment because she has pointed to evidence that she was, in fact, disabled, and that Defendants knew that she was disabled because she told them that she was disabled.

c) Whether Burnell Requested Accommodation for her Disability
Burnell has presented sufficient evidence that she informed Defendants of her restrictions in writing and requested accommodation both in writing and during the April 22 meeting.

d) Whether Tealwood Made a Good Faith Effort to Assist Burnell in Seeking Accommodation
Burnell has raised a question of fact regarding whether Tealwood engaged in the interactive process. According to Tealwood, it attempted to engage in a back and forth discussion with her after April 24, 2015, but Burnell ceased [*32]  communications with it. According to Burnell, after April 20, 2015, Defendants refused to discuss any of her accommodation requests. On April 22, Krebsbach merely read a letter to Burnell and said that Defendants could not meet the accommodations. He did not discuss the accommodations with her or explain why Defendants could not make them. Defendants merely offered her an ultimatum of accepting de facto termination through unpaid status or being restriction-free.
According to Burnell, if Tealwood had truly engaged in the interactive process, it would have learned that she did not have an hours and days restriction after April 20 and it would have known that she could have used a motorized scooter to give tours and quickly move about the campus. There appears to have been a miscommunication among the parties regarding whether Burnell would have accepted an alternative position. It is open to interpretation which party is at fault for that miscommunication.

e) Whether Burnell Could Have Been Reasonably Accommodated but for Tealwood's Lack of Good Faith
The question of whether Burnell could have been reasonably accommodated but for Tealwood's alleged lack of good faith is a fact question, [*33]  as discussed with regard to the discrimination claim.

2. Failure to Accommodate

a) Failure to Accommodate Standard
In a failure to accommodate case, "the 'discrimination' is framed in terms of the failure to fulfill an affirmative duty—the failure to reasonably accommodate the disabled individual's limitations." Peebles v. Potter, 354 F.3d 761, 767 (8th Cir.2004).
[I]t is not the employer's discriminatory intent in taking adverse employment action against a disabled individual that matters. Rather, discrimination occurs when the employer fails to abide by a legally imposed duty. The known disability triggers the duty to reasonably accommodate and, if the employer fails to fulfill that duty, we do not care if he was motivated by the disability.
Id. (citations omitted).
The Court applies a modified burden-shifting analysis to reasonable accommodation claims. Fenney v. Dakota, Minn. & E. R.R. Co., 327 F.3d 707, 712 (8th Cir. 2003). A plaintiff must make a facial showing that she has an ADA disability, that she suffered an adverse employment action, and that she is a "qualified individual," with or without reasonable accommodation. Id.
Where the employee requests accommodation, the employer must engage in an informal, interactive process with the employee to identify the limitations caused by the disability and the [*34]  potential reasonable accommodations to overcome those limitations. An employer hinders this process when: the employer knows about the employee's disability; the employee requests accommodations or assistance; the employer does not in good faith assist the employee in seeking accommodations; and the employee could have been reasonably accommodated but for the employer's lack of good faith.
Battle v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 438 F.3d 856, 862-63 (8th Cir. 2006) (citations omitted).
The plaintiff need only "make a facial showing that a reasonable accommodation is possible." Fjellestad v. Pizza Hut of Am., Inc., 188 F.3d 944, 950 (8th Cir. 1999). The burden of production then shifts to the employer "to show that it is unable to accommodate." Id. "There is no precise test for what constitutes a reasonable accommodation, but an accommodation is unreasonable if it requires the employer to eliminate an essential function of the job." EEOC v. Convergys Customer Mgmt. Group, Inc., 491 F.3d 790, 796 (8th Cir. 2007) (citations omitted). An MHRA failure to accommodate claim is analyzed in the same manner as an ADA failure to accommodate claim. Kobus v. Coll. of St. Scholastica, Inc., 608 F.3d 1034, 1038 (8th Cir. 2010).

b) Analysis
Burnell has raised a material fact question on the claim that Defendants failed to provide reasonable accommodation. Tealwood knew that Burnell was injured. Burnell informed Tealwood that she wanted accommodation. As previously discussed, there is a fact question [*35]  regarding whether reasonable accommodation was possible to enable Burnell to perform the essential functions of her position.

D. Retaliation in Violation of the ADA and MHRA (Counts 2 and 4)

1. Retaliation Standard
"To defeat summary judgment on a retaliation claim, a plaintiff must produce either direct evidence of retaliation, or create an inference of retaliation under the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework." Pye v. Nu Aire, Inc., 641 F.3d 1011, 1020 (8th Cir. 2011) (citations omitted). Under the McDonnell Douglas framework,
an employee has the initial burden of establishing a prima facie case of retaliation by showing that (1) he engaged in protected conduct, (2) he suffered a materially adverse employment action, and (3) the adverse action was causally linked to the protected conduct. If an employee establishes a prima facie case of retaliation, the burden shifts to the employer to articulate a legitimate, non-retaliatory reason for its action; if the employer does so, the burden then shifts back to the employee to put forth evidence of pretext, the ultimate question being whether a prohibited reason, rather than the proffered reason, actually motivated the employer's action.
Id. at 1021 (citations omitted). Retaliation claims under the MHRA [*36]  and ADA are analyzed under the same test. Heisler v. Metro. Council, 339 F.3d 622, 632 n.6 (8th Cir. 2003).

2. Protected Activity
Burnell engaged in protected activity by requesting accommodation in her April 20 email, during the April 22 meeting, and in two more emails thereafter.

3. Adverse Employment Action
As previously explained, the record supports a finding that Burnell suffered an adverse employment action when Defendants denied her request for accommodation and moved her to an unpaid position with no benefits.

4. Causal Connection
"A retaliation claim under the ADA requires a but-for causal connection between the employee's assertion of her ADA rights and an adverse action by the employer." Oehmke v. Medtronic, Inc., 844 F.3d 748, 758 (8th Cir. 2016) (citation omitted). At this time, "[t]he Minnesota courts have not addressed . . . whether the Nassar but-for causation standard similarly applies for reprisal claims under the MHRA." Liles v. C.S. McCrossan, Inc., 851 F.3d 810, 819 (8th Cir. 2017) (citation omitted). The Court concludes that, even if the mixed-motive causation standard applies, Burnell's retaliation claims cannot survive summary judgment.
Burnell argues that she has established a causal connection because she requested accommodation on April 20 and 22, was told that she would not be accommodated on April 22, and was moved to unpaid status on April 24. [*37]  "Generally, more than a temporal connection between the protected conduct and the adverse employment action is required to present a genuine factual issue on retaliation." Kiel v. Select Artificials, Inc., 169 F.3d 1131, 1136 (8th Cir. 1999). For the purpose of the summary judgment motion, the Court will assume that this close temporal proximity between the protected activity and the adverse action satisfies the prima facie causal connection prong.

5. Legitimate, Nondiscriminatory Reason
As previously discussed, Defendants have articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its action.

6. Pretext
The Court concludes that Burnell's retaliation claim cannot survive summary judgment. Burnell asserts that the protected activity was requesting accommodation in her April 20 email, during the April 22 meeting, and in two more emails thereafter. There is no evidence of a causal connection beyond the close temporal connection between the protected conduct — requesting accommodation on April 20 and thereafter — and the adverse employment action — moving Burnell to interim status on April 24. However, the record is clear that Defendants planned to move her interim status before April 20. On April 3, Sheridan first asked Lucia to draft a letter to notify Burnell [*38]  that she was moved to a status without pay and benefits. The draft letter, moving Burnell to interim status, was circulated to Sheridan, Brown, and Krebsbach on April 5. While there is ample evidence that Defendants moved her to interim status based on her alleged disability, there is no evidence that, but for her request for accommodations on April 20 and thereafter, Defendants would not have moved her to interim status. Nor is there evidence of a retaliatory motive to support a showing of causation even under a mixed-motive standard. See Oehmke, 844 F. 3d at 759.

E. Claims Against Helen Street and TCC
The Court denies Defendants' motion to dismiss TCC and Helen Street.

1. Single Employer Test

A "single employer" situation exists where two nominally separate entities are actually part of a single integrated enterprise so that, for all purposes, there is in fact only a single employer. The single entity analysis is appropriate when separate corporations are not what they appear to be, that in truth they are but divisions or departments of a single enterprise.
Scheidecker v. Arvig Enters., Inc., 122 F. Supp. 2d 1031, 1037 (D. Minn. 2000) (citations omitted) (discussing Title VII).
In a "joint employer" relationship . . . there is no single integrated enterprise. The joint employer analysis [*39]  assumes separate legal entities exist, but that they have chosen to handle certain aspects of their employer-employee relationships jointly. A finding of joint employer is proper where one company has retained for itself sufficient control of the terms and conditions of employment of the employees who are employed by the other employer. The Eighth Circuit applies the same four factors used in a single entity analysis to a joint employer relationship.
Id. at 1038 (citations omitted).
There is a "strong presumption that a parent company is not the employer of its subsidiary's employees, and the courts have found otherwise only in extraordinary circumstances." Brown v. Fred's, Inc., 494 F.3d 736, 739 (8th Cir. 2007) (citation omitted).
A parent company may employ its subsidiary's employees if (a) the parent company so dominates the subsidiary's operations that the two are one entity and therefore one employer, or (b) the parent company is linked to the alleged discriminatory action because it controls individual employment decisions.
Id. (citations omitted). The Court analyzes parental domination or whether separate entities should be consolidated to be treated as a single employer "based on the following factors: (1) interrelation of operations, (2) common [*40]  management, (3) centralized control of labor relations, and (4) common ownership or financial control." Artis v. Francis Howell N. Band Booster Ass'n, Inc., 161 F.3d 1178, 1184 (8th Cir. 1998) (citation omitted). See also Sandoval v. Am. Bldg. Maint. Indus., Inc., 578 F.3d 787, 796 (8th Cir. 2009) (explaining that "the traditional four-factor standard is the means by which plaintiffs demonstrate corporate dominance over a subsidiary's operations and establish affiliate liability"); Bradley v. Monarch Constr., Inc., 35 F. App'x 420, 421 (8th Cir. 2002) (applying "single employer" test applies to ADA).

2. Analysis
All of the employees who work at Polar Ridge, including Burnell, were employed by Tealwood. (Pl. Ex. 66, Groff Dep. 14; Patton Aff., Ex. 1, Defs. Ans. to Interrog. No. 4.) However, Burnell claims that all three Defendants are a single employer for purposes of the ADA and MHRA.
Defendants are all owned by many of the same individuals. (See Pl. Ex. 66, Groff Dep. 10-13.) TCC has two shareholders: Groff and Sheridan. (Id. 10.) Tealwood has four shareholders: Groff, Sheridan, Molly Toulouse, and Jeanne Jaeckels. (Id. 11-12.) Helen Street has four shareholders: Samuel Kaplan, Ralph Strangis, Trident-North St. Paul, LLC, and Black Hawk Investment III, LLC. (Id. 12-13.) Trident-North St. Paul, LLC has two shareholders: Jeffrey Drown and Scott O'Brien. (Id. 13.) Black Hawk Investments III, LLC has seven shareholders: Groff, Sheridan, Gregory Brown, [*41]  Toulouse, Jaeckels, Krebsbach, and Amanda Johnson. (Id.) Burnell notes that most of the individuals involved in the decision to terminate Burnell are part owners of all three Defendants. (Id. 10-13.)
Groff is the president of Tealwood, the president of TCC, and the vice president of Helen Street. (Groff Dep. 15.) All of the employees who work at Polar Ridge, including the Executive Director, are employed by Tealwood; TCC provided assistance to Tealwood regarding employment decisions; and Tealwood provides management services to Helen Street. (Patton Aff., Ex. 45, Defs. Resp. Req. for Admissions No. 43; Pl. Ex. 67; Groff Dep. 14, 18, 21, 24-25, 28-29.) Helen Street has no employees. (Groff Dep. 23.) Helen Street supervises Tealwood's work and retains ultimate control over any decisions made by Tealwood at Polar Ridge, including employment matters. (Id. 18-19, 21, 28-29.) Krebsbach, who supervised the Polar Ridge Executive Director, is employed by TCC. (Id. 15.)
The record is not entirely clear regarding the relationship among TCC, Tealwood, and Helen Street. However, it is apparent that they have interrelated operations in that Tealwood provides management services to Helen Street, which has no employees and, although [*42]  Burnell was employed by Tealwood, a TCC officer supervised her. There is also common management in that a TCC officer — Krebsbach — was Burnell's supervisor. Also, Groff is president of both Tealwood and TCC and is vice president of Helen Street. Labor relations appear centralized in that TCC human resources personnel, Lucia and Immel, and TCC employee, Krebsbach, handled Burnell's employment issues with Tealwood. TCC admittedly assists Tealwood with employment decisions and, in turn, Tealwood provides management services to Helen Street, which has no employees. Also, Helen Street supervises Tealwood's work and retains ultimate control over Tealwood's decisions at Polar Ridge, including employment matters. Thus, ultimately, Helen Street had final say in Burnell's termination. Finally, as far as common ownership or financial control, TCC has only two shareholders (Groff and Sheridan), and those two shareholders are two of the four shareholders of Tealwood. It is less clear whether Helen Street has common financial control. One of Helen Street's four shareholders is an LLC with seven shareholders, four of whom are the shareholders in Tealwood and two of those are the shareholders in [*43]  TCC.
Additionally, when Burnell was offered the Executive Director position, the offer letter stated that "[o]n behalf of Tealwood Senior Living, I am pleased to offer you a position as the Executive Director of Polar Ridge Senior Living." (Pl. Ex. 3.) "Tealwood Senior Living" is the d/b/a for Defendant TCC. Also, the letter listed the benefits package as provided by "Tealwood Senior Living, Inc.," not by Tealwood. (Id.)
Overall, the three entities are entangled both in fact and in the way they present themselves to employees, particularly with regard to personnel issues, and all three had authority with regard to terminating Burnell's employment. The Court concludes that there is a genuine question of material fact regarding whether Helen Street, TCC, and Tealwood should all be treated as a single or joint employer for the purposes of ADA and MHRA liability.
Accordingly, based upon the files, records, and proceedings herein, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED:
Defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment [Docket No. 25] is GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART as follows: Count 1: Violation of Title I of the ADA and Count 3: Violation of the MHRA REMAIN; and Count 2: Violation of the Prohibition of Retaliation [*44]  in the ADA and Count 4: Violation of the Prohibition of Retaliation in the MHRA are DISMSSED.
Dated: July 10, 2018
/s/ Michael J. Davis
Michael J. Davis
United States District Court


End of Document

