Cason v. Coca-Cola Co.
United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division
May 15, 2020, Decided
CIVIL ACTION NO. 1:17-CV-03891-JPB

Reporter
2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 269131 *
KENESIA CASON, Plaintiff, v. THE COCA-COLA COMPANY and YU SHI, in her capacity as management for the Coca-Cola Company, Defendants.
Counsel:  [*1] For Kenesia Cason, 678-719-1279, Kenesia Cason, 2103 Oakview Road, Kenesia Cason, Atlanta GA 30317, Plaintiffs: John F. Meyers, LEAD ATTORNEY, John F. Meyers Esq., Atlanta, GA; Samuel Lester Tate III, LEAD ATTORNEY, Akin & Tate PC, Cartersville, GA; James E. Voyles, The Voyles Law Firm P.C., Marietta, GA.
For The Coca-Cola Company, Defendant: Luke Donohue, Nathan Joseph Allen, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart P.C. - Atl, Atlanta, GA.
Judges: J. P. BOULEE, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: J. P. BOULEE
Opinion



ORDER ADOPTING FINAL REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION
This matter comes before the Court on the Magistrate Judge's Final Report and Recommendation [Doc. 83]. This Court finds as follows:
PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Kenesia Cason ("Plaintiff") began her employment as an administrative assistant with the Coca-Cola Company ("Defendant") on July 20, 2011, and continued her work for Defendant until August 2016. [Doc. 61-2, p. 3, 9]. Plaintiff brought this action against Defendant on October 4, 2017, and alleged that Defendant discriminated against her during her employment. [Doc. 1]. More specifically, Plaintiff brought the following causes of action: (1) retaliation in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 ("Title VII"); (2) racial discrimination in violation [*2]  of Title VII (disparate treatment and hostile work environment); (3) racial discrimination in violation of 42 U.S.C. § 1981 (disparate treatment and hostile work environment); (4) failure to accommodate in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"); (5) violation of the Fair Labor Standards Act ("FLSA"); (6) intentional infliction of emotional distress; (7) negligent infliction of emotional distress; and (8) punitive damages. [Doc. 24].
Defendant moved for summary judgment on November 4, 2019. [Doc. 61]. On March 23, 2020, the Magistrate Judge issued his Final Report and Recommendation wherein he recommended granting, in part, Defendant's motion. [Doc. 83]. More specifically, the Magistrate Judge recommended granting summary judgment as to all causes of action except Plaintiff's claim pursuant to the FLSA. Id. at 1-2.
ANALYSIS
A district judge has broad discretion to accept, reject or modify a magistrate judge's proposed findings and recommendations. United States v. Raddatz, 447 U.S. 667, 680 (1980). Pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1), the Court reviews any portion of the Report and Recommendation that is the subject of a proper objection on a de novo basis and any non-objected-to portion under a "clearly erroneous" standard. Notably, a party objecting to a recommendation "must specifically identify those findings objected to. [*3]  Frivolous, conclusive, or general objections need not be considered by the district court." Marsden v. Moore, 847 F.2d 1536, 1548 (11th Cir. 1988). It is reasonable to place this burden on the objecting party because "[t]his rule facilitates the opportunity for district judges to spend more time on matters actually contested and produces a result compatible with the purposes of the Magistrates Act." United States v. Schultz, 565 F.3d 1353, 1361 (11th Cir. 2009).
Plaintiff timely filed her objection to the Report and Recommendation on April 6, 2020. [Doc. 86]. As an initial matter, Plaintiff's objection is not proper. The bulk of the objection is a mirror image of Plaintiff's Response to Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment. [Doc. 64]. Instead of specifically identifying the findings or conclusions objected to, entire pages are cut and pasted from Plaintiff's previous filing. Here, instead of directing this Court to specific errors, Plaintiff attempts to relitigate the entire issue of whether summary judgment is appropriate. "The Court is not persuaded that this 'umbrella' objection constitutes a specific objection to a discrete finding or conclusion reached by the Magistrate Judge. Rather it is an implicit invitation to revisit essentially every factual finding and the ultimate legal conclusion [*4]  reached by the Magistrate Judge." Spencer v. Publix Super Markets, Inc., Civil Action No. 1:17-CV-03777-AT, 2019 WL 2004136, at *2 (N.D. Ga. Mar. 21, 2019). Ultimately, Plaintiff's objection is not a proper objection because "[i]t is critical that the objection be sufficiently specific and not a general objection to the report." See Marcort v. Prem, Inc., 208 F. App'x 781, 784 (11th Cir. 2006).
Because only proper objections require a de novo review, this Court has reviewed the Report and Recommendation for clear error and finds none. In an abundance of caution, this Court has also reviewed the entire Report and Recommendation de novo and discerns no error.
1. Retaliation under Title VII
In this case, Plaintiff filed a charge of discrimination with the Equal Opportunity Employment Commission ("EEOC") in March 2016. Plaintiff alleges that she was retaliated against because she was subsequently placed on a performance improvement plan ("PIP") in August 2016. In recommending that summary judgment be granted as to Plaintiff's retaliation claim, the Magistrate Judge determined that Plaintiff failed to show adverse action and causation, which must be proved to establish a prima facie case of retaliation. The Magistrate Judge further determined that even if Plaintiff were able to show a prima facie case, she failed to establish pretext.
In Plaintiff's objection, she seems [*5]  to state that she suffered an adverse employment action because she was constructively discharged. This issue was not presented to the Magistrate Judge. A district court has discretion to decline to consider a party's argument when that argument was not first presented to the magistrate judge. Williams v. McNeil, 557 F.3d 1287, 1292 (11th Cir. 2009). As a result, this Court will not consider Plaintiff's new constructive discharge claim because she did not first raise the issue with the Magistrate Judge. To the extent Plaintiff argues constructive discharge in her objection, it is OVERRULED.
This Court finds that it need not address whether placement on the PIP (or even constructive discharge) was an adverse action because it is clear that Plaintiff failed to show causation and pretext. In the Report and Recommendation, the Magistrate Judge noted that "Plaintiff addresses the issue of pretext in a sentence: '[Plaintiff] has shown the pretext through Defendant's failure to accommodate [Plaintiff's] poor hearing and its supervisor showing a despicable pattern of discriminatory behavior towards [Plaintiff] and other African Americans.'" [Doc. 83, p. 33]. Plaintiff's objection contains the exact same sentence and supplies no additional argument [*6]  to support a showing of pretext.
For retaliation claims based on circumstantial evidence, like the one here, this Court is required to apply the three-part burden-shifting framework established by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973). Walker v. Mortham, 158 F.3d 1177, 1183 (11th Cir. 1998).
Pursuant to this framework, the plaintiff bears the initial burden to show a prima facie case. Id. Once the plaintiff establishes a prima facie case of discrimination, the burden shifts to the employer to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse decision of which she complains. Id. at 1184. The burden then returns to the plaintiff who is not permitted to "simply stand on her prima facie case; instead, she must convince the court that the evidence in the case as a whole preponderates in favor of a finding of intentional discrimination by the defendant." Id. at 1184-85. In other words, the plaintiff must show that the employer's alleged reason for the adverse action is a pretext for illegal discrimination. Hutchinson v. Sec'y, Dep't of Veteran Affairs, 766 Fed. App'x 883, 887 (11th Cir. 2019). Importantly, "[w]hile the intermediate burdens of production shift back and forth, 'the ultimate burden of persuading the trier of fact that the defendant intentionally discriminated against the plaintiff remains at all times with the plaintiff.'" Holmes v. Ala. Bd. of Pardons & Paroles, 591 Fed. App'x 737, 742 (11th Cir. 2014).
Although the Magistrate [*7]  Judge determined that Plaintiff failed to establish a prima facie case of retaliation, he nevertheless analyzed the issue of pretext and found that Defendant offered legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for placing Plaintiff on a PIP. Those legitimate reasons were Plaintiff's calendaring errors (one which cost Defendant $3,000) and lack of attention to detail. This Court agrees that Defendant articulated legitimate reasons for placing Plaintiff on a PIP.
Because Defendant successfully articulated a nondiscriminatory reason for the decision to place Plaintiff on a PIP, the burden returns to Plaintiff to establish pretext. To establish pretext, Plaintiff must produce "actual evidence to satisfy this burden" because conclusory allegations of discrimination are not sufficient to raise an inference of pretext. Center v. Sec'y, Dep't of Homeland Sec., Customs & Border Prot. Agency, 895 F.3d 1295, 1303 (11th Cir. 2018). The evidence must be such that a reasonable factfinder could conclude that the reasons given by the employer were not the real reasons for the adverse employment decision and that retaliation was the real reason. Furcron v. Mail Ctrs. Plus, LLC, 843 F.3d 1295, 1313 (11th Cir. 2016). The evidence "must reveal such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, incoherencies or contradictions in the employer's proffered legitimate reasons for its actions [*8]  that a reasonable factfinder could find them unworthy of credence." Id. Importantly, a plaintiff is required to meet the proffered reason "head on and rebut it, and [she] cannot succeed by simply quarreling with the wisdom of that reason." Id. at 1313-14. If the employer proffers more than one reason, the plaintiff must rebut each of them to survive summary judgment. Holmes, 591 Fed. App'x at 743.
As already stated above, Defendant proffered two reasons for its decision to place Plaintiff on a PIP. After review of the objection and the entire record, this Court finds that Plaintiff failed to provide any evidence that Defendant's proffered reasons were false, and she also failed to show that the true reason was unlawful retaliation. Plaintiff failed to show that Defendant's reasons were a pretextual ruse designed to mask retaliation. As such, Plaintiff's objection is OVERRULED.
2. Hostile Work Environment
In this case, Plaintiff alleges that she was subjected to a hostile work environment due to her disability and her race. Hostile work environment claims require harassment that is severe or pervasive. Reeves v. C.H. Robinson Worldwide, Inc., 594 F.3d 798, 808 (11th Cir. 2010). "The requirement that the harassment be 'severe or pervasive' contains an objective and a subjective component." Dugandzic v. Nike, Inc., No. 19-11793, 2020 WL 1510165, at *3 (11th Cir Mar. 30, 2020). In analyzing [*9]  the objective component, the Court must consider four factors: "(1) the frequency of the conduct; (2) the severity of the conduct; (3) whether the conduct is physically threatening or humiliating, or a mere offensive utterance; and (4) whether the conduct unreasonably interferes with the employee's job performance." Id. Importantly, "[c]ourts should examine the conduct in context, not as isolated acts, and determine under the totality of the circumstances whether the harassing conduct is sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the terms of the plaintiff's employment and create a hostile or abusive working environment." Id.
In Plaintiff's objection, she contends that the Magistrate Judge erred in his recommendation regarding the hostile work environment claim because the Magistrate Judge failed to consider all the relevant circumstances. Plaintiff then proceeds to cut and paste multiple pages from her original summary judgment briefing. As already mentioned above, this is an inappropriate and impermissible objection as it fails to direct the Court to any specific error committed by the Magistrate Judge.
The Magistrate Judge did not fail to consider all the relevant circumstances. The [*10]  Magistrate Judge, while recognizing that the alleged racial comments made by Plaintiff's supervisor were despicable, if true, determined that Plaintiff could not show severe or pervasive harassment because she was unable to identify specifically how many statements were made or when they made. Rather than direct this Court to each of the alleged harassing statements or occurrences, Plaintiff simply restates her previous argument. As such, this Court is still left "with a record that shows a handful of statements made at unknown times during the year or so Plaintiff worked with [her supervisor]." [Doc. 83, p. 46]. Plaintiff's objection is thus OVERRULED. This Court additionally notes that even when considering the racial comments and the comments about Plaintiff's hearing loss together, they still do not rise to the level of severe or pervasive harassment as the comments were too infrequent.
3. Disparate Treatment
Plaintiff contends that the Magistrate Judge erred in recommending summary judgment as to her disparate treatment claim because the Magistrate Judge focused exclusively on whether she suffered an adverse action. Like the other objections, Plaintiff proceeds to rehash, nearly [*11]  word for word, her previous arguments.
To prove race discrimination under Title VII and § 1981, a plaintiff must show, as part of her prima facie case, that she was subjected to an adverse employment action. Medearis v. CVS Pharmacy, Inc., 646 F. App'x 891, 897 (11th Cir. 2016). Because Plaintiff is required to show adverse action as part of her prima facie case, the Magistrate Judge did not err by focusing on this element when analyzing the disparate treatment claim. As a general rule, "not all conduct by an employer negatively affecting an employee constitutes adverse employment action." Davis v. Town of Lake Park, 245 F.3d 1232, 1238 (11th Cir. 2001). To prove adverse employment action, a plaintiff must show a serious and material change in the terms, conditions or privileges of employment. Id. at 1239. "Moreover, [a plaintiff's] subjective view of the significance and adversity of the employer's action is not controlling; the employment action must be materially adverse as viewed by a reasonable person in the circumstances." Id.
Because Plaintiff was not "demoted or terminated or subject to any" final or ultimate decision in the traditional sense when placed on the PIP, the Magistrate Judge determined that Plaintiff did not show an adverse employment action. Plaintiff's objection fails to show that the Magistrate Judge's recommendation [*12]  is error. This Court finds that Plaintiff failed to create a genuine issue of material fact because Plaintiff failed to provide evidence that the PIP resulted in a "serious and material change in the terms, conditions, or privileges of [her] employment." Redd v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 615 F. App'x 598, 603 (11th Cir. 2015) (determining that the plaintiff's placement on a performance improvement plan was not adverse action). See also Scott v. Novartis Pharm., Corp., Civil Action File No. 1:14-cv-04154-ELR-RGV, 2017 WL 5197875, at *17 (N.D. Ga. Jan. 31, 2017) (holding that placement on a performance improvement plan was not an adverse employment action because the plaintiff failed to show that it had a serious and material adverse impact on his employment and citing other cases to show same). Ultimately, this Court agrees with the Magistrate Judge that Plaintiff's placement on a PIP was not an adverse employment action because Plaintiff failed to show that it materially changed the terms and conditions of her employment, and therefore Plaintiff's objection is OVERRULED.
4. ADA Claim
In this case, Plaintiff claims that Defendant discriminated against her by failing to accommodate her hearing-related disability. To establish a prima facie claim for failure to accommodate, the plaintiff must show that: (1) she was disabled; (2) she was a qualified individual in that she could perform [*13]  the essential functions of the job with or without reasonable accommodations; and (3) she was discriminated against by way of the defendant's failure to provide a reasonable accommodation. Lucas v. W.W. Grainger, Inc., 257 F.3d 1249, 1255 (11th Cir. 2001). Only the third element is at issue.
Even though failing to provide a reasonable accommodation is a form of discrimination, a viable discrimination claim cannot exist under either of the following circumstances. First, a plaintiff cannot establish a claim "alleging that the defendant discriminated against [her] unless [she] demanded such an accommodation." Gaston v. Bellingrath Gardens & Home, Inc., 167 F.3d 1361, 1363 (11th Cir. 1999). The initial burden is on the employee, and "the duty to provide a reasonable accommodation is not triggered unless a specific demand for an accommodation has been made." Id. at 1363-64. "Indeed, 'before an employer's duty to provide reasonable accommodations—or even to participate in the interactive process—is triggered under the ADA, the employee must make an adequate request, thereby putting the employer on notice.'" Williamson v. Clarke Cty. Dep't of Human Res., 834 F. Supp. 2d 1310, 1320 (S.D. Ala. 2011).
Second, even if a plaintiff makes a specific demand for an accommodation, liability cannot arise when the employee's actions cause a breakdown in the interactive process. Stewart v. Happy Herman's Cheshire Bridge, Inc., 117 F.3d 1278, 1287 (11th Cir. 1997). Ordinarily, once a disabled employee demands a reasonable accommodation, [*14]  the employer shall "initiate an informal, interactive process with the individual with the disability in need of an accommodation" so that the employer can determine the appropriate reasonable accommodation. Knowles v. Sheriff, 460 Fed. App'x 833, 835 (11th Cir. 2012). Importantly, if it is the employee's action or inaction that causes a breakdown in the interactive process, the employee is not entitled to recovery.
In the Report and Recommendation, the Magistrate Judge cited to numerous pieces of evidence showing that Defendant worked with Plaintiff in accommodating her disability (or was at least open to work with Plaintiff) and that it was Plaintiff who failed to engage in the interactive process. Plaintiff asserts that the Magistrate Judge erred because Plaintiff asked her supervisor on three different occasions to discuss her hearing issues and was denied a discussion on each occasion. Tellingly, in Plaintiff's objection, Plaintiff never addresses the fact that Plaintiff was given a device to assist with her hearing loss and was told on multiple occasions that Defendant's Director of Compliance would provide assistance in accommodating Plaintiff's disability should Plaintiff need it. Plaintiff ignores that she was given specific instructions [*15]  to speak to the Director of Compliance and that the undisputed evidence showed that Plaintiff never made any specific requests to the Director of Compliance or informed the Director of Compliance that she needed assistance to perform the essential duties of her job. Because Plaintiff fails to address this evidence in any way in her objection, Plaintiff's objection is OVERRULED.
5. Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress
In his recommendation to grant summary judgment as to Plaintiff's intentional infliction of emotional distress claim, the Magistrate Judge determined that the conduct alleged (a handful of racist statements and comments about Plaintiff's hearing) did not rise to the level of extreme and outrageous conduct. While cutting and pasting the entirety of the section devoted to intentional infliction of emotional distress in the summary judgment briefing, Plaintiff contends that the Magistrate Judge erred in his recommendation to grant summary judgment as to her intentional infliction of emotional distress claim because the Magistrate Judge failed to consider that Plaintiff tried to kill herself after being placed on the PIP.
In Georgia, to make out a prima facie case of [*16]  intentional infliction of emotional distress, the plaintiff must show: (1) conduct that is intentional or reckless; (2) conduct that is extreme and outrageous; (3) a causal connection between the wrongful conduct and the emotional distress; and (4) severe emotional distress. Bartholomew v. AGL Res., Inc., 361 F.3d 1333, 1339 (11th Cir. 2004). Although Plaintiff's suicide attempt shows severe emotional distress, Plaintiff's objection completely fails to address her failure to show extreme and outrageous conduct or address the Magistrate Judge's finding as to that element. As such, Plaintiff's objection is OVERRULED.
CONCLUSION
After consideration of the Report and Recommendation and Plaintiff's objections, the Court APPROVES AND ADOPTS the Final Report and Recommendation as the judgment of the Court. For the reasons stated in the Report and Recommendation, Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. 61] is GRANTED IN PART AND DENIED IN PART. Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment is granted as to all causes of action except Plaintiff's FLSA claim.
As to Plaintiff's FLSA claim, the parties are HEREBY ORDERED to file the Consolidated Pretrial Order required by Local Rule 16.4 within fourteen days of entry of this Order. The parties are notified that a failure to comply [*17]  with this Order may result in sanctions, including dismissal of the case or entry of default judgment. In the event a Consolidated Pretrial Order is not filed, the Clerk is DIRECTED to submit the case at the expiration of the fourteen-day period.
SO ORDERED this 15th day of May, 2020.
/s/ J. P. Boulee
J. P. BOULEE
United States District Judge


End of Document

