Castelan v. Universal Studios Inc.
United States District Court for the Central District of California
January 10, 2014, Decided; January 10, 2014, Filed
CV 12-05481 BRO (AGRx)

Reporter
2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 9092 *; 2014 WL 210754
ANGEL CASTELAN AND MARVIN HUEZO v. UNIVERSAL STUDIOS INC., ET AL.
Counsel:  [*1] Attorneys for Plaintiffs: Not Present.
Attorneys for Defendants: Not Present.
Judges: Honorable BEVERLY REID O'CONNELL, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: BEVERLY REID O'CONNELL
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES – GENERAL
Proceedings: (IN CHAMBERS)

ORDER GRANTING DEFENDANTS' MOTION FOR SUMMARY ADJUDICATION [39]

I. INTRODUCTION
This lawsuit, alleging violations of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), presents the Court with novel questions, in part due to the scarcity of precedent that is on point. It asks the Court to determine the scope of the ADA's requirements for places of public accommodation—the extent to which the Act requires a place of public accommodation to provide services that are specifically designed for persons with disabilities. Plaintiffs are two individuals with disabilities as defined by the Act: one has no arms or hands; the other has no legs. Defendants are owners and operators of a major amusement park, which among other attractions includes rollercoasters. In order to ride at least one of Defendants' rollercoasters, a person must have a minimum of one functioning arm and hand, and at least one leg. Consequently, Plaintiffs, not fitting this description, have been precluded from riding that particular  [*2] rollercoaster. Believing they were wrongfully discriminated against, in violation of the ADA, Plaintiffs filed this action.
Currently pending before the Court is Defendants' motion for summary judgment. According to Defendants, California law mandates that they operate their rollercoaster consistent with the manufacturers' operating manuals. Because the manufacturer's operating instructions for the rollercoaster in question require a rider to have at least one arm and hand, and at least one leg, Defendants contend that California law requires them to preclude Plaintiffs from riding the rollercoaster. Accordingly, Defendants argue it would be unreasonable to hold them liable under the ADA. According to Plaintiffs, however, Defendants should have designed the rollercoaster so that the manufacturer's operating instructions would not have prevented them from riding it. For the following reasons, Defendants' motion is GRANTED.

II. FACTUAL BACKGROUND
Defendants Universal Studios Inc., Universal Studios LLC, and NBCUniversal Media LLC (collectively, "Universal") own and operate the world-famous Universal Studios theme park ("Universal Studios"). (Compl. ¶ 1; First Am. Compl. ("FAC") ¶ 10.) Since  [*3] the addition of its first major attraction in 1965, Universal Studios has become one of the world's largest and most visited theme parks, offering amusement rides, live entertainment, dining, and tours of real movie studios and special effects stages to millions of visitors each year. (Compl. ¶ 1; FAC ¶ 1.) Indeed, occupying a significant parcel of land in the hills above Los Angeles, it is known as the "Entertainment Capital of L.A.." (Id.)
One of the many amusement rides offered at Universal Studios is a rollercoaster named "The Revenge of the Mummy." (Compl. ¶ 3; FAC ¶ 3.) Opened to the public fairly recently, and with a cost of approximately $ 40 million, The Mummy is a state-of-the-art rollercoaster, and a major attraction at the theme park. (Compl. ¶ 14; FAC ¶ 14.) The ride is in essence an enclosed, steel rollercoaster, where passengers—secured by a metal safety bar fastened across their lap—sit in a runaway mine car for two minutes of twists and turns and close encounters with the walking dead, traveling at speeds of up to forty-five miles per hour. (See Compl. ¶ 14; FAC ¶ 14; Tusch Decl. ¶ 2.)
As "owner[s] and operator[s]" of Universal Studios theme park, a facility with "permanent  [*4] amusement park ride[s] in public operation," Defendants are subject to the requirements of California Code of Regulations section 3195.3. (See Compl. ¶ 1; FAC ¶ 10.) One of the provisions in section 3195.3 requires the owner and operator of a permanent amusement park ride to maintain "[p]rocedures for implementing . . . patron safety measures necessary to ensure the operation of the ride in a manner that is safe for all patrons." Cal. Code Reg. § 3195.3(a)(4)(D). The safety measures "shall consist of," among other things, "[p]rocedures to ensure the implementation of all patron-specific safety measures necessary for operation of the ride in a manner that is safe for all patrons. These procedures shall, at a minimum, implement all specific manufacturer recommendations." Id. (emphasis added). Among the manufacturer recommendations for The Mummy are restrictions about who may ride the rollercoaster. (See Tuch Decl. Ex. A, at 14; Ex. B, at 107.) The restrictions indicate that riders "must have one functioning arm/hand and be capable of grasping handhold points and maintaining safe posture." (Tuch Decl. Ex. A, at 14.) They also require that riders have at least one leg that can be placed  [*5] "behind the shin pad," and at least one foot placed "flat on the floor."1 (See id.)
Plaintiffs Angel Castelan and Marvin Huezo are friends and frequent patrons of Universal Studios theme park. (Compl. ¶¶ 12, 19; FAC ¶¶ 12, 19.) In fact, Castelan purchased special "front of the line" passes, in addition to annual passes to the theme park, so that he can maximize the number of rides he enjoys each time he patronizes Universal Studios. (Compl. ¶ 12; FAC ¶ 12.) The Mummy is one of Castelan's favorite rides. (Compl. ¶ 15; FAC ¶ 15.) Unfortunately, however, Plaintiffs are not permitted to ride The Mummy, although they have done so in the past. (See Compl. ¶¶ 16-20; FAC ¶¶ 16-20.) Mr. Castelan does not have at least "one functioning arm [and] hand," and therefore does  [*6] not satisfy the rider requirements in the manufacturer recommendations for The Mummy.2 And Mr. Huezo does not have at least one leg that may be placed "behind the shin pad," and therefore he also does not satisfy the rider requirements.3 On at least two separate occasions, Universal staff has refused to permit Castelan to ride The Mummy—in October 2010, and again in October 2011.4 (Compl. ¶¶ 17-20; FAC ¶¶ 17-20.) Huezo was also denied permission to ride the ride in October 2011. In each instance, the theme park staff indicated that Castelan could not ride the rollercoaster "because he did not have hands and arms," and Huezo could not ride "because he did not have legs." (Compl. ¶ 20; FAC ¶ 20; accord Compl. ¶ 17; FAC ¶ 17.)
Understandably, Plaintiffs were offended after being denied access to The Mummy, and believed  [*7] they had been the victims of wrongful discrimination, in violation of the ADA. Accordingly, on June 22, 2012, they filed this lawsuit, alleging violations of the ADA, in addition to various California statutes.5 (Dkt. No. 1.) In total, Plaintiffs' complaint contains four causes of action. Only the first cause of action alleges violations of the ADA; it alleges not only a violation with respect to rider eligibility for The Mummy ("ridership claim"), but also violations with respect to general accessibility throughout the Universal Studios theme park and Universal City Walk.
On June 24, 2013, Defendants filed the instant motion for summary judgment. (Dkt. No. 39.) In their motion, Defendants contend that Plaintiffs' ADA ridership claim fails because the rider restrictions are necessary for the lawful and safe operation of The Mummy. (Mot. 8-11.) They also argue that the requested modifications to Defendants' policies and The Mummy ride itself would not  [*8] be reasonable. (Mot. 11-18.)
On December 17, 2013, the parties stipulated for leave to file Plaintiffs' first amended complaint, (Dkt. No. 47), which the Court granted on December 19, 2013, (Dkt. No. 49). On December 27, 2013, Plaintiffs filed their first amended complaint. (Dkt. No. 51.) To avoid mooting the instant motion as a result of Plaintiffs' first amended complaint, on January 8, 2014, the parties stipulated to regard the instant motion as directed to Plaintiffs' first amended complaint. (Dkt. No. 54.)

III. LEGAL STANDARD
Summary judgment is appropriate when, after adequate discovery, the evidence demonstrates that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56. A disputed fact is material where its resolution might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). An issue is genuine if the evidence is sufficient for a reasonable jury to return a verdict for the non-moving party. Id. A court may consider the pleadings, discovery and disclosure materials, and any affidavits on file. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(2). Where the moving party's  [*9] version of events differs from the non-moving party's version, a court must view the facts and draw reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Scott v. Harris, 550 U.S. 372, 378, 127 S. Ct. 1769, 167 L. Ed. 2d 686 (2007).
The moving party bears the initial burden of establishing the absence of a genuine issue of material fact. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323-24, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). The moving party may satisfy that burden by showing "that there is an absence of evidence to support the non-moving party's case." Id. at 325.
Once the moving party has met its burden, the non-moving party "must do more than simply show that there is some metaphysical doubt as to the material facts." Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986). Rather, the non-moving party must go beyond the pleadings and identify specific facts that show a genuine issue for trial. Id. at 587. Only genuine disputes over facts that might affect the outcome of the suit will properly preclude the entry of summary judgment. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248; see also Arpin v. Santa Clara Valley Transp. Agency, 261 F.3d 912, 919 (9th Cir. 2001) (finding that the non-moving party must present specific evidence  [*10] from which a reasonable jury could return a verdict in its favor). A genuine issue of material fact must be more than a scintilla of evidence, or evidence that is merely colorable or not significantly probative. Addisu v. Fred Meyer, Inc., 198 F.3d 1130, 1134 (9th Cir. 2000).
Although a court may rely on materials in the record that neither party cited, it need only consider cited materials. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(3). Therefore, a court may properly rely on the non-moving party to specifically identify the evidence that precludes summary judgment. Keenan v. Allan, 91 F.3d 1275, 1279 (9th Cir. 1996).
Finally, the evidence presented by the parties must be admissible. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e). Conclusory or speculative testimony in affidavits and moving papers is insufficient to raise a genuine issue of fact and defeat summary judgment. Thornhill's Publ'g Co. v. GTE Corp., 594 F.2d 730, 738 (9th Cir. 1979). Conversely, a genuine dispute over a material fact exists if there is sufficient evidence supporting the claimed factual dispute, requiring a judge or jury to resolve the differing versions of the truth. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 253.

IV. DISCUSSION
The issues before the Court have evolved over  [*11] time. Defendants have always contended they are entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiffs' so-called ridership claim: alleged discrimination in excluding Plaintiffs from The Mummy rollercoaster in violation of the ADA.
Originally, in their motion, Defendants attempted to construe Plaintiffs' claims. They construed the ridership claim to be supported by Plaintiffs' allegation that Defendants discriminated by "[i]mposing eligibility criteria that screen out individuals with disabilities from the full and equal enjoyment of Defendants' goods, services, facilities," in violation of 28 C.F.R. § 36.301(a)–(b) and 42 U.S.C. § 12182(b)(2)(A)(i). (Compl. ¶ 32; FAC ¶ 42.) Defendants also construed a request in Plaintiffs' prayer for relief as another basis for their ridership claim. In their prayer for relief, Plaintiffs request the Court for a judgment, "[o]rdering Defendants to modify their policies and procedures to ensure that they do not arbitrarily and capriciously discriminate against persons with disabilities." (Compl. 23:21-23.) Defendants construed this request to be a claim pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 12182(b)(2)(A)(ii). (Mot. 7:10-17.) In their motion, Defendants believed that by these  [*12] two allegations Plaintiffs were asserting liability for enforcing the rider eligibility criteria recommended by the rollercoaster's manufacturer. (See Mot. 8-15.) Accordingly, Defendants argued that Plaintiffs' claim fails because California law requires Defendants to enforce the eligibility criteria recommended by the rollercoaster's manufacturer, and it would be unreasonable to force Defendants to violate California law. (Mot. 1-2, 8-15.)
In their opposition, Plaintiffs clarified the ridership theories on which they proceed under the ADA. They do not contend Defendants violate the ADA by imposing the rider eligibility criteria that California law requires. (Opp'n 2.) Instead, they contend Defendants violated the ADA by failing to design a ride that does not require rider eligibility criteria that excludes patrons with disabilities. (Opp'n 2-3, 5-6.) As they explain in their opposition, Plaintiffs contend "the relevant inquiry lies not in whether this Court should order [Defendants] to violate California law, but in whether [Defendants] ha[ve] discriminated against disabled guests in [their] ride design, alteration and procurement process, which all occur long before an Operations  [*13] Manual is even contemplated." (Opp'n 6:3-6.)
Accordingly, the issues before the Court effectively reduce to one question: whether the ADA requires an amusement park to design rides that all patrons may ride, regardless of a patron's disabilities. In their reply and at the hearing, Defendants provided three reasons why there is no such requirement: (1) the ADA does not require provision of goods or services designed for use by persons with disabilities; (2) the ADA's express design and construction standards for amusement park rides do not require rides themselves to be accessible to persons with disabilities; and (3) even assuming there were a requirement to design a ride that is accessible to persons with disabilities, there would always be at least someone who would be excluded. For the reasons discussed below, the Court agrees with Defendants.

A. The ADA Does Not Require Provision of Goods or Services Designed for Persons With Disabilities
Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 12182-12189, prohibits discrimination on the basis of a person's disability "in the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations  [*14] of any place of public accommodation."6 42 U.S.C. § 12182(a). Discrimination under the Act may arise in various forms: denial of benefits of goods or services; provision of unequal goods or services; provision of separate goods or services; use of "eligibility criteria that screen out or tend to screen out" persons with disabilities; "failure to make reasonable modifications in policies, practices, or procedures when such modifications are necessary to afford such goods, [or] services . . . to individuals with disabilities; "failure to take such steps as may be necessary to ensure that no individual with a disability is excluded, denied services, segregated or otherwise treated differently than other individuals because of the absence of auxiliary aids and services; failure to remove architectural barriers, and communication barriers that are structural in nature, or provide goods and services through alternative methods. 42 U.S.C. § 12182(b)(1)(A)(i)–(iii); § 12182(b)(2)(A)(i)–(v).
Superficially, it might appear that  [*15] Defendants' exclusion of Plaintiffs from The Mummy qualifies as discrimination. For example, one might reason that Defendants have denied Plaintiffs the full and equal enjoyment of the services of riding The Mummy. Additionally, one could argue that Defendants have indeed used eligibility criteria that screen out Plaintiffs from enjoying The Mummy. But, as briefly discussed above, Defendants must exclude Plaintiffs pursuant to California law: the manufacturer's operations manual for The Mummy requires it (Tuch Decl. Ex. A, at 14), and California law requires enforcement of the manufacturer's recommendations, California Code of Regulations § 3195.3(a)(4)(D). Thus, Plaintiffs contend Defendants should have designed a ride that would not have required their exclusion.
In Weyer v. Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp., 198 F.3d 1104 (9th Cir. 2000), the Ninth Circuit interpreted the meaning of Title III, and held that it does not require provision of goods or services specifically tailored to persons with disabilities. Specifically, the court explained that "whatever goods or services the place [of public accommodation] provides, it cannot discriminate on the basis of disability in providing  [*16] enjoyment of those goods and services." Id. at 1115. The court further explained that Title III "does not require provision of different goods or services, just nondiscriminatory enjoyment of those that are provided." Id. Thus, it appears that in the Ninth Circuit focuses the Title III inquiry not on the goods and services themselves but on how they are provided or offered to consumers. To illustrate, the circuit court referred to the example of a bookstore, indicating it "need not assure that the books are available in Braille," but that it "cannot discriminate against disabled people in granting access" to the store. Id. (emphasis added). In applying its interpretation to the facts of Weyer itself, the Ninth Circuit held that "an insurance office must be physically accessible to the disabled but need not provide insurance that treats the disabled equally with the non-disabled." Id. (emphasis added). Accordingly, the Ninth Circuit has made it apparent that Title III does not govern the goods and services that a place of public accommodation decides to offer; it governs how the place of public accommodation provides them.
Applying the rule to this case, Defendants may offer and provide  [*17] to the public—and therefore design as well—"whatever goods or services" they desire—including rollercoasters that have so many twists, turns, jolts, drops, loops, and excessive speeds that a manufacturer, and consequently California, might limit the ride to only persons with at least one hand and leg. Nevertheless, Defendants must ensure that those goods, services, and rollercoasters are physically accessible to persons with disabilities, in accordance with the regulations promulgated under the ADA—even if those persons are otherwise precluded from the ride due to its extreme design and consequent safety requirements.
In their opposition and at the hearing, Plaintiffs entirely failed to discuss or even mention the Ninth Circuit's explanation in Weyer. Instead, they attempted to argue that "the analogy of the inventory and the Braille books" is inapplicable to this case. (Tr. 13: 5-14:3.) In essence, Plaintiffs argue that Braille books may be used only by a person who is blind, whereas a rollercoaster designed to be accessible to persons with disabilities could be used by "able bodies and persons with disabilities alike." (Tr. 13:12-19 ("What we're saying is if they had in the early  [*18] process of procurement and design made [the ride] more accessible, it would be there for able bodies and persons with disabilities alike.").) Admittedly, the Braille book and bookstore analogy breaks down at some point. Yet the Court need not lose sight of the Ninth Circuit's indication that Title III does not regulate the goods and services that are actually provided: "whatever goods or services the place provides, it cannot discriminate on the basis of disability"; and "[Title III] does not require provision of different goods or services, just nondiscriminatory enjoyment of those that are provided." Weyer, 198 F.3d at 1115 (emphasis added). Thus, as discussed above, this Court focuses not on what is provided, but how it is provided. Accordingly, the Court finds Plaintiffs' argument to be unpersuasive.
Given the Ninth Circuit's interpretation in Weyer, the Court holds that Defendants have no duty under the ADA to design an amusement park ride that Plaintiffs are able to ride in spite of their disabilities. On this basis, the Court GRANTS Defendants' motion for summary judgment on Plaintiffs' ridership claim.

B. Pursuant to 28 C.F.R. § 36.301, Persons With Disabilities May Be Excluded  [*19] For Safety Reasons
Section 36.301 of Title 28 of the Code of Federal Regulations provides further support for the Court's analysis above, and serves as an independent basis for granting Defendants' motion. In promulgating 28 C.F.R. § 36.301, the Department of Justice recognized that some goods and services might require the exclusion of persons with disabilities due to safety concerns. Accordingly, while generally "[a] public accommodation shall not impose or apply eligibility criteria that screen out . . . an individual with a disability," "[a] public accommodation may impose legitimate safety requirements that are necessary for safe operation." 28 C.F.R. § 36.301(a)–(b). With respect to § 36.301, the DOJ provides two examples of eligibility criteria that would exclude persons with disabilities due to safety requirements: (1) "height requirements for certain amusement park rides"; and (2) "a requirement that all participants in a recreational rafting expedition be able to meet a necessary level of swimming proficiency." 56 Fed. Reg. 35544-01.
Inherent in the exception and the corresponding examples is the principle that some activities—including amusement park rides—pose sufficient safety  [*20] risks that not everyone may enjoy participation in them. Thus, it readily follows that the ADA does not prevent Defendants from designing an amusement park ride whose safe operation might require excluding persons with disabilities. Accordingly, Defendants cannot be held liable under the ADA for designing The Mummy even though unfortunately, Plaintiffs are excluded from it. The ride's manufacturer has specified that safe operation of The Mummy limits riders to those who have at least one "functioning arm/hand and be capable of grasping handhold points and maintaining safe posture," as well as those who have at least one leg and foot. (Tuch Decl. Ex. A, at 14.)
In their opposition, Plaintiffs attempt to make this a factual issue, arguing that Defendants have failed to present facts that demonstrate the manufacturer's safety criteria are indeed necessary. (See Opp'n 67; 9:10-17; 12:4-20.) They also assert that Castelan has in times past been permitted to ride the rollercoaster "hundreds of times" without incident. But in the Court's view, even if Castelan has ridden The Mummy previously, this fact is irrelevant—doing so was in contravention of California state law.7 The Court is unwilling  [*21] to require Defendants to second-guess the manufacturer's safety requirements. California law requires enforcement of the manufacturer's safety requirements, and the manufacturer has directed that riders must have at least one functioning arm and hand, and at least one leg and foot. It is not Defendants' responsibility to challenge the manufacturer's operating manual, and ensure these requirements are in fact necessary for the safe operation of The Mummy. If Plaintiffs believe the restrictions are overprotective, they are free to initiate an action against the manufacturer. For the purposes of this motion, however, the Court is satisfied that California law effectively requires Defendants to enforce the eligibility criteria of which Plaintiffs now complain.
In short, in the Court's view, 28 C.F.R. § 36.301(b) provides another, independent basis for the proposition that the ADA does not prevent Defendants from designing and procuring a ride whose safe operation requires the exclusion of Plaintiffs  [*22] due to their disabilities. Because California law requires Defendants to enforce the manufacturer's safety requirements, which exclude Plaintiffs due to their disabilities, Defendants have satisfied their burden in demonstrating that The Mummy is such a ride. Accordingly, on this basis, the Court GRANTS Defendants' motion for summary judgment on Plaintiffs' ridership claim.

C. Plaintiffs' Arguments are Unpersuasive
Finally, at the hearing, Plaintiffs asserted that the ADA in fact requires Defendants to have designed a ride that itself is accessible to all. (Tr. 13-14.) In response to the Court's query as to whether they had any supporting authority for their assertion, Plaintiffs pointed to the ADA Accessibility Guidelines. (Tr. 14.)
The ADA Accessibility Guidelines ("ADAAG") were "[p]romulgated by the Attorney general to 'carry out the provisions' of the ADA." Chapman v. Pier 1 Imports (U.S.) Inc., 631 F.3d 939, 945 (9th Cir. 2011). The ADAAG's requirements, which "are as precise as they are thorough," "provide[] the objective contours of the standard that architectural features must not impede disabled individuals' full and equal enjoyment of accommodations." Id. The requirements include  [*23] specific instructions for amusement park rides, and are essentially limited to accommodations for transferring an amusement park guest who is confined to a wheel chair into the amusement ride.8 36 C.F.R. Part 1191 App'x D, Ch. 10, 1002.1-1002.6.1.
According to Plaintiffs, "[i]t makes no sense that Congress is going to tell you to get the person with disabilities to the ride, make sure they can get in the ride, [but then] take them out because [the ride is] not designed for them." (Tr. 14:14-17.) This argument ignores that a great number of persons confined to a wheelchair may still satisfy the requirements for riding The Mummy. That is, just because someone is confined to a wheelchair does not mean they have no functioning arm and hand, or no leg. Therefore, in the case of The Mummy, the ADAAG's guidelines provide accessibility to a great number of persons who have disabilities contemplated by these specific requirements. Accordingly, the Court rejects the argument that the ADAAG's requirements  [*24] for a transfer device necessarily require design of a rollercoaster that permits all persons access, regardless of a person's disabilities.

V. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, Defendants' motion is GRANTED.
IT IS SO ORDERED.


End of Document

