Coleman v. Portfolio Recovery Assocs.
United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia, Norfolk Division
April 16, 2019, Decided; April 17, 2019, Filed
ACTION NO. 2:17cv204

Reporter
2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 236097 *; 2019 WL 11585359
CHANTELL COLEMAN, Plaintiff, v. PORTFOLIO RECOVERY ASSOCIATES, LLC, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] Chantell Coleman, Plaintiff, Pro se, Virginia Beach, VA.
For Portfolio Recovery Associates LLC, Defendant: David Christopher Burton, LEAD ATTORNEY, Williams Mullen, Virginia Beach, VA; Allison Annette Cohan, PRO HAC VICE, Williams Mullen (NC-NA), Raleigh, NC.
Judges: Arenda L. Wright Allen, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Arenda L. Wright Allen
Opinion



DISMISSAL ORDER
This matter is before the Court on Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment and Defendant's "Motion to Strike ECF Doc. No. 35" ("Motion to Strike"). Mot. Summ. J., ECF No. 31; Mot. Strike, ECF No. 36. The Court concludes that oral argument is unnecessary because the facts and legal arguments are adequately presented in the parties' briefs. For the reasons set forth below, Defendant's Motion to Strike, ECF No. 36, is DENIED; and Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment, ECF No. 31, is GRANTED.
I. Procedural Background
Plaintiff, appearing pro se, filed suit against Defendant, her former employer, alleging a number of wrongdoings related to her former employment. Am. Compl., ECF No. 14. Specifically, Plaintiff asserted claims against Defendant for: (i) disability harassment under the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 ("ADA"); (ii) retaliation [*2]  under the ADA; (iii) failure to accommodate under the ADA; (iv) defamation; and (v) assault. Id. at 1-13. On July 2,2018, the Court entered an Order that granted in part and denied in part a Motion to Dismiss filed by Defendant. Order, ECF No. 24. After the Court's July 2, 2018 Order, the following claims remain in this action: (i) an ADA retaliation claim; (ii) an ADA failure to accommodate claim; and (iii) a state law assault claim. Id. at 24.
On November 5, 2018, Defendant filed a Motion for Summary Judgment, and provided Plaintiff with a proper Roseboro notice pursuant to Rule 7(K) of the Local Civil Rules of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia. See Mot. Summ. J. at 1-2, ECF No. 31; E.D. Va. Loc. Civ. R. 7(K). In support of its motion, Defendant attached: (i) excerpts from Plaintiff's deposition; (ii) copies of relevant employment records; (iii) a declaration of Tanya Black, Plaintiff's former Team Lead ("Black Declaration"), along with copies of relevant employment records; (iv) a declaration of Angela Lewis, an Operations Manager who oversaw Plaintiff's team ("Lewis Declaration"), along with copies of relevant employment records; (v) documents related to Charges of Discrimination filed by Plaintiff with the Equal [*3]  Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC"); and (vi) a declaration of Alexandra E. Konikoff, Counsel and Vice President of Business Relations for Defendant ("Konikoff Declaration"), along with excerpts of Defendant's Employee Handbook. Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J., ECF No. 32.
Plaintiff filed a timely opposition ("Opposition"), but did not attach any supporting documents thereto. Opp'n, ECF No. 33. Defendant filed a timely reply ("Reply"), and attached: (i) additional excerpts from Plaintiff's deposition; and (ii) a second declaration of Alexandra E. Konikoff ("Second Konikoff Declaration"), along with copies of relevant employment records. Reply, ECF No. 34.
On December 17, 2018, Plaintiff filed a surreply ("Surreply") without first obtaining leave of Court to do so.1 Surreply, ECF No. 35. In support of her Surreply, Plaintiff attached copies of: (i) printouts from the Internet regarding laws involving "recording a conversation" and "emotional abuse;" (ii) Plaintiff's medical records; (iii) documents showing that Plaintiff's medications "calmed [her] to the point of coloring and sitting in silence" at work; (iv) work-related emails and documents; and (v) correspondence with Defendant's counsel [*4]  regarding deposition scheduling. Id. On December 19, 2018, Defendant filed a Motion to Strike, in which it asks the Court to strike Plaintiff's unauthorized Surreply. Mot. Strike, ECF No. 36. Plaintiff did not file an opposition to Defendant's Motion to Strike, and her deadline to do so has expired. Both pending motions are ripe for decision.
II. Factual Background
A. Facts Related to Plaintiff's ADA Retaliation Claim
Plaintiff began working full-time for Defendant in August 2014 as a Legal Clerk. Pl. Dep. at 8, ECF No. 32-1; Second Konikoff Decl. ¶ 4, ECF No. 34-2. Plaintiff was assigned to a litigation team that was led by Tanya Black. Black Decl. ¶ 2, ECF No. 32-3. In early 2015, Plaintiff and Ms. Black were involved in a "non-work related disagreement." Mar. 29, 2016 Letter, attached as Ex. 4 to Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J., ECF No. 32-4. As a result of the "non-work related disagreement," Plaintiff claimed that Ms. Black would "make[] snide and derogatory comments about [Plaintiff]" at work, and "on occasion," would "yell[] across the room at [Plaintiff]." Id. at 1.
In early 2016, Angela Lewis, an Operations Manager for Defendant, assumed the responsibility of overseeing Plaintiff's litigation [*5]  team, and became Plaintiff's direct supervisor. Lewis Decl. ¶ 2, ECF No. 32-6; see also Answer at 2, ECF No. 25. On February 1, 2016, Plaintiff filed an internal complaint with Defendant regarding Ms. Black. Feb. 25, 2016 Letter, attached as Ex. 2 to Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J., ECF No. 32-2. In the internal complaint, Plaintiff claimed that Ms. Black "exhibited inappropriate behavior by sending inappropriate text messages, sending harsh/harassing emails, throwing a package at [Plaintiff], and calling [Plaintiff] an inappropriate name while she was at the copier." Id. at 1. Defendant conducted an investigation, but was "unable to corroborate" Plaintiff's claims. Id. Nevertheless, in a letter dated February 25, 2016, Defendant informed Ms. Black of Plaintiff's claims, reminded Ms. Black of its Workplace Conduct Policy, and emphasized the importance of maintaining a work environment that is "free from any form of harassment, discrimination, and/or intimidation." Id.
On March 11, 2016, Plaintiff filed a second internal complaint with Defendant regarding Ms. Black. Mar. 29, 2016 Letter at 1. In the second internal complaint, Plaintiff claimed that Ms. Black "display[ed] inappropriate behavior in the [*6]  workplace and made derogatory comments in [Plaintiff's] presence[]." Id. Plaintiff also claimed that Ms. Black "harasses and bullies [Plaintiff] and other team members," and "swung a package at [Plaintiff]." Id. Plaintiff feared that Ms. Black "could be physically aggressive toward [Plaintiff] in the future." Id. Defendant conducted another investigation; however, "the investigation did not reveal evidence to corroborate [Plaintiff's] allegations." Id.
Around this timeframe, Ms. Lewis and Joseph Hood, Assistant Vice President, met with Plaintiff "to discuss [Plaintiff's] ongoing attendance issues." Lewis Decl. ¶ 5. Shortly thereafter, on March 28, 2016, Plaintiff filed an internal complaint with Defendant regarding Ms. Lewis. Apr. 8, 2016 Letter, attached as Ex. 5 to Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J., ECF No. 32-5. In the internal complaint, Plaintiff claimed that Ms. Lewis "made inappropriate comments about an employee's job knowledge," and "made reference to terminating [Plaintiff's] employment without valid reason." Id. at 1. Defendant conducted an investigation; however, Defendant "did not find evidence to substantiate the allegations of inappropriate behavior by [Ms.] Lewis." Id. In a letter to [*7]  Plaintiff dated April 8, 2016, Defendant summarized the findings of its investigation, and reminded Plaintiff of the importance of complying with the "Company's Attendance and Time Recording policies." Id. (noting that during a recent meeting with Ms. Lewis and Mr. Hood, Plaintiff admitted to "forgetting to regularly clock in/out for breaks or inform the O[perations] M[anager] when [Plaintiff] needed to step away from the office to make personal phone calls").
On April 3, 2016, shortly before Defendant concluded its investigation into Plaintiffs internal complaint regarding Ms. Lewis (as discussed above), Plaintiff took a leave of absence. Am. Compl. at 3, ECF No. 14; Answer at 4. The following day, Plaintiff filed for short-term disability benefits with MetLife, and claimed that she suffered from depression. MetLife Denial Letter, attached as Ex. 7 to Mem. Supp. Mot. Sumrn. J., ECF No. 32-7. MetLife ultimately denied Plaintiffs request for short-term disability benefits after it determined that Plaintiffs "medical information would not support functional limitations precluding work function." Id. at 1.
On May 11, 2016, prior to returning from leave, Plaintiff filed a Charge of Discrimination [*8]  against Defendant with the EEOC ("First EEOC Charge"). First EEOC Charge, attached as Ex. 8 to Mem. Supp. Summ. J., ECF No. 32-8. In her First EEOC Charge, Plaintiff alleged that she had been "subjected to harassment" from Ms. Black and Ms. Lewis, and that "no action has been taken to resolve [Plaintiffs] concerns." Id. at 1. Plaintiff claimed that the "harassment . . . caused [her] to suffer from a medical impairment in violation of the [ADA]."2 Id.
Plaintiff remained out on leave through June 12, 2016. See Am. Compl. at 5; Answer at 6. Within a month of Plaintiff's return, Plaintiffs attendance issues — which were previously addressed with Plaintiff in March 2016 — continued. See Disciplinary Action Summary at 2, attached as Ex. 16 to Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J., ECF No. 32-16 (listing Plaintiffs "attendance violations"); see also Lewis Decl. I 5; Apr. 8, 2016 Letter at 1. On July 13, 2016, Defendant counseled Plaintiff about her breaks and the need to clock out when taking breaks. See Am. Compl. at 6; Answer at 8. On July 14, 2016, Plaintiff met with Mr. Hood, Ms. Lewis, and Andrea Sprately, a Human Resources representative. Lewis Decl. ¶ 7. During the meeting, Plaintiff [*9]  was advised "about the Company's expectations for her taking breaks from work, as [Plaintiff] had been taking excessive breaks at unapproved times." Id.
On July 25, 2016, Plaintiff filed a second Charge of Discrimination against Defendant with the EEOC ("Second EEOC Charge"). Second EEOC Charge, attached as Ex. 22 to Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J., ECF No. 32-22. In her Second EEOC Charge, Plaintiff alleged:
I was hired on December 10,2015, in the Quality Control Department. My current position is Legal Clerk. Since 2/2015, I have been subjected to harassment from Tanya Black (Team Lead) and Angela Lewis (Manager). I have filed internal complaints and no action has been taken to resolve my concerns. On or [a]bout April 3, 2016, I notified my employer about my disability and began a medical leave of absence. On or about May 23, 2016, I filed an EEOC charge for the harassment I had been subjected to prior to going on medical leave. I returned to work on June 13, 2016. I requested a reasonable accommodation of not being placed under the supervisor of the individuals who had harassed me.3 My request was denied. The . . . harassment continued and has escalated. My regular work assignments have been [*10]  taken from me and I am being given random work to do. I am being followed around by Angela during my breaks.
My work is being more closely monitored than my co[-]workers. I have been called into the office numerous times since my return. I have been placed back in [the] work area with Tanya Black who is one of the harassers. I have been told that if I have a panic attack, I need to clock out of work. On July 18, 2016, I resubmitted my request for an accommodation. My request has still not been granted and I am continuing to be harass[ed].
Angela Lewis told a co[-]worker that she was going to get rid of me before I got her fired.
I believe that I am being denied a reason[able] accommodation and subjected to the above described harassment in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended and for having previous internal complaints of discrimination and an EEOC Charge of Discrimination.
Id.
On August 9, 2016, Plaintiff was called to a meeting with Ms. Lewis and Mr. Hood. Lewis Decl. ¶ 9; see also Am. Compl. at 8. During the meeting, the parties discussed Plaintiff's "continued attendance issues," "the ongoing problem of [Plaintiff] taking breaks out of structure," [*11]  and Plaintiff's "failure to reach production goals since returning from her leave of absence." Lewis Decl. ¶ 9. Plaintiff "acknowledged that she understood [Defendant's] expectations for her and that she had not met them." Id.; see also Pl. Dep. at 100 (admitting that "it was hard for [Plaintiff] to perform [her] job" and that Plaintiff "would not get through very many accounts daily").
On August 12, 2016, Plaintiff was called to a "coaching and counseling meeting" with Ms. Lewis, Mr. Hood, and Terry Webb, Defendant's Employee Relations Consultant. See Lewis Decl. ¶¶ 4, 10; Am. Compl. at 8; Answer at 9. Plaintiff "abruptly left" the meeting, "proceeded to punch a metal pole on company property, which damaged it," and "shouted and cursed at [Defendant's] employees." Lewis Decl. ¶ 10; see also Konikoff Decl. ¶ 5, ECF No. 32-25. Due to Plaintiff's conduct, Defendant called the Norfolk Police Department, and an officer was dispatched to the scene. Konikoff Decl. ¶ 5.
As set forth in its Employee Handbook, Defendant maintains a "Zero Tolerance for Workplace Violence" policy that governs the behavior of all employees. Id. ¶¶ 3-4; see also Employee Handbook, attached as Ex. A to Konikoff Declaration. [*12]  The policy states, in part: "The Company adheres to a 'zero-tolerance' policy for violence and aggression in the workplace and we expect employees to conduct themselves in a non-threatening, non-abusive manner at all times." Employee Handbook at 52.
Following the events of August 12, 2016, when Plaintiff "punched a metal pole," "dented it," and "shouted and cursed at [Defendant's] employees," Defendant determined that Plaintiff's conduct violated its "Zero Tolerance for Workplace Violence" policy. Konikoff Decl. ¶ 5. As a result, Defendant terminated Plaintiff's employment.4 Id. ¶ 6; see also Termination Letter, attached as Ex. 24 to Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J., ECF No. 32-24. In Plaintiff's termination letter, which was dated August 16, 2016, Defendant provided the following explanation to Plaintiff:
On August 12, 2016, while in a meeting with management and Human Resources[,] you abruptly walked out and slammed the conference room door behind you. Moments later you were seen physically hitting and dent[ing] a mental column attached to the outside of the building while yelling. As a result of your actions, the Norfolk Police Department was called and remained on the scene. Prior to you leaving the property, the [*13]  Company's Security Officer requested that you turn in your Company security badge, at which time you refused and stated to the effect of, "no, this discussion is not over yet."
On the same day, the Company attempted to contact you[,] but was unable to speak with you. Subsequently, a message was left informing you that your employment was suspended pending further investigation.
It has been determined that you violated the Company's Workplace Health and Safety policy which states, "The Company adheres to a 'zero-tolerance' policy for violence and aggression in the workplace and we expect employees to conduct themselves in a non-threatening, non-abusive manner at all times." Further, you violated the Workplace Conduct policy by acts of aggressive and violent behavior. . . .
As a result of your actions and policy violations described above, the Company has made the decision to terminate your employment effective August 16, 2016.
Termination Letter at 1.5
B. Facts Related to Plaintiffs ADA Failure to Accommodate Claim
Between May 31, 2016 and July 15, 2016, Plaintiff submitted three requests for workplace accommodations to Defendant. Each request, and response thereto, is summarized below.
i. Plaintiffs First [*14]  Accommodation Request
On May 31, 2016, Plaintiff submitted her first request for a workplace accommodation to Defendant ("First Accommodation Request"). June 13, 2016 Letter, attached as Ex. 10 to Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J., ECF No. 32-10; see also Pl. Dep. at 55. In her First Accommodation Request, Plaintiff asked Defendant to: (i) "[m]ove [Plaintiff] from [her] current team, building or department" and (ii) authorize Plaintiff to have "[n]o contact with [her] Team Lead and minimal contact with [her] current manager." June 13, 2016 Letter at 1; see also Pl. Dep. at 55. In response to Plaintiff's First Accommodation Request, Defendant provided Plaintiff with a "Certification of Health Care Provider form to be completed by [Plaintiffs] physician." June 13, 2016 Letter at 1.
On June 10, 2016, Defendant received a Certification of Health Care Provider form ("First Certification of Health Care Provider") that was completed by Dr. Matthew Sachs. Id.; see also First Certification Health Care Provider, attached as Ex. 11 to Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J., ECF No. 32-11. Dr. Sachs indicated that Plaintiff did not have a "physical or mental impairment," and as a result, no accommodations were necessary [*15]  "to permit [Plaintiff] to perform the essential functions of [her] position." First Certification Health Care Provider at 1-2.
Based on the information received from Dr. Sachs, Defendant notified Plaintiff on June 13, 2016, that her First Accommodation Request was denied "at this time." June 13, 2016 Letter at 1; see also Pl. Dep. at 63 (admitting that Defendant "had the right to reject [Plaintiffs] [First] [A]ccommodation [R]equest" based on the information contained in the First Certification of Health Care Provider). Defendant advised Plaintiff that if she felt that she "still require[d] workplace accommodation," she should "submit [her] completed forms to the Human Resources Department for consideration." June 13, 2016 Letter at 1.
ii. Plaintiffs Second Accommodation Request
On June 22, 2016, Plaintiff submitted her second request for a workplace accommodation to Defendant ("Second Accommodation Request"). June 29, 2016 Letter, attached as Ex. 14 to Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J., ECF No. 32-14; see also Pl. Dep. at 66-68. In response to Plaintiffs Second Accommodation Request, Defendant again provided Plaintiff with a "Certification of Health Care Provider form to be completed by [Plaintiff's] physician." June 29, 2016 Letter at 1. [*16] 
On June 27, 2016, Defendant received a Certification of Health Care Provider form ("Second Certification of Health Care Provider") that was completed by Dr. Raja Bakhashi. Id.; see also Second Certification Health Care Provider, attached as Ex. 15 to Mem. Supp. Mot. Swum. J., ECF No. 32-15. Dr. Bakhashi indicated that Plaintiff suffers from "anxiety," that commenced on or about March 25, 2016, that affects Plaintiff's ability to "interact[] w[ith] superiors," specifically, Ms. Black and Ms. Lewis. Second Certification Health Care Provider at 1. Dr. Balchashi recommended that Plaintiff "be transferred to a different team." Id.
After considering Dr. Balchashi's recommendation, Defendant advised Plaintiff of its decision in a letter dated June 29, 2016. See June 29, 2016 Letter at 1-2. In its June 29, 2016 Letter, Defendant first acknowledged Dr. Bakhashi's findings regarding Plaintiff's anxiety and its effect on Plaintiff's ability to interact with her superiors. Id. at I. Next, Defendant reminded Plaintiff that one of the essential functions of Plaintiff's job is to "interact with superiors, i.e., update department manager and team members about any recent changes as it relates to [the] work process." Id. Defendant ultimately denied Plaintiffs Second Accommodation [*17]  Request, and explained that "[a]fter a careful review of [Plaintiff's] request, and considering [Plaintiff's] limitations, the essential functions of [Plaintiff's] position, and [Defendant's] operational necessities," Defendant was unable to provide the requested accommodation "at this time." Id. Defendant specifically noted that "[t]he work environment requires employees to interact with superiors/management during the course of daily business." Id. However, as an "alternative accommodation[] in order to assist [Plaintiff] with working effectively with supervisors while also meeting the Company's operational necessities," Defendant encouraged Plaintiff to: (i) "[m]aintain open communication;" (ii) "[e]stablish written long term and short term goals for production;" and (iii) "[d]evelop strategies to deal with problems before they arise." Id.
iii. Plaintiff's Third Accommodation Request
On July 15, 2016, Plaintiff submitted her third request for a workplace accommodation ("Third Accommodation Request"). July 15, 2016 Letter, attached as Ex. 18 to Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J., ECF No. 32-18; see also Pl. Dep. at 80-81. In response to Plaintiffs Third Accommodation Request, Defendant again [*18]  provided Plaintiff with a "Certification of Health Care Provider form to be completed by [Plaintiffs] health care provider." July 15, 2016 Letter at 1; see also Pl. Dep. at 80-81.
On July 18, 2016, Defendant received a Certification of Health Care Provider form ("Third Certification of Health Care Provider") that was completed by Dr. Bakhashi. July 27, 2016 Letter, attached as Ex. 19 to Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J., ECF No. 32-19; see also Third Certification Health Care Provider, attached as Ex. 20 to Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J., ECF No. 32-20. Dr. Bakhashi again indicated that Plaintiff suffers from "anxiety," that commenced on or about March 25, 2016, that affects Plaintiffs ability to "interact[] w[ith] superiors." Third Certification Health Care Provider at 1. However, Dr. Bakhashi also indicated that Plaintiffs anxiety affects Plaintiffs ability to breathe, perform manual tasks, sleep, and think. Id. Dr. Bakhashi recommended that Plaintiff: (i) have "no contact" with Ms. Black and Ms. Lewis; (ii) be moved to a different team; and (iii) be permitted to take 5-10 minute breaks "when [she] feels anxious." Id.
Upon review, Defendant noted that the three Certification of Health Care Provider forms that it received for Plaintiff between [*19]  June and July of 2016 contained "conflicting information" regarding Plaintiffs health and the need for an accommodation. See July 27, 2016 Letter at 1; see also Pl. Dep. at 83-85. As a result, Defendant sent Plaintiff a letter on July 27, 2016, that: (i) explained the "conflicting information;" and (ii) requested that Plaintiff be evaluated "by a health care provider of the Company's choosing." July 27, 2016 Letter at 1; see also Pl. Dep. at 83-85. Defendant provided Plaintiff with "a list of health care providers that the Company obtained from a third party," and asked Plaintiff to "choose one at the Company's expense." July 27, 2016 Letter at 1; see also Pl. Dep. at 83-85.
Plaintiff was evaluated by a doctor from Dominion Psychiatric ("Fourth Certification of Health Care Provider"). Fourth Certification Health Care Provider, attached as Ex. 21 to Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J., ECF No. 32-21. The doctor indicated that Plaintiff suffers from panic attacks, anxiety, and depression, which affects, to some extent, Plaintiff's ability to sleep, think, and work. Id. at 1. When asked to recommend any specific accommodations "in order to permit [Plaintiff] to perform the essential functions of the position," [*20]  the doctor stated: "I will not interfere with the work policies or decision, but [I] will try to do what I can w[ith] medication." Id.; see also Pl. Dep. at 87-88. When asked if it was necessary for Plaintiff to work intermittently, the doctor stated: "Possibility of 16 hours a month, taken in breaks away from her desk, or having to come in late or leave early." Fourth Certification Health Care Provider at 1; see also Pl. Dep. at 87-88. The doctor did not recommend any other specific accommodations. Fourth Certification of Health Care Provider at 1.
Plaintiff provided Defendant with the Fourth Certification of Health Care Provider on August 8, 2016. Pl. Dep. at 88-89. As of August 16, 2016, the date of Plaintiff's termination, Defendant had not yet made a decision as to Plaintiff's Third Accommodation Request. Id. at 89; see also Termination Letter at 1.
C. Facts Related to Plaintiff's State Law Assault Claim
In February 2016, Plaintiffs "team was moving desk locations within the same office building." Black Decl. ¶ 3. During the moving process, Plaintiff believes that she was assaulted by Ms. Black. Pl. Dep. ¶¶ 35-36. In her deposition, Plaintiff summarized the alleged incident as follows:
A. I had both hands carrying a light portable file thing that belonged on my desk.
...
A. It was stackable container [*21]  type files that you slide things in. So I had like three or four of those stacked on top of each other like they belonged, and I had them in my hands. And I was walking from my desk. I took a couple of steps and met [Ms.] Black rounding the corner. She saw it was me, slung the things6 in my chest and face area, made her little hmph noise, turned around and walked away.
Pl. Dep. at 35. Plaintiff further testified:
Q. Now when she did that were you concerned that she was trying to cause you bodily harm?
A. Yes.
Q. You were?
A. Yes.
Q. And how did you think those papers were going to cause bodily harm to you?
A. Because even if it was a paper cut, it doesn't matter. You cannot throw things at people as a person that's in power and authority or a team lead, whatever you want to call her title. Even as a normal employee, you shouldn't be throwing things at people whether it's paper, a paper clip or air. If it's against public policy to do half the stuff that's in the handbook, it's against the policy to throw things in people's face[s].
Q. Did you sustain any injuries?
A. Yeah. I sustained an injury to my emotions and my mental state.
Q. Did you have any paper cuts?
A. I don't remember.
Q. Did you seek [*22]  any medical treatment for the papers that hit you?
A. I went to HR about the papers that hit me.
Id. at 36.
In her declaration, Ms. Black states that during a meeting on February 18, 2016, she learned that Plaintiff accused Ms. Black of "thr[owing] papers at her while [their] team was moving desk locations . . . a few weeks before." Black Decl. ¶ 3. Ms. Black denies the accusation, and summarizes the incident as follows:
4. . . . I had placed mail on top of a box that [Plaintiff] was carrying to her new desk. I did this with other employees on that day, as well.
5. With respect to my conduct, I did not intend to harm [Plaintiff] when I placed the mail on the box she was carrying, nor do I believe that I did harm her. I do not recall [Plaintiff] reacting to me giving her the mail or otherwise demonstrating that she was frightened or startled.
Id. ¶¶ 4-5.
Plaintiff spoke with Ms. Lewis about the incident. Lewis Decl. ¶ 3. In her declaration, Ms. Lewis states:
[Plaintiff] shared with me that [Ms.] Black had put papers on top of a box that [Plaintiff] had been carrying in a manner that she found very disrespectful. While advising me of this, [Plaintiff] visually demonstrated the motion of how [Ms. Black] [*23]  placed the documents on the box she was carrying. [Plaintiff] th[e]n indicated that she was going to HR about this. At no time during the discussion did [Plaintiff] say that she had feared for her safety during the interaction, that papers had been thrown at her, or that she had been injured by Ms. Black's conduct.
Id.
III. Defendant's Motion to Strike
As noted above, Plaintiff filed an unauthorized Surreply on December 17, 2018, and Defendant moved to strike Plaintiff's Surreply from the record pursuant to Local Civil Rule 7(F)(1). Surreply, ECF No. 35; Mot. Strike, ECF No. 36. Although the Court agrees that Plaintiff's Surreply was improperly filed, in deference to Plaintiff's pro se status, the Court has considered Plaintiff's Surreply in its analysis of Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment. Accordingly, Defendant's Motion to Strike, ECF No. 36, is DENIED.7
IV. Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment
A. Summary Judgment Standard
Summary judgment is appropriate only when the Court, viewing the record as a whole and in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party, determines that there exists no genuine dispute "as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." [*24]  Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986); see also Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a); Seabulk Offshore, Ltd. v. Am. Home Assur. Co., 377 F.3d 408, 418 (4th Cir. 2004). "A dispute is genuine if a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party . . . [and] [a] fact is material if it might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law." Jacobs v. NC. Admin. Office of the Courts, 780 F.3d 562, 568 (4th Cir. 2015) (citations omitted). The moving party has the initial burden to show the absence of an essential element of the nonmoving party's case and to demonstrate that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Honor v. Booz-Allen & Hamilton, Inc., 383 F.3d 180, 185 (4th Cir. 2004); McLean v. Patten Cmtys., Inc., 332 F.3d 714, 718 (4th Cir. 2003); see Celotex, 477 U.S. at 322-25.
When the moving party has met its burden to show that the evidence is insufficient to support the nonmoving party's case, the burden then shifts to the nonmoving party to present specific facts demonstrating that there is a genuine issue for trial. Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586-87, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986); Honor, 383 F.3d at 185; McLean, 332 F.3d at 718-19. Such facts must be presented in the form of exhibits and sworn affidavits. Celotex, 477 U.S. at 324; see also M&M Med. Supplies & Serv., Inc. v. Pleasant Valley Hosp., Inc., 981 F.2d 160, 163 (4th Cir. 1993). To successfully defeat a motion for summary judgment, the nonmoving party must rely on more than conclusory allegations, "mere speculation," the "building of one inference upon another," the "mere existence of a scintilla of evidence," or the appearance of "some metaphysical doubt" concerning a material fact. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 252, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986); Thompson v. Potomac Elec. Power Co., 312 F.3d 645, 649 (4th Cir. 2002); Tao of Sys. Integration, Inc. v. Analytical Servs. & Materials, Inc., 330 F. Supp. 2d 668, 671 (E.D. Va. 2004). Rather, there must be sufficient evidence that would enable a reasonable fact-finder to return a verdict [*25]  for the nonmoving party. See Anderson, 477 U.S. at 252.
Although the Court is not "to weigh the evidence and determine the truth of the matter" at the summary judgment phase, the Court is required to "determine whether there is a genuine issue for trial." Tolan v. Cotton, 572 U.S. 650, 134 S. Ct. 1861, 1866, 188 L. Ed. 2d 895 (2014) (quoting Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249); see also Jacobs, 780 F.3d at 568-69. In determining whether there is a genuine issue for trial, the Court does not weigh the evidence to make a truth determination; rather, "Nile relevant inquiry is 'whether the evidence presents a sufficient disagreement to require submission to a jury or whether it is so one-sided that one party must prevail as a matter of law." Stewart v. MTR Gaming Grp., Inc., 581 F. App'x 245, 247 (4th Cir. 2014) (quoting Anderson, 477 U.S. at 251-52).
B. Discussion
i. Plaintiff's ADA Retaliation Claim
The ADA provides that "no person shall discriminate against any individual because such individual has opposed any act or practice made unlawful by this Act or because such individual made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this Act." 42 U.S.C. § 12203(a); see also Jacobs, 780 F.3d at 577. A plaintiff may prove a violation of ADA's anti-retaliation provision either through "direct and indirect evidence of retaliation," or through the "burden-shifting method" set forth in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 802, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). Jacobs, 780 F.3d at 577. Because Plaintiff has not provided direct [*26]  or circumstantial evidence of retaliation, the Court will utilize the McDonnell Douglas framework in its analysis of Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment.
To prevail under the McDonnell Douglas framework, Plaintiff must first establish a prima facie case of retaliation by showing that: (i) "she engaged in protected activity;" (ii) "her employer acted adversely against her;"8 and (iii) "her protected activity was causally connected to her employer's adverse action." Rhoads v. FDIC, 257 F.3d 373, 392 (4th Cir. 2001). If Plaintiff establishes a prima facie case of retaliation, the burden shifts to Defendant "to rebut the presumption of retaliation by articulating a legitimate nonretaliatory reason for its actions." Id. If Defendant does so, Plaintiff "must demonstrate that the proffered reason is a pretext for forbidden retaliation." Id. "The plaintiff always bears the ultimate burden of persuading the trier of fact that she was the victim of retaliation." Id.
Plaintiff appears to claim that she was subjected to unlawful retaliation under the ADA after she filed (i) "internal complaints of discrimination;" and (ii) her First EEOC Charge. Order at 19-20, ECF No. 24 (construing the claims set forth in Plaintiff's Amended [*27]  Complaint); see also Am. Compl., Exs. 1-24, ECF No. 14. As a result of Plaintiff's filings, Plaintiff claims that she: (i) lost her "regular work assignments;" (ii) was "given random work to do;" (iii) was "followed around by [Ms. Lewis] during [her] breaks;" (iv) was "more closely monitored than [her] co[-]workers;" and (v) was "called into the office numerous times." Order at 19; see also Second EEOC Charge, ECF No. 32-22. Plaintiff further appears to claim that her termination was the result of unlawful retaliation. Order at 20-21; see also Pl. Dep at 14 ("I'm disputing that they fired me in retaliation.").
In its Motion for Summary Judgment, Defendant argues, among other things, that Plaintiff's "internal complaints" and First EEOC Charge do not constitute protected activity for purposes of an ADA retaliation claim. Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J. at 17-18, ECF No. 32. As explained above, the anti-retaliation provision of the ADA prohibits an employer from retaliating against an individual because the individual "has opposed any act or practice made unlawful by this Act," or because the individual "made a charge . . . or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing [*28]  under this Act." 42 U.S.C. § 12203(a) (emphasis added).
As summarized in Part II.A of this Dismissal Order, Plaintiff filed an internal complaint with Defendant regarding Ms. Black on February 1, 2016, and March 11, 2016. Feb. 25, 2016 Letter, ECF No. 32-2; Mar. 29, 2016 Letter, ECF No. 32-4. Plaintiff also filed an internal complaint with Defendant regarding Ms. Lewis on March 28, 2016. Apr. 8, 2016 Letter, ECF No. 32-5. In her February 1, 2016 internal complaint, Plaintiff claimed that Ms. Black sent "inappropriate text messages," sent "harsh/harassing emails," threw a package at Plaintiff, and called Plaintiff an inappropriate name. Feb. 25, 2016 Letter at 1. In her March 11, 2016 internal complaint, Plaintiff claimed that Ms. Black displayed "inappropriate behavior," "made derogatory comments," harassed and bullied Plaintiff "and other team members," and "swung a package" at Plaintiff. Mar. 29, 2016 Letter at 1. In her March 28, 2016 internal complaint, Plaintiff claimed that Ms. Lewis "made inappropriate comments about an employee's job knowledge," and "made reference to terminating [Plaintiffs] employment without valid reason." Apr. 8,2016 Letter at 1. None of Plaintiffs internal complaints made [*29]  any mention of alleged violations under the ADA. As such, Plaintiffs internal complaints cannot be construed as opposing acts made unlawful by the ADA, and cannot serve as the "protected activity" necessary for an ADA retaliation claim.
Further, although Plaintiffs First EEOC Charge contained a reference to the ADA, the basis of Plaintiff's First EEOC Charge appears to be unrelated to the ADA. See First EEOC Charge at 1, ECF No. 32-8. For example, Plaintiff alleged therein that: (i) she was "subjected to harassment" by Ms. Black and Ms. Lewis (that does not appear to be disability-related); and (ii) the alleged harassment "caused [P]laintiff to suffer from a medical impairment." Id. Plaintiffs claim — that non-disability-related harassment created a medical impairment — is not cognizable under the ADA. As such, Plaintiffs First EEOC Charge cannot serve as the "protected activity" necessary for an ADA retaliation claim. See Balazs v. Liebenthal, 32 F.3d 151, 159-60 (4th Cir. 1994) (finding that a plaintiffs retaliation claim failed, in part, because the EEOC charge that "was alleged to have given rise to the retaliation claim" did not contain a claim that was "cognizable" under the statute on which it was based).
Defendant further argues that, even if Plaintiffs [*30]  internal complaints and First EEOC Charge could be construed as protected activity, "the record is devoid of any evidence to support that a causal connection exists" between such activity and Plaintiff's alleged adverse employment actions. Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J. at 20. Specifically, Defendant argues that the record reflects that: (i) Plaintiff's work assignments were necessarily impacted by Plaintiff's extended leave of absence; and (ii) Plaintiffs conduct in the workplace was monitored, and Plaintiff was "called into the office numerous times" as a result of documented performance issues. Id. at 20-21. Upon review of the record evidence, the Court agrees that Plaintiff provided insufficient evidence for a reasonable factfinder to conclude that the alleged adverse employment actions were causally connected to Plaintiffs internal complaints or First EEOC Charge.
With respect to Plaintiffs ultimate termination, Defendant argues that it provided "a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for Plaintiff's discharge" that Plaintiff has not sufficiently challenged as pretext. Id. at 21-22. As such, Defendant claims that any claim of retaliatory termination under the ADA cannot survive summary judgment. Id. The Court [*31]  agrees.
As explained above, on August 12, 2016, Plaintiff "abruptly left a coaching and counseling meeting" with Ms. Webb, Mr. Hood, and Ms. Lewis. Lewis Decl. ¶ 10. After leaving the meeting, Plaintiff "proceeded to punch a metal pole on company property, which damaged it," and "shouted and cursed at [Defendant's] employees." Id.; see also Konikoff Decl. ¶ 5. Defendant determined that the events of August 12, 2016, violated its "Zero Tolerance for Workplace Violence" policy, and as a result, Defendant terminated Plaintiffs employment as of August 16, 2016. Konikoff Decl. ¶ 5; see also Termination Letter at 1, ECF No. 32-24.
Although Plaintiff may disagree with Defendant's decision to terminate her employment, the Court finds that Plaintiff has provided insufficient evidence to create a genuine issue of material fact regarding pretext. See Holland v. Wash. Homes, Inc., 487 F.3d 208, 218 (4th Cir. 2007) (explaining that, with respect to pretext, the plaintiffs self-assessment is irrelevant); McNaught v. Va. Cmty. College Sys., 933 F. Supp. 2d 804, 824 (E.D. Va. 2013) (noting that a plaintiffs disagreement with a defendant's hiring decisions was insufficient to establish pretext and escape summary judgment).
For these reasons, the Court concludes that Plaintiff has not demonstrated the existence of a genuine dispute of material fact as to her ADA [*32]  retaliation claim. Accordingly, Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment is GRANTED as to Plaintiffs ADA retaliation claim.
ii. Plaintiffs ADA Failure to Accommodate Claim
To establish a prima facie case for failure to accommodate under the ADA, Plaintiff must show that: (i) she was an individual with a disability within the meaning of the statute; (ii) Defendant had notice of her disability; (iii) with reasonable accommodation, Plaintiff could perform the essential functions of the position; and (iv) Defendant refused to make such accommodation. Jacobs, 780 F.3d at 579; see also Wilson v. Dollar Gen. Corp., 717 F.3d 337, 345 (4th Cir. 2013); Rhoads, 257 F.3d at 387 n.11.
Under the ADA, a reasonable accommodation may include, among other things, job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, or reassignment to a vacant position; however, an employer is not required to provide a requested accommodation if it would lead to an undue hardship. See Adams v. Anne Arundel Cly. Pub. Sch., 789 F.3d 422, 432 (4th Cir. 2015); see also 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(4). In determining whether a requested accommodation would lead to an undue hardship, an employer may consider, among other factors, "[t]he impact of the accommodation upon the operation of the facility, including the impact on the ability of other employees to perform their duties and on the facility's ability to conduct business." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(p)(2)(v); see [*33]  also Crabill v. Charlotte Mecklenburg Bd. of Educ., 423 F. App'x 314, 323 (4th Cir. 2011) (noting that "an accommodation that would require other employees to work harder is unreasonable"). Further, an employer "is not obligated to provide an employee the accommodation he or she requests or prefers; the employer need only provide some reasonable accommodation." Cra bill, 423 F. App'x at 323.
As summarized above, Plaintiff submitted three accommodation requests to Defendant between May 31, 2016 and July 15, 2016. Each request essentially sought the same relief: to be transferred to a different work team and to eliminate and/or minimize contact with Ms. Black and Ms. Lewis. See June 13,2016 Letter, ECF No. 32-10; Pl. Dep. at 55, 66-68, 80-81; June 29, 2016 Letter, ECF No. 32-14; July 15, 2016 Letter, ECF No. 32-18. Defendant denied Plaintiff's First Accommodation Request because the information received from Plaintiff's doctor indicated that (i) Plaintiff did not suffer from a "physical or mental impairment;" and (ii) no accommodations were necessary. See June 13, 2016 Letter at 1; First Certification Health Care Provider, ECF No. 32-11. Plaintiff admitted in her deposition that Defendant "had the right to reject" Plaintiff's First Accommodation Request. Pl. Dep. at 63.
To support her Second [*34]  Accommodation Request, Plaintiff submitted a certification from a different doctor, who indicated that Plaintiff suffered from anxiety that affected Plaintiff's ability to "interact[] w[ith] superiors," specifically, Ms. Black and Ms. Lewis. Second Certification Health Care Provider, ECF No. 32-15. This doctor recommended that Plaintiff "be transferred to a different team." Id. at 1. Because the "essential functions" of Plaintiff's job as a Legal Clerk included "interact[ing] with superiors" and "updat[ing] [the] department manager and team members about any recent changes as it relates to [the] work process," Defendant determined that Plaintiff's transfer request, based on an inability to "interact[] w[ith] superiors," was unreasonable. June 29, 2016 Letter, ECF No. 32-14. As an alternative, Defendant encouraged Plaintiff to "[m]aintain open communication," "[e]stablish written long term and short term goals," and "[d]evelop strategies to deal with problems before they arise" in order to work more effectively with her current supervisors. Id. at 1.
Plaintiff's Third Accommodation Request was submitted on July 15, 2016; however, due to conflicting information received from Plaintiff's health care providers, [*35]  Defendant asked Plaintiff to obtain another medical evaluation. See July 15, 2016 Letter at 1; July 27, 2016 Letter, ECF No. 32-19; Pl. Dep. at 83-85. Defendant did not receive a summary of the additional medical evaluation until August 8, 2016 — only four days before the events of August 12, 2016, which led to Plaintiff's termination. Pl. Dep. at 88-89; Konikoff Decl. ¶¶ 5-6; Termination Letter, ECF No. 32-24. Because Plaintiff's employment was terminated due to Plaintiff's conduct while Defendant was considering Plaintiffs Third Accommodation Request, Defendant never rendered an ultimate decision on Plaintiffs Third Accommodation Request. Pl. Dep. at 88-89; Konikoff Decl. ¶¶ 5-6; Termination Letter at 1.
In its Motion for Summary Judgment, Defendant argues that Plaintiff "cannot establish her failure to accommodate claim" because, "as the record reflects, the accommodations sought were unreasonable and did not guarantee that [Plaintiff] would be able to perform the essential functions of her position even if her proposed request had been granted." Mem. Supp. Mot. Stunm. J. at 12. Under these circumstances, the Court agrees that summary judgment is warranted in favor of Defendant on Plaintiffs ADA failure [*36]  to accommodate claim. Plaintiff admits that (i) Defendant's denial of her First Accommodation Request was justified; and (ii) she was terminated before Defendant was able to render a decision on her Third Accommodation Request. Pl. Dep. at 63, 88-89. Accordingly, Plaintiffs failure to accommodate claim can only be based on Defendant's denial of Plaintiff's Second Accommodation Request. As explained above, Plaintiffs Second Accommodation Request sought a "transfer[] to a different team" because Plaintiff suffered from anxiety that interfered with her ability to "interact[] w[ith] superiors," including Ms. Black and Ms. Lewis. Second Certification Health Care Provider at 1.
As Defendant explained to Plaintiff, interaction with superiors, department managers, and team members was an essential function of Plaintiffs Legal Clerk position. June 29, 2016 Letter at 1. As such, if Plaintiffs anxiety interfered with Plaintiffs ability to interact with superiors, a transfer to a different team, even if feasible, would not reasonably accommodate Plaintiffs disability because such interaction would be required in any position. See Wiggins v. DaVita Tidewater, LLC, 451 F. Supp. 2d 789, 799 (E.D. Va. 2006) (finding that an employee's request to be transferred away from a supervisor who caused her stress would, in essence, require the employer [*37]  to ensure that the employee was "guarded against stress and criticism from supervisors in general," which would be unreasonable and would impose an undue burden on the employer).
Additionally, the ADA does not obligate Defendant to provide Plaintiff with the specific accommodation she requests. Crabill, 423 F. App'x at 323. Defendant is only obligated to provide "some reasonable accommodation." Id. Although Defendant denied Plaintiffs specific accommodation e., a transfer to another team), Defendant provided Plaintiff with suggestions to improve her working relationship with her current team. June 29, 2016 Letter at 1.
Further, the Court notes that when a requested accommodation involves reassignment, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit has explained that "[i]t is the plaintiffs burden to show that a vacant position exists for which he [or she] was qualified." Fields v. Clifton T Perkins Hosp., 605 F. App'x 200, 201 (4th Cir. 2015). "[I]f there is no vacant position for which the plaintiff qualifies, then failure to reassign the employee does not constitute a breach of the employer's duty to reasonably accommodate the employee's disability, if possible, through reassignment." Id. (affirming the decision of a district court to grant summary judgment in favor of [*38]  an employer on an ADA reasonable accommodation claim involving a request for reassignment because the plaintiff "failed to meet his burden of production as to the existence of a vacant position . . . for which he was qualified"). Here, Plaintiff has not provided any admissible evidence to suggest that there was a vacant position within Defendant's organization to which Plaintiff could have been reassigned, and for which Plaintiff was qualified.
For these reasons, the Court finds that a reasonable fact-finder could not conclude that Plaintiff has established a prima facie case of failure to accommodate under the ADA. Accordingly, Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's ADA failure to accommodate claim.
iii. Plaintiffs State Law Assault Claim
As summarized above, in February 2016, Plaintiffs "team was moving desk locations within the same office building." Black Decl. ¶ 3. Plaintiff testified that as she was carrying "three or four" "stackable [file] container[s]" to her new desk location, Ms. Black "slung" papers in Plaintiffs "chest and face area," made a "little hmph noise, turned around and walked away."9 Pl. Dep. at 35. In her declaration, Ms. Black states [*39]  that: (i) she "did not intend to harm" Plaintiff (nor does she believe that she did); and (ii) she "do[es] not recall [Plaintiff] reacting. . . or otherwise demonstrating that [Plaintiff] was frightened or startled." Black Decl. ¶ 5.
Under Virginia law, an "[a]ssault entails 'an act intended to cause either harmful or offensive contact with another person or apprehension of such contact, and that creates in that other person's mind a reasonable apprehension of an imminent battery.'"10 Balas v. Huntington Ingalls Indus., 711 F.3d 401, 411 (4th Cir. 2013) (citing Koffman v. Garnett, 265 Va. 12, 574 S.E.2d 258, 261 (Va. 2003)). In its Motion for Summary Judgment, Defendant argues, among other things, that Plaintiffs assault claim cannot survive summary judgment because "Plaintiff has failed to provide evidence that shows that any of the alleged conduct performed by Ms. Black was undertaken with the intent to harm or scare Plaintiff." Mem. Supp. Mot. Summ. J. at 25. The Court agrees.
As explained above, an assault claim requires proof of intent. See Balas, 711 F.3d at 411. Here, the Court finds that Plaintiff has not established the requisite intent. Ms. Black specifically denies any ill intent. Black Decl. ¶ 5 (stating that Ms. Black "did not intend to harm [Plaintiff]"). Although Plaintiff may question Ms. Black's motive, the Court finds [*40]  that Plaintiff has provided insufficient evidence to allow a reasonable fact-finder to determine that Ms. Black intended to cause harmful or offensive contact with Plaintiff, or that Ms. Black intended to create in Plaintiffs mind a reasonable apprehension of an imminent battery.11 See Thompson v. Potomac Elec. Power Co., 312 F.3d 645, 649 (4th Cir. 2002) (noting that to defeat a motion for summary judgment, "[cionclusory or speculative allegations do not suffice, nor does a mere scintilla of evidence"). Accordingly, Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's assault claim.
V. Conclusion
For the reasons set forth above, Defendant's Motion to Strike, ECF No. 36, is DENIED; and Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment, ECF No. 31, is GRANTED.
Plaintiff may appeal this Dismissal Order by forwarding a written notice of appeal to the Clerk of the United States District Court, Norfolk Division, 600 Granby Street, Norfolk, Virginia 23510. The written notice must be received by the Clerk within thirty days from the date of the entry of this Dismissal Order.
The Clerk is DIRECTED to send a copy of this Dismissal Order to Plaintiff and counsel for Defendant.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
/s/ Arenda L. Wright Allen
Arenda L. Wright Allen
United [*41]  States District Judge
Norfolk, Virginia
April 16th, 2019


End of Document

