Coleman v. City of L.A.
United States District Court for the Central District of California
July 6, 2016, Decided; July 6, 2016, Filed
CV16-2577 PSG (AJWx)

Reporter
2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 200668 *
Otis Coleman v. City of Los Angeles, et al.
Counsel:  [*1] Attorneys for Plaintiffs: Not Present.
Attorneys for Defendants: Not Present.
Judges: Philip S. Gutierrez, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Philip S. Gutierrez
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES - GENERAL

Proceedings (In Chambers): Order GRANTING in Part and DENYING in Part Defendant's Motion to Dismiss
Before the Court is Defendant City of Los Angeles' motion to dismiss Plaintiff Otis Coleman's First Amended Complaint ("FAC"). Dkt. # 9. The Court finds the matter appropriate for decision without oral argument. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 78(b); L.R. 7-15. After considering the moving, opposing, and reply papers, the Court GRANTS in part and DENIES in part the motion.
I. Background
Plaintiff Otis Coleman ("Plaintiff") is a former employee of Defendant City of Los Angeles ("the City"). Dkt. # 1, Ex. B, First Amended Complaint ("FAC"). Plaintiff alleges that he suffered discrimination, harassment, and retaliation throughout his employment, in violation of multiple state and federal anti-discrimination laws. See generally FAC.
Plaintiff was first employed by the City in 1989 as a general laborer at the Department of Public Works ("DPW"). FAC 3. In 1990, Plaintiff fractured his knee at work and was required to take medical leave for one year. Id. at 4. Plaintiff returned [*2]  to DPW with work restrictions, notifying his employers that he could not perform tasks involving bending, climbing, or kneeling. Id.
In 1992, Plaintiff alleges that Supervisor Chuck Mazelin ("Mazelin") ordered Plaintiff to wash and wax a street sweeper. Id. When Plaintiff protested that the task would violate his work restrictions, Mazelin allegedly responded, "Are you refusing to do an order? I don't care about your restrictions, I'll write you up right now." Id. Plaintiff complied with Mazelin's orders but reinjured his knee, prompting another year of medical leave. Id.
In 1993, Plaintiff returned to work at DPW's San Pedro location, a 35-mile drive from Plaintiff's home. Id. Because the commute aggravated his bad knee, Plaintiff alleges that he made a number of transfer requests, four of which were denied by Supervisor Lloyd Durham ("Durham"). Id. 4-5. Plaintiff also claims that Durham frequently marked Plaintiff absent without an excuse, even when Plaintiff provided doctors' notes. Id. at 5.
Plaintiff was later transferred to another DPW facility, where Supervisor Jesse Cruz ("Cruz") instructed him to raise and lower a flag every day. Id. Plaintiff asked Superintendent Robert Potter if he had to [*3]  follow Cruz's instructions, even though Plaintiff felt that they violated his work restrictions. Id. Plaintiff claims that Potter responded, "You have to follow the chain of command." Id. Plaintiff subsequently complied with Cruz's orders until he reinjured himself, prompting roughly another year of medical leave. Id.
By 2011, Plaintiff had been transferred to a desk job on the second floor of a DPW facility. Id. at 6. Plaintiff's primary duties at this time were filing and preparing reports. Id. at 3.
Plaintiff claims that because the second-floor bathroom was relatively small, it was sometimes necessary for him to travel to the first-floor bathroom. Id. at 6. Plaintiff asked his supervisor, Defendant Veronica Camacho ("Camacho"), for extended bathroom breaks to accommodate his limited mobility. Id. Plaintiff alleges that Camacho denied his request and frequently berated him for taking long bathroom breaks, writing Plaintiff up and telling him, "You've been warned about taking too long to go to the bathroom." Id. Plaintiff also alleges that, on days when the elevator was broken, Camacho effectively confined him to the second floor, saying, "You're not allowed to go to the stairs except when you are coming [*4]  to or leaving work." Id. Plaintiff claims that he complained to both Camacho and his union about this treatment, but no action was taken. Id.
Plaintiff also claims that his second-floor desk was located directly beneath an air conditioner, which other employees would frequently turn up. Id. Plaintiff gave his employer a doctor's note confirming that the cold air affected his spine and notified his union. Id. However, Plaintiff alleges that Personnel Manager Rhonda Dowdy refused to intervene. Id. Plaintiff also claims that he asked Camacho several times to change the location of his desk, but she consistently refused. Id. at 7.
Plaintiff suffered a heart attack on September 9, 2013. Id. While he was recovering, Plaintiff alleges that he caught pneumonia, was diagnosed with kidney cancer, and was treated for a herniated disc. Id. Plaintiff took roughly seventeen months of medical leave and was scheduled to return to work on February 2, 2015. Id.
However, Plaintiff alleges that DPW Superintendent Ron Lee ("Lee") refused to let Plaintiff return to work on his scheduled return date because he was wearing a cast on his leg. Id. Plaintiff claims that the cast did not impair his ability to work, but [*5]  Lee told Plaintiff that he "could not return to work until [he] could work without support for his right leg." Id.
Plaintiff was given a return to work date of January 19, 2016. Id. However, the City terminated his employment on March 4, 2015. Id. Plaintiff alleges that because the City did not notify Plaintiff of his termination, he did not discover that he had been terminated until his union notified him as such on September 25, 2015. Id.
On January 25, 2016, Plaintiff filed an administrative complaint with the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing ("DFEH"), requesting and receiving an immediate right-to-sue letter. FAC, Ex. 1. Plaintiff filed this action in California Superior Court that same day. Dkt. # 1, Ex. A. Initially, Plaintiff brought nine claims against the City and Camacho for harassment and discrimination based on disability, failure to prevent harassment, failure to provide reasonable accommodations, retaliation, and wrongful termination in violation of California's Fair Employment and Housing Act ("FEHA"), California's Whistleblower Protection Law ("CWPA"), and wrongful termination in violation of public policy.
Plaintiff amended his Complaint on April 8, [*6]  2016. FAC. Plaintiff amended his complaint to include the following claims against the City and Camacho: (1) Harassment Based Upon Disability (FEHA); (2) Failure to Stop, Prevent or Correct Harassment, Discrimination and Retaliation (FEHA); (3) Discrimination Based Upon Disability (FEHA); (4) Failure to Engage in a Timely, Good Faith, Interactive Process to Determine Reasonable Accommodation for Disability (FEHA); (5) Failure to Provide Reasonable Accommodations for Disability (FEHA); (6) Medical Leave Retaliation (CFRA); (7) Medical Leave Discrimination (CFRA); (8) Interference with Family Medical Leave Act Rights (Family Medical Leave Act, "FMLA"); (9) Discrimination/Retaliation for Exercising Family Medical Leave Rights (FMLA); (10) Discrimination Based Upon Disability (Americans with Disabilities Act, "ADA"); (11) Failure to Provide Reasonable Accommodations for Disability (ADA); (12) Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process (ADA); (13) Retaliation for Opposing Violations of ADA (ADA); (14) Discrimination Based Upon Age (FEHA); (15) Discrimination Based Upon Age (Age Discrimination in Employment Act, "ADEA"); (16) Retaliation for Opposing Violations of Gov't Code Part 2.8 (FEHA); [*7]  (17) Retaliation for Reporting and Refusing to Participate in Conduct Violating Statute(s) or Regulation(s) or Reporting Good Faith Belief or Violation to Government (CWPA); and (18) Wrongful Termination In Violation of Public Policy.1
The City removed the action to this Court on April 14, 2016. See Dkt. # 1. Plaintiff filed an administrative complaint with the EEOC on April 27, 2016. FAC, Ex. 2. The City now moves to dismiss the FAC in its entirety. Dkt. # 9.
II. Legal Standard
A motion to dismiss under Rule 12(b)(6) tests whether the complaint "contain[s] sufficient factual matter, accepted as true, to 'state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face.'" Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678 (2009) (quoting Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 570 (2007)). When deciding a Rule 12(b)(6) motion, the court must accept the facts pleaded in the complaint as true, and construe them in the light most favorable to the plaintiff. Faulkner v. ADT Sec. Servs., Inc., 706 F.3d 1017, 1019 (9th Cir. 2013); Cousins v. Lockyer, 568 F.3d 1063, 1067-68 (9th Cir. 2009). The court, however, is not required to accept "legal conclusions . . . cast in the form of factual allegations." W. Mining Council v. Watt, 643 F.2d 618, 624 (9th Cir. 1981); see Iqbal, 556 U.S. at 678; Twombly, 550 U.S. at 555.
After accepting all non-conclusory allegations as true and drawing all reasonable inferences in favor of the plaintiff, the court must determine whether the complaint alleges a plausible claim to relief. See Iqbal, 556 U.S. at 679-80. "A claim has facial plausibility when the plaintiff [*8]  pleads factual content that allows the court to draw the reasonable inference that the defendant is liable for the misconduct alleged . . . . The plausibility standard is not akin to a 'probability requirement,' but it asks for more than a sheer possibility that a defendant has acted unlawfully." Id. at 678.
III. Discussion
The Court will address Plaintiff's claims in six categories: (1) FEHA and CFRA Claims (Claims 1-7, 14, 16); (2) ADA Claims (Claims 10-13); (3) ADEA Claim (Claim 15); (4) FMLA Claims (Claims 8-9); (5) CWPA Claim (Claim 17); and (6) Wrongful Termination Claim (Claim 18).
A. FEHA and CFRA Claims
FEHA prohibits employment discrimination based on, inter alia, disability and age. Cal. Gov. Code. § 12940(a). CFRA is a portion of FEHA which allows eligible employees to take unpaid medical leave to care for themselves or a sick family member. Cal. Gov. Code § 12945.2.
Plaintiff brings nine claims under FEHA or CFRA: (1) Claim 1: Harassment Based Upon Disability; (2) Claim 2: Failure to Stop, Prevent, or Correct Harassment, Discrimination and Retaliation; (3) Claim 3: Discrimination Based Upon Disability; (4) Claim 4: Failure to Engage in a Timely, Good Faith, Interactive Process to Determine Reasonable Accommodation for Disability; (5) [*9]  Claim 5: Failure to Provide Reasonable Accommodations for Disability; (6) Claim 6: Medical Leave Retaliation; (7) Claim 7: Medical Leave Discrimination; (8) Claim 14: Discrimination Based Upon Age; and (9) Claim 16: Retaliation for Opposing Violations of Gov't Code Part 2.8. FAC 8-13, 17-20.
i. Statute of Limitations
Defendant argues that Plaintiff's FEHA claims are barred by the statute of limitations. See Mot. 10. A plaintiff asserting FEHA claims must file an administrative complaint with the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing ("DFEH") within one year from the date of the alleged unlawful practice. Cal. Gov. Code § 12960. Because the CFRA is a part of FEHA, a Plaintiff bringing a CFRA claim must also satisfy this administrative requirement. Mora v. Chem-Tronics, Inc., 16 F.Supp.2d 1192, 1201 (S.D. Cal. 1998). "The administrative time limits prescribed by FEHA are treated as equivalent to statutes of limitations." Rodriguez v. Airborne Express, 265 F. 3d 890, 900 (9th Cir. 2001). See also Lelaind v. San Francisco, 576 F.Supp.2d 1079, 1091-92 (N.D. Cal. 2008) (holding that the statute of limitations on the plaintiff's FEHA claims began to run one year prior to the plaintiff's DFEH filing).
Here, Plaintiff filed his DFEH complaint on January 25, 2016. Accordingly, Plaintiff's FEHA claims must be premised on conduct which occurred after January 25, 2015. Recognizing that the majority of her [*10]  FEHA claims are premised on conduct which occurred before that date, Plaintiff argues that the continuing violations doctrine applies. See Opp. 5-6.
Under the continuing violations doctrine, a court may consider FEHA allegations which fall outside the statutory period if a plaintiff can show that the employers actions before and during the limitations period were "(1) sufficiently similar in kind. . . (2) have occurred with reasonable frequency, (3) and have not acquired a degree of permanence." Yanowitz v. L'Oreal USA, Inc., 36 Cal.4th 1028, 1059 (2005) (quoting Richards v. CH2M Hill, Inc., 26 Cal.4th 798, 823 (2001)). Permanence in this context means that "an employer's statements and actions make clear to a reasonable employee that any further efforts at informal conciliation to obtain reasonable accommodation or end harassment will be futile." Id. at 1059 n. 19 (quoting Richards, 26 Cal.4th at 818-24) ("[W]hen an employer engages in a continuing course of unlawful conduct under the FEHA by refusing reasonable accommodation of a disabled employee or engaging in disability harassment . . . the statute of limitations begins to run . . . either when the course of conduct is brought to an end, as by the employer's cessation of such conduct or by the employee's resignation, or when the employee is on notice that further efforts [*11]  to end the unlawful conduct will be in vain.").
Here, the allegations in Plaintiff's FAC do not satisfy the third prong of the continuing violations test. Plaintiff alleges that he was discriminated against, retaliated against, harassed, and refused reasonable accommodations by his employer for a period spanning more than twenty years. See generally FAC. Even if the court were to expand its review to Plaintiff's most recent time-barred factual allegations—those involving Camacho's harassment and refusal to accommodate Plaintiff at the East Valley location—that conduct began in 2011. See FAC 5-6. Plaintiff alleges that once he was transferred to his desk job, Camacho berated him "multiple times a day" from 2011 until his heart attack in 2013. Id. at 6. Plaintiff also alleges that he asked Camacho "multiple times" to change the location of his desk to accommodate his spinal disability, "but she refused to do so." Id. Similarly, Plaintiff alleges that the City's personnel manager, Dowdy, "refused" to accommodate him when he complained about the air conditioning. Id. It would have become apparent to Defendant during that time that future efforts to engage in constructive conciliation would be in [*12]  vain. See Yanowitz, 36 Cal.4th at 1059. Because the conduct about which Defendant complains had acquired a degree of permanence, the continuing violations doctrine does not apply. See id.
The Court therefore limits Plaintiff's FEHA claims to conduct which occurred in the one-year period before Plaintiff filed his DFEH complaint. FEHA and CFRA claims premised on conduct which occurred before January 25, 2015 are time-barred.
ii. Claim 1: Harassment Based on Disability
Plaintiff's first claim is for disability harassment under FEHA. FAC 8. California law is clear that under FEHA, "harassment consists of conduct outside the scope of necessary job performance, conduct presumably engaged in for personal gratification, because of meanness or bigotry, or for other personal motives." Roby v. McKesson Corp., 47 Cal. 4th 686, 707 (2009) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). Harassment is "generally concerned with the message conveyed to an employee, and therefore with the social environment of the workplace, whereas discrimination is concerned with explicit changes in the terms or conditions of employment." Id. (emphasis in original). In other words, discrimination "refers to bias in the exercise of official actions," while harassment "refers to bias that is expressed [*13]  or communicated through interpersonal relations in the workplace." Id. Although the two may overlap, "[c]ommonly necessary personnel management actions" made by "employees exercising their employer-delegated authority" are not sufficient to show harassment unless the employer engaging in those actions also conveys the hostile message constituting harassment. See id. at 708-09. Further, "[t]o state a FEHA harassment claim, an employee must allege facts showing that workplace harassment was 'severe enough or sufficiently pervasive to alter the conditions of employment and create a work environment that qualifies as hostile or abusive to employees.'" Christ v. Staples, Inc., No. CV 14-07784 MMM (JEMx), 2015 WL 248075 at *6 (C.D. Cal. Jan. 20, 2015) (quoting Hughes v. Pair, 46 Cal. 4th 1035, 1043 (2009)).
Here, Plaintiff's only timely allegations about the City's conduct are that (1) in February, 2015, Lee would not allow Plaintiff to return to work as scheduled because Plaintiff was wearing a cast; and (2) Plaintiff was terminated shortly thereafter. FAC 7. As alleged, these instances do not constitute harassment under FEHA. Both decisions reflect official personnel management decisions. Plaintiff does not allege that either action was accompanied by a hostile message which itself constitutes harassment. Moreover, [*14]  because Plaintiff was on leave for the entirety of the relevant time period, Plaintiff could not have been subjected to a socially hostile work environment. See Christ, 2015 WL 248075, at *6. Thus, while Plaintiff's allegations may support a claim of discrimination, they cannot support a distinct harassment claim.
Plaintiff's claim for disability harassment under FEHA is therefore DISMISSED. Because Plaintiff could not have been subjected to a "hostile work environment" while he was on medical leave and Plaintiff was on medical leave for the entirety of the statutory period, this claim is dismissed WITHOUT leave to amend. See Leadsinger, Inc. v. BMG Music Pub., 512 F.3d 522, 532 (9th Cir. 2008) (holding that leave to amend may be withheld when it is clear that the claim cannot be saved by further amendment).
iii. Claim 3: Discrimination based on Disability
To establish disability discrimination under FEHA, a plaintiff must show that he "(1) suffered from a disability, or was regarded as suffering from a disability; (2) could perform the essential duties of the job with or without reasonable accommodations, and (3) was subjected to an adverse employment action because of the disability or perceived disability." Wills v. Superior Court, 195 Cal.App.4th 143, 159-60 (2011) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). To satisfy the third [*15]  element of a disability discrimination claim, the plaintiff's disability must have been a "substantial motivating factor in the particular employment decision." Harris v. Santa Monica, 56 Cal.4th 203, 232 (2013).
Plaintiff provides sufficient factual allegations within the relevant statutory period to satisfy these three elements. First, Plaintiff alleges that he suffered from a disability. FEHA defines "physical disability" as "a condition that both "affects one or more . . . body systems" and "limits a major life activity." Cal. Gov't Code § 12926(m)(1). Plaintiff claims that he suffers from multiple conditions, including a bad knee and kidney loss. FAC 5. Plaintiff alleges that these conditions limit his ability to work, see id., which FEHA recognizes as a major life activity. See E.E.O.C. v. United Parcel Service, Inc., 424 F.3d 1060, 1072 (9th Cir. 2005); Cal. Gov. Code § 12926(k)(1)(B)(iii). Plaintiff has therefore alleged that he is disabled under FEHA.
Second, Plaintiff alleges that he could perform the essential duties of his job, which he describes as filing and preparing reports, with a reasonable accommodation in the form of a leg cast. FAC 3, 7.
Third, Plaintiff alleges that in February, 2015, Lee forbade him from returning to work as scheduled because Plaintiff was wearing a cast. FAC 7. Plaintiff was subsequently terminated while he believed himself to be on [*16]  authorized medical leave. FAC 7. Plaintiff's termination constitutes adverse employment actions under California law. Brooks v. San Mateo, 229 F.3d 917, 928-29 (9th Cir. 2000). That the termination occurred less than one month after his interaction with Lee makes plausible that Plaintiff's disability was a substantial motivating factor for his termination.
Plaintiff has therefore stated a claim for disability discrimination under FEHA. The City's motion to dismiss this claim is DENIED.
iv. Claims 4 and 5: Failure to Engage in Timely, Good Faith, Interactive Process to Determine Reasonable Accommodation and Failure to Provide Reasonable Accommodation
FEHA requires employers "to engage in a timely, good faith, interactive process with [a disabled] employee . . . to determine effective reasonable accommodations." Cal. Gov. Code §12940(n). "An employee need only give notice of his or her disability and potential need for accommodation in order to trigger the employer's duty to engage in a cooperative, interactive process." Godinez v. Alta-Dena Certified Dairy, LLC, No. CV 15-01652 RSWL (SSx), 2016 WL 756460 at *2 (C.D. Cal. Feb. 25, 2016) (citing Prilliman v. United Airlines, Inc., 53 Cal.App.4th 935, 950 (1997)).
FEHA also makes employers liable for their failure to provide reasonable accommodations. To establish this claim, a plaintiff must show that (1) he or she has a disability covered by FEHA; [*17]  (2) he or she is qualified to perform the essential functions of the position; and (3) the employer failed to reasonably accommodate the plaintiff's disability.2Scotch v. Art Inst. of Cal.—Orange Cnty., Inc., 173 Cal.App.4th 986, 1010 (2009).
Here, Plaintiff attempted to return to work with a cast on his leg, putting the city on notice of his disability and potential need for accommodation. See FAC 7. Plaintiff alleges that Lee arbitrarily refused to accommodate Plaintiff even though Plaintiff could perform the essential functions of his desk job—filing and preparing reports—while wearing a leg cast. FAC 3, 7. Instead, Lee gave Plaintiff one option: to extend his leave until his leg healed enough for him to work without a cast. Id. Because Plaintiff was terminated less than one month later, the "accommodation"—permitting Plaintiff to take extended medical leave—does not appear to have been in good faith. Id. As alleged, Lee failed to engage in a "good faith, interactive process" to determine whether there were accommodations which would permit Plaintiff to return to work with a cast on his leg and failed to reasonably accommodate Plaintiff's disability. Id. 7.
Because Plaintiff has stated claims for failure to engage in the interactive process [*18]  and failure to provide reasonable accommodations under FEHA, the City's motion to dismiss Plaintiff's fourth and fifth claims is DENIED.
v. Claims 6 and 7: Medical Leave Retaliation and Discrimination
CFRA allows eligible employees to take up to twelve weeks of unpaid leave in a twelve-month period to care for themselves or a sick family member. Cal. Gov. Code § 12945.2. Employers are prohibited from discriminating or retaliating against employees who exercise their right to protected leave, and employees are guaranteed reemployment at the end of their leave. Id. However, employees are not entitled to reinstatement when they fail to return to work at the end of the twelve-week period protected by CFRA. Rogers v. Los Angeles, 198 Cal.App.4th 480, 488 (2011).
Here, Plaintiff alleges that he attempted to return to work at the end of a medical leave lasting seventeen months. FAC 7. Because Plaintiff alleges that his leave extended beyond the period of time which CFRA protects, Plaintiff has not stated claims for retaliation and discrimination under CFRA. Plaintiff's sixth and seventh claims are therefore DISMISSED with leave to amend.
vi. Claim 14: Discrimination Based on Age
FEHA prohibits employment discrimination on the basis of age. Cal Gov. Code § 12940. To establish an age discrimination [*19]  claim under FEHA, a plaintiff must show that "he was (1) at least forty years old, (2) performing his job satisfactorily, (3) discharged, and (4) either replaced by substantially younger employees with equal or inferior qualifications or discharged under circumstances otherwise 'giving rise to an inference of age discrimination.'" Schechner v. KPIX-TV, 686 F.3d 1018, 1023 (9th Cir. 2012); see Guz v. Bechtel Nat'l, Inc., 24 Cal.4th 317, 354 (2000).
Here, Plaintiff's FAC fails to satisfy the fourth element of an age-based discrimination claim. Plaintiff alleges that before his discharge, he was criticized and written up for "not moving fast enough." FAC 18. Elsewhere in his FAC, however, Plaintiff alleges that his slow movement was a product of his disability, not his age. See FAC 8. Plaintiff provides no indication that the criticism he received from moving slowly was based on his age. Accordingly, Plaintiff has not alleged facts that make it plausible that his eventual discharge was based on age discrimination. Plaintiff himself alleges that his termination was influenced by his recent injuries, illnesses and requests for accommodation. See FAC 15. Furthermore, although Plaintiff alleges that he was replaced with "someone not of his protected class" after he was terminated, he fails to provide [*20]  any information indicating that he here means a younger person as opposed to an able-bodied person. See FAC 8.
Because the alleged circumstances of Plaintiff's termination do not suggest that he was discriminated against based on his age, Plaintiff fails to state a claim for age discrimination under FEHA. Claim 14 is therefore DISMISSED with leave to amend.
vii. Claim 16: Retaliation for Opposing Violations of Gov. Code Part 2.8
FEHA makes it illegal for employers to retaliate against employees who oppose practices prohibited by FEHA. Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(h). To establish an instance of retaliation under FEHA, a plaintiff must show that "(1) she engaged in a protected activity, (2) the employer subjected her to an adverse employment action, and (3) a causal link existed between the protected activity and the employer's action." Day v. Sears Holdings Corp., 930 F.Supp.2d 1146, 1176 (C.D. Cal. 2013) (citing Miller v. Dep't of Corrections, 36 Cal.4th 446, 472 (2005)). Protected activities under FEHA include filing administrative complaints, making informal complaints to supervisors, and serving as a witness in FEHA proceedings. Id.
Here, Plaintiff does not allege that he engaged in protected activity during the applicable limitations period. See FAC 7. Plaintiff's DFEH complaint cannot serve as the predicate activity for his retaliation [*21]  claim because Plaintiff filed the complaint after his termination. Plaintiff does not otherwise claim to have made any complaints, formal or informal, between January 25, 2015, and January 25, 2016. Plaintiff's claim for retaliation is therefore DISMISSED, with leave to amend.
viii. Claim 2: Failure to Stop, Prevent, or Correct Harassment, Discrimination, and Retaliation
FEHA holds employers liable for failing to take all reasonable steps necessary to prevent discrimination and harassment from occurring. See Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(k). Plaintiff cannot plead a failure to prevent claim without successfully pleading a predicate claim for harassment, discrimination or retaliation. Because Plaintiff cannot state a claim for harassment, "[his] claim for failure to prevent harassment also fails." Harris v. Lynwood Unified School Dist., No. CV 07-05058 DDP (CTx), 2009 WL 2900313 at *7 (C.D. Cal. Sept. 3, 2009). This logic extends to Plaintiff's retaliation claim, as well. However, because Plaintiff has stated a viable claim for discrimination under FEHA, the Court analyzes whether Plaintiff has adequately pled a claim for failure to prevent discrimination under FEHA.
To plead a failure to prevent discrimination claim under FEHA, a plaintiff "must show that (1) he was subjected to [*22]  discrimination; (2) defendant failed to take all reasonable steps to prevent discrimination; and (3) this failure caused plaintiff to suffer injury, damage, loss or harm." Achal v. Gate Gourmet, Inc., 114 F. Supp. 3d 781, 804 (N.D. Cal. 2015); Cal. Civil Jury Instruction (BAJI) 12.11.
Here, Plaintiff has sufficiently alleged that he was subjected to discrimination within the period of limitations because he was prevented from returning to work without a cast and was subsequently discharged.3 However, Plaintiff's allegations regarding the City's failure to prevent these occurrences are too conclusory to satisfy the requirements of Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 8. Plaintiff alleges that Defendant "failed to take all reasonable steps to prevent . . . discrimination . . . from occurring, including but not limited to failing to timely and thoroughly investigate evidence of . . . discrimination . . . and failing to take timely and appropriate corrective action." FAC 9. However, Plaintiff does not indicate that there was actual evidence for the City to ignore during the relevant period. For example, Plaintiff does not allege that he complained about being prevented from returning to work in February, 2015 and that his complaints were ignored. Nor does Plaintiff indicate that after his termination, [*23]  he asked the City to take corrective action and the City failed to do so. Because Plaintiff has not alleged facts that the City was on notice of the alleged discrimination or failed to take reasonable steps to prevent it, Plaintiff has not stated a claim under § 12940(k).
Plaintiff's claim for failure to prevent harassment, discrimination or retaliation is therefore DISMISSED, with leave to amend.
B. ADA Claims
The ADA prohibits employers from discriminating or retaliating against an employee because of a disability. 42 U.S.C. § 12112. Plaintiff brings four claims under the ADA: (1) Claim 10: Discrimination Based Upon Disability; (2) Claim 11: Failure to Provide Reasonable Accommodations for Disability; (3) Claim 12: Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process; and (4) Claim 13: Retaliation for Opposing Violations of ADA. FAC 14-17.
i. Statute of Limitations
Claims brought under Title I of the ADA must comply with the statutory limitations imposed by Title VII of the Civil Rights Act ("Title VII"). Sharkey v. O'Neal, 778 F.3d 767, 770 (9th Cir. 2015). Under Title VII, if a plaintiff has already filed a complaint with a relevant state or local agency, he or she must file a charge with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC") "within 300 days after [*24]  the alleged unlawful employment practice, or within thirty days after receiving notice that the state or local agency has terminated the proceedings under State or local law, whichever is earlier." 42 U.S.C. § 2000ec-5(e)(1). The period of limitations in subsequent civil suits is calculated by counting back 300 days from the day when a plaintiff filed his EEOC complaint. See Douglas v. California Dep't of Youth Authority, 271 F.3d 812, 823 (9th Cir. 2001); see also Williams v. Owens-Illinois, Inc., 665 F.2d 918, 933 (9th Cir. 1982) ("Claims for any employment discrimination, discrete or continuing, occurring within 300 days before the initial charge filed with the EEOC or extending into that period will not be barred by limitations.").
Here, Plaintiff filed his EEOC complaint on April 27, 2016. Opp. 10. The City argues that Plaintiff's ADA claims are time-barred because Plaintiff filed his EEOC claim more than 300 days after the last factual allegation in the Complaint, i.e. Plaintiff's March 4, 2015 termination. See Mot. 8-9. However, under a work-sharing agreement between the EEOC and DFEH, "a charge filed with the DFEH is deemed to have been received by the EEOC on the same day." Stiefel v. Bechtel Corp., 624 F.3d 1240, 1244 (9th Cir. 2010) (internal citation omitted). "When a plaintiff files a disability discrimination complaint with a state agency acting . . . as an agent of the EEOC, and receives a right-to-sue [*25]  letter from the state agency, the plaintiff need not file a separate complaint with the EEOC nor receive an EEOC right-to-sue letter in order to file suit." Id. at 1245.
Plaintiff filed his DFEH complaint on January 25, 2016. FAC, Ex. 1. Pursuant to DFEH and EEOC's work-sharing agreement, his EEOC complaint is treated as being filed on the same day. Therefore, Plaintiff's ADA claims are limited to alleged violations which took place after March 31, 2015-300 days before January 25.4 However, none of the City's alleged conduct took place after March 31, 2015. See generally FAC.
ii. Delayed Discovery
The most recent alleged conduct in Plaintiff's FAC is the City's termination of Plaintiff in March 4, 2015. See FAC 7. Because Plaintiff was terminated on March 4, 2015, twenty-seven days outside of the statutory period, his ADA claims appear fully time-barred. However, Plaintiff asks the Court to salvage at least some of his ADA claims by allowing him to premise his ADA claims on his termination, even though his termination occurred outside the applicable 300-day window, on the basis that he did not timely discover his termination. Opp. 10.
"Because it is inequitable to bar someone who has [*26]  no idea he has been harmed from seeking redress, the statute of limitations has generally been tolled by the 'discovery rule.'" O'Connor v. Boeing N. Am., Inc., 311 F.3d 1139, 1147 (9th Cir. 2002). Under federal law, the delayed discovery rule provides that a claim does not accrue "until a plaintiff discovers, or reasonably could have discovered, his claim." Id.
Here, Plaintiff alleges that Defendants did not provide notice of his termination, and that he was thus ignorant of it until he was informed by his union on September 25, 2015. FAC 7. Further, Plaintiff claims that immediately prior to his termination, Lee told Plaintiff that he "could not return to work until [he] could work without support for his right leg." Id. Plaintiff therefore believed that he would remain on medical leave until his new return to work date of January 19, 2016. Id. Under the circumstances alleged, there is no reason that Plaintiff should have discovered his termination prior to being told by his union.5
The Court therefore finds that Plaintiff has stated facts sufficient to show that tolling is warranted under the delayed discovery rule. Based on Plaintiff's allegations that he was not notified of his termination and did not discover that he had been [*27]  terminated until September 25, 2015, the Court will consider Defendant's termination in analyzing whether he has stated claims for violations of the ADA.6 However, claims predicated on the remainder of the City's actions—including claims based on Plaintiff's conversation with Lee in February, 2015—are time-barred.
iii. Claims 10 and 11: Discrimination Based on Disability and Failure to Provide Reasonable Accommodation
The framework for analyzing disability-based discrimination claims is the same under the ADA as it is under FEHA. Humphrey v. Memorial Hospitals Ass'n, 239 F.3d 1128, 1133 n. 6 (9th Cir. 2001). To establish a claim for discriminatory discharge under the ADA, a plaintiff must establish that he was a disabled individual who could perform the essential duties of his job with or without reasonable accommodations, and that his employer discharged him because of his disability. Id. at 1133. An employer's failure to provide reasonable accommodations is treated as a discriminatory action under the ADA. 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). Failure to accommodate claims are therefore assessed using the same framework as claims for discriminatory discharge: a plaintiff must show that he is a disabled individual who is qualified to perform the essential functions of his job with or without reasonable accommodations, [*28]  but that his employer failed to accommodate him. See, e.g., Samper v. Providence St. Vincent Med. Center., 675 F.3d 1233, 1237 (9th Cir. 2012).
As with Plaintiff's disability discrimination claim under FEHA, Plaintiff has stated claims for discriminatory discharge and failure to accommodate. Here, the analysis varies slightly because Plaintiff's cannot predicate his claim on his interaction with Lee in February, 2015. However, Plaintiff alleges that the City terminated his employment while he believed himself to be on authorized medical leave, rather than accommodating his disability by allowing him to return to work. Although Plaintiff's interactions with Lee are not actionable themselves, they make plausible Plaintiff's assertion that the City decided to terminate Plaintiff because of his disability.
Therefore, Plaintiff successfully states claims for disability discrimination and failure to provide reasonable accommodations under the ADA.
v. Claim 12: Failure to Engage in Interactive Process
When an employee requests an accommodation request, the ADA requires his employer to "engage in an interactive process with the employee to determine the appropriate reasonable accommodation."7Zivkovic v. S. Cal. Edison Co., 302 F.3d 1080, 1089 (9th Cir. 2002). "The interactive process requires: (1) direct communication between the employer and [*29]  employee to explore in good faith the possible accommodations; (2) consideration of the employee's request; and (3) offering an accommodation that is reasonable and effective." Id.
Here, Plaintiff's complaint does not sufficiently allege an interactive process claim under the ADA. Even with the benefit of the delayed discovery rule, Plaintiff's ADA claims can only be premised on his actual termination. While Plaintiff's termination sufficiently anchors his discrimination and failure to accommodate claims, the termination on its own is not sufficient to show that Plaintiff requested an accommodation which triggered the City's duty to engage in the interactive process. Because Plaintiff fails to allege an interactive process violation within the period of limitations established for his ADA claims, his twelfth claim is DISMISSED, with leave to amend.
vi. Claim 13: Retaliation for Opposing ADA Violations
The ADA prohibits retaliation against an employee who "has opposed any act or practice made unlawful by this chapter or because such individual made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this chapter." 42 U.S.C. § 12203(a). To state [*30]  a claim for retaliation, a plaintiff must allege that "(1) he or she engaged in a protected activity; (2) suffered an adverse employment action; and (3) there was a causal link between the two." Pardi v. Kaiser Found. Hosps, 389 F.3d 840, 849 (9th Cir. 2004).
As with Plaintiff's FEHA retaliation claim, Plaintiff does not allege that he engaged in protected activity during the applicable limitations period. See FAC 7. For the same reasons mentioned in Section III(A)(vii), supra, Plaintiff's claim for ADA retaliation is DISMISSED, with leave to amend.
C. Claim 15: Age Discrimination Under the ADEA
Plaintiff's fifteenth claim is for age discrimination under the ADEA.8 See FAC 18. The ADEA prohibits an employer from discharging or otherwise discriminating against an individual because of the individual's age. 29 U.S.C. § 623(a)(1).
The test for whether a plaintiff has pled a claim for age-based discrimination under the ADEA is the same as that for FEHA. Guz v. Bechtel Nat'l, Inc., 24 Cal. 4th 317, 354 (2000) (holding that agebased discrimination claims under FEHA are analyzed under the framework established by the ADEA). Under both tests a plaintiff must allege that "(1) [he or] she was at least forty years old; (2) [he or] she was performing her job satisfactorily; (3) discharged; and (4) 'either replaced by [a] [*31]  substantially younger [employee] with equal or inferior qualifications or discharged under circumstances otherwise giving rise to an inference of age discrimination.'" Sheppard v. David Evans and Assoc., 694 F.3d 1045, 1049 (9th Cir. 2012) (citing Diaz v. Eagle Produce Ltd. Partnership, 521 F.3d 1201, 1207 (9th Cir. 2008)).
Plaintiff fails to sufficiently plead an ADEA claim for the same reasons that he failed to allege an age-based discrimination claim under FEHA, as discussed in Section III(A)(vi), supra. Plaintiff's ADEA claim is therefore DISMISSED with leave to amend.9
D. FMLA Claims
The FMLA allows employees to take unpaid leave from work to care for themselves or for ailing relatives. See 29 U.S.C. § 2612(a)(1). Plaintiff brings two claims under the FMLA: (1) Claim 8: Interference with Family Medical Leave Act Rights; and (2) Claim 9: Discrimination/Retaliation for Exercising Family Medical Leave Rights. FAC 13-14.
i. Claims 8 and 9: Interference with Family Medical Leave Act Rights and Discrimination/Retaliation for Exercising Family Medical Leave Rights
Similar to the CFRA, the FMLA guarantees an employee's right to use up to twelve weeks of unpaid leave per year in order to care for himself or for an ailing family member, and allows him to return to his job after using such protected leave. 29 U.S.C. § 2612(a)(1); 29 U.S.C. § 2614. Employers are prohibited from interfering with [*32]  an employee's exercise of his FMLA rights, and from discriminating or retaliating against an employee for taking FMLA leave. 29 U.S.C. § 2615(a)(1), 2615(a)(2).
Plaintiff alleges that the City's refusal to allow him to return to work and his subsequent termination qualify as interference, discrimination, and retaliation in violation of the FMLA. FAC 13-14. However, Plaintiff's allegations are inconsistent with an FMLA cause of action. Plaintiff alleges that he attempted to return to work at the end of a seventeen-month period of medical leave, see id., a break which far exceeds the twelve weeks of protected leave contemplated by the FMLA. Even construing the facts in Plaintiff's favor, it is therefore implausible that the City's decision to terminate Plaintiff was based on his taking twelve weeks of protected leave. Because the facts Plaintiff alleges are inconsistent with FMLA claims, Plaintiff's claims for interference and discrimination/retaliation under the FMLA are DISMISSED, with leave to amend.10
E. Claim 17: California Whistleblower Claim
Plaintiff's seventeenth claim is for "retaliation for reporting and refusing to participate in conduct violating statutes or regulations or [*33]  reporting good faith belief of violation to government." FAC 19. The CWPA prohibits employers from retaliating against employees who disclose suspected illegal activity. Cal. Lab. Code § 1102.5(b). The CWPA makes it illegal for employers to retaliate against an employee who "disclos[es] information to a government or law enforcement agency, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a violation of state or federal statute, or violation or noncompliance with a state or federal regulation." Cal. Lab. Code § 1102.5(b). Additionally, the CWPA prohibits retaliation where an employee "refus[es] to participate in an activity that would result in a violation of state or federal statute, or a violation of or noncompliance with a local, state, or federal rule or regulation." Cal. Lab. Code § 1102.5(c). In order to state a plausible CWPA claim, Plaintiff must first establish that he engaged in these protected activities. Feretti v. Pfizer Inc., 855 F. Supp. 2d 1017, 1025 (N.D. Cal. 2012).
Additionally, the statute of limitations for CWPA claims is three years. Cal Civ. Proc. § 338(a); Minor v. Fedex Office & Print Servs, Inc., No. 16-CV-00532-LHK, 2016 WL 1623760 at *18 (N.D. Cal. Apr. 25, 2016) (Holding that because "California's statute of limitations for [a]n action upon a liability created by statute, other than a penalty or forfeiture is three years," [*34]  whistleblower actions under § 1102.5 "must be brought within three years.") (citing Monk v. Sacramento Metro. Fire Dist., 2011 WL 6176078, at *11 (Cal.Ct.App. Dec. 13, 2011) (unpublished)). Because Plaintiff's suit was filed on January 25, 2016, he must allege that he engaged in protected activities and suffered retaliation after January 25, 2013.
Although Plaintiff vaguely alleges that the City subjected him to adverse employment action in retaliation for protected disclosures, see FAC 19, the Court is unable to identify any conduct—particularly conduct occurring after January 25, 2013—which could constitute protected activity within the meaning of the CWPA. The only allegations that fall clearly within the relevant statutory period are those related to Plaintiff's latest medical leave, which began on September 9, 2013. However, Plaintiff does not allege that he made protected disclosures or refusals in connection with his medical leave or in connection with the subsequent events leading to Plaintiff's termination. See FAC 7. Plaintiff's failure to make clear whether any other alleged instances of potential disclosure or refusal took place within the period of limitations makes it impossible for the Court to determine whether his CWPA claim is timely.
Therefore, Plaintiffs CWPA [*35]  claim is DISMISSED with leave to amend.
F. Common Law Wrongful Termination Claim
Finally, Plaintiff brings a claim for wrongful termination in violation of public policy. FAC 20. The City argues that as a local government, it is immune from common law tort claims. Mot. 20-21. The Court agrees. See Cal. Gov. Code § 815 (holding that public entities are not liable for injury "except as otherwise provided by statute"); Miklosy v. Regents of University of California, 44 Cal.4th 876, 899-900 (2008) (holding that absent specific statutory liability, the California Tort Claims Act bars wrongful termination in violation of public policy claims against the government).
Plaintiff expressly brings his wrongful termination claim as a common law tort claim and does not address the City's claim to immunity in his reply brief. See generally Reply. The Court therefore DISMISSES Plaintiff's wrongful termination tort claim. Because the City's immunity would make amendment futile, the claim is dismissed WITHOUT leave to amend. See Gordon v. City of Oakland, 627 F.3d 1092, 1094 (9th Cir. 2010) ("Although leave to amend a deficient complaint shall be freely given when justice so requires. . . leave may be denied if amendment of the complaint would be futile."); see also Jones v. California, No. C 94-20901 JW, 1996 WL 37792 at *4-5 (N.D. Cal. Jan. 19, 1996) (holding that leave to amend is futile when claims are defeated [*36]  by sovereign immunity).
IV. Conclusion
Defendants' motion to dismiss is GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART, as follows. The City's motion is DENIED with respect to:
• Plaintiff's third claim for disability discrimination under FEHA;
• Plaintiff's fourth claim for failure to engage in the interactive process under FEHA; and
• Plaintiff's fifth claim for failure to provide reasonable accommodations under FEHA.
Plaintiff's FEHA claims must be based on conduct which occurred after January 25, 2015. The City's motion is also DENIED with respect to:
• Plaintiff's tenth claim for disability discrimination under the ADA; and
• Plaintiff's eleventh claim for failure to provide reasonable accommodations under the ADA.
Plaintiff's ADA claims must be based on his termination and on events which occurred after March 31, 2015.
The City's motion is GRANTED WITH LEAVE TO AMEND with respect to:
• Plaintiff's second claim for failure to prevent harassment, discrimination or retaliation under FEHA;
• Plaintiff's sixth claim for medical leave retaliation under CFRA;
• Plaintiff's seventh claim for medical leave discrimination under CFRA;
• Plaintiff's eighth claim for interference with FMLA rights;
• Plaintiff's ninth [*37]  claim for discrimination/retaliation for exercising FMLA rights;
• Plaintiff's twelfth claim for failure to engage in the interactive process under the ADA;
• Plaintiff's thirteenth claim for retaliation for opposing violations of the ADA;
• Plaintiff's fourteenth claim for age discrimination under FEHA;
• Plaintiff's fifteenth claim for age discrimination under the ADA;
• Plaintiff's sixteenth claim for retaliation for opposing FEHA violations;
• Plaintiff's seventeenth claim for whistleblower retaliation.
The City's motion is GRANTED WITHOUT LEAVE TO AMEND with respect to:
• Plaintiff's first claim for disability harassment under FEHA;
• Plaintiff's eighteenth claim for wrongful termination in violation of public policy under common law tort.
IT IS SO ORDERED.


End of Document

