Conners v. Wilkie
United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois, Eastern Division
June 12, 2019, Filed
No. 15-CV-5623

Reporter
2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 248245 *
PRISCILLA L. CONNERS, Plaintiff, v. ROBERT L. WILKIE, Secretary of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs,1 Defendant.
Subsequent History: Affirmed by Conners v. Wilkie, 984 F.3d 1255, 2021 U.S. App. LEXIS 1062, 2021 WL 129665 (Jan. 14, 2021)
Counsel:  [*1] For Robert A McDonald, Secretary U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, Defendant: Ernest Yi Ling, United States Attorney's Office (NDIL - Chicago), Chicago, IL; United States Attorney's Office (NDIL - Chicago), Chicago, IL.
For Patricia L Conners, Plaintiff: Timothy A. Bridge, Timothy A. Bridge Esq., St. Charles, IL; Robert J. Drummond, Drummond Law Firm, Chicago, IL.
Judges: John J. Tharp, Jr., United States District Judge.
Opinion by: John J. Tharp, Jr.
Opinion



MEMORANDUM OPINION AND ORDER
In October 2011 a car hit Priscilla Conners as she crossed an intersection, causing her to sustain extensive physical injuries. Three years later, she lost her job as a licensed practical nurse ("LPN") at the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs' Lovell Federal Health Care Center ("Lovell FHCC")—according to the VA, it terminated Conners because physical limitations resulting from the accident prevented her from performing essential job functions and caused her to miss an excessive amount of work. Conners subsequently filed a complaint against the VA in this district alleging that it violated the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. by 1) failing to provide her with reasonable accommodations and thereby exacerbating her physical limitations, 2) retaliating against [*2]  her for seeking accommodations and filing a complaint with the EEOC, and 3) subjecting her to a hostile work environment. The parties filed cross-motions for summary judgment. Because Conners has failed to produce sufficient evidence to support a jury verdict in her favor (let alone require one) her motion is denied and the VA's motion is granted.

BACKGROUND
Conners began working as an LPN at Lovell FHCC in 2006. As part of her job, she administered immunizations to naval recruits, served as a clinic supervisor for naval corpsmen who assisted with immunizations, treated patients, managed the front desk, taught classes, and completed paperwork. Defendant's Statement of Facts ("DSOF") ¶ 3, ECF No. 50; Plaintiff's Ex. F at 10:14-20, ECF No. 42. According to the VA, Lovell FHCC served up to 1,400 patients on any given day and was a noisy, busy, place requiring mobility from the LPNs working there. DSOF at ¶ 3. To that point, the official LPN job description explained that employees "must have the physical ability to perform job-related duties which require lifting, standing, bending, transferring, stooping, stretching, walking, pushing, or pulling without assistance from another patient [*3]  care provider or significant other." Defendant's Ex. A-2 at 6, ECF No. 50.
Conners was able to perform the above duties without issue until October 2011, when she was hit by an SUV while crossing a street. Conners sustained major physical injuries as a result, including a skull fracture, a pelvis fracture, a sacral fracture, and compound leg fractures. DSOF at ¶ 6. Conners spent the next sixth months on leave as she recovered from the accident and an initial corrective surgery. When Conners was cleared to return to work in late April 2012, her doctor submitted a report to Conners' supervisor, Nurse Manager Mary Bailey, describing Conners' physical limitations as follows:
Upon return, she is able to work 4 hours per day for the first 6 weeks. Then she can increase her hours to 6 hours per day for 6 weeks. Then she can increase to fulltime. She is not able to lift objects over 20 pounds. She is not able to climb, run, bend, squat or jump. She cannot perform prolonged sitting or walking. She needs to have the ability to change position after about 15 minutes. She will need to be able to elevate her leg as needed. She needs to avoid loud noises. Lastly, she will require at least four medical [*4]  visits per month for the next few months.
Defendant's Ex. A-11 at 375. Conners' return to Lovell FHCC was short lived—she was back in the emergency room two days later because of a complication with a metal rod that had been placed in her leg. A second surgery kept Conners away from work until late June 2012, at which time her doctor submitted another report reiterating that Conners was unable to "perform prolonged sitting or walking" and would need to "change position after about 15 minutes" and "elevate her leg as needed." Defendant's Ex. A-11 at 377. Conners maintains that Nurse Bailey ignored the recommendations and continued to assign her the same duties she had performed prior to the accident. Plaintiff's Statement of Facts ("PSOF") ¶ 30, ECF No. 42. Nurse Bailey testified in her deposition that she did not treat the doctor reports as formal requests for accommodations or pass the reports up the chain of command because she was not trained with respect to the Agency's reasonable accommodations policy. Plaintiff's Ex. F at 29:9-24, 68:6. She also testified, however, that she was aware of Conners' medical needs and tried to accommodate her when she returned to work by assigning [*5]  her to a private classroom and not requiring her to administer immunizations or assist at the front desk. Id. at 16:15-23. From what the Court can discern, Conners acknowledges that Nurse Bailey modified her duties at some point but maintains that further accommodations were needed. See Plaintiff's Response to DSOF ¶ 3, ECF No. 52 (admitting that Conners gave immunizations and served as clinic supervisor prior to the accident but implying that she did not do so afterwards). Conners was back at work for approximately four months before undergoing a third surgery in late October 2012 which required her to take another four to six weeks of medical leave. DSOF at ¶ 10.
In late March 2013, Lovell FHCC upper management e-mailed Conners offering assistance and advising her for the first time to contact reasonable accommodation coordinator Eric Strong to begin paperwork for a reasonable accommodation request. Id. at ¶ 11. On April 15, 2013, Conners submitted a formal request for the following accommodations: 1) a private office, 2) the ability to elevate her leg at 15-20-minute intervals every 1-2 hours, 3) a foot stool at her desk for elevation, 4) no standing for longer than 10-15 minutes [*6]  at a time, and 5) ambulation of 25 yards or more only when necessary. Id. at ¶ 12. Later that same day, Lovell FHCC management explained that it could temporarily provide Conners with a foot stool but could not agree to her other requests because a major part of her job as an LPN required standing and walking. Defendant's Ex. F at 3. It also noted that while it had and would continue to allow Conners to teach classes during her rehabilitation period to accommodate her, even teaching required walking more than 25 yards at a time. Id.
Conners missed another month of work following a fourth surgery in late April 2013. DSOF at ¶ 16. On May 6, 2013, Conners filed an administrative complaint with the VA's Office of Resolution Management alleging that the VA had failed to accommodate her disability since she returned to work in June 2012 after her second surgery. Plaintiff's Ex. A, ECF No. 42.
Sometime around June 7, 2013, the VA informed Conners that it had determined she was no longer able to perform essential LPN duties due to the limitations caused by her disability. It then requested that she fill out a reassignment form so that it could help her find a different position within the VA. [*7]  Plaintiff's Ex. F-21, ECF No. 42. Conners indicated on the form that she was willing to consider, among other things, reassignment to Mesa, Arizona and reassignment to a different type of position (i.e., a non-LPN position) for which she was qualified. She noted that 90% of her current duties were clerical/supervisory in nature. Defendant's Ex. A-4. At the bottom of the form, Conners crossed out a portion that read "I understand that if VA cannot find a suitable position the agency will have no further obligation to accommodate me." Id. When Conners returned the form, Eric Strong told her that it could not be altered in that fashion. DSOF at ¶ 20. In an e-mail he subsequently sent to Conners' supervisors, Strong stated that he had instructed Conners to update the form but was unsuccessful in his attempt to explain that the form could not be "customized." Defendant's Ex. H. Conners did not submit an updated reassignment form until October 2, 2013, this time indicating a willingness to accept a position in Hot Springs, Arkansas but again crossing out the portion about the agency's obligation to accommodate. Defendant's Ex. I. Conners had a fifth surgery later that month.
Then, in what [*8]  appears to be a follow up to a conversation that took place on November 18, 2013, Conners sent an e-mail to Lovell FHCC Human Resources on the morning of November 21, 2013 explaining that she would continue her duties in her current position with reasonable accommodations. Defendant's Ex. A-15 at 3. HR responded by stating that there were no LPN positions that functioned in a primarily administrative role as would be necessary to accommodate her, either at Lovell FHCC or elsewhere, and that the accommodations she sought would not enable her to "complete the full depth and scope of duties as defined in [the LPN] functional statement." It then outlined three options: 1) potential reassignment to a position in a different occupational series upon submission of an up-to-date, detailed resume; 2) file for medical disability retirement; or 3) removal due to inability to perform required duties even with reasonable accommodation. Id. at 1-2. Connors replied by again suggesting that she be allowed to continue in her current position under the modified duty schedule Nurse Manager Bailey had assigned and requesting a meeting with all concerned parties. Id. at 1.
Things were apparently quiet (or [*9]  at least undocumented in the record) until January 2014. At that point, Lovell FHCC sent Conners a letter of proposed removal, citing her inability to perform essential functions and failure to maintain a regular work schedule. DSOF at ¶ 27. The letter advised Conners that she had 14 days from receipt to object or otherwise reply. Conners did not respond and was formally terminated on January 27, 2014. Shortly thereafter, she applied for Social Security disability benefits. Id. at ¶ 38.
Conners filed another administrative complaint of discrimination against the VA on April 4, 2014 in which she advanced discrimination, retaliation, and hostile work environment claims. The VA's Office of Employment Discrimination Complaint Adjudication issued a final decision in the matter in May 2015 dismissing both the April 2014 and May 2013 administrative complaints but permitting Conners to file a civil action in federal court. Compl. Ex. A. Conners filed this suit in June 2015, alleging that the VA had failed to accommodate her, retaliated against her, and subjected her to a hostile work environment in violation of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. After more than two years of discovery, Conners filed a motion for summary [*10]  judgement on her failure to accommodate claim. The VA then filed its own motion for summary judgment on all of Conners' claims.

DISCUSSION
Summary judgement is warranted when the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute of material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). The general standards do not change when courts consider cross summary judgment motions: all facts and inferences must be construed in favor of the party against whom the motion under consideration is made. Calumet River Fleeting, Inc. v. Int'l Union of Operating Engineers, Local 150, AFL-CIO, 824 F.3d 645, 647-48 (7th Cir. 2016) (internal citations omitted).
The Rehabilitation Act prohibits federal agencies from discriminating against an otherwise qualified individual with a disability solely by reason of his or her disability. 29 U.S.C. § 794(a). Apart from the standard of causation (which is not at issue here), the Rehabilitation Act is coextensive with Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12132, under which discrimination is defined to include both disparate treatment and failure to make reasonable accommodations. Brumfield v. City of Chicago, 735 F.3d 619, 630 (7th Cir. 2013).

I. Failure to Accommodate
To prevail on her failure to accommodate claim under the Rehabilitation Act, Conners must show 1) that she was a "qualified" individual with a disability; 2) that the VA was aware of her disability; and 3) that the VA failed to accommodate her disability reasonably. E.E.O.C. v. AutoZone, Inc., 809 F.3d 916, 919 (7th Cir. 2016). It is undisputed [*11]  that Conners had a disability and that the VA was aware of that disability. The issue, then, is whether Conners was a qualified individual for purposes of the Rehabilitation Act, and if so, whether the VA failed to reasonably accommodate her.
The Court begins by noting that Conners' principal argument in her motion for summary judgment is that the VA's failure to engage in an interactive process to identify and implement appropriate accommodations—as evidenced by its year-long delay in providing Conners with the relevant accommodation paperwork or any information on its policies—shows that it failed to reasonably accommodate her.2 See Plaintiff's Memorandum in Support of Motion for Summary Judgment 16, ECF No. 45. The Seventh Circuit has explained, however, that while the "interactive process" is relevant to the determination of whether an employer failed to reasonably accommodate an employee, it is not an independent basis for liability. Sansone v. Brennan, 917 F.3d 975, 980 (7th Cir. 2019). Rather, an employer's failure to engage in the process is actionable "only if it prevents identification of an appropriate accommodation for a qualified individual." Basden v. Prof'l Transp., Inc., 714 F.3d 1034, 1039 (7th Cir. 2013). Accordingly, the question of whether an employer failed to engage with the employee need not be considered [*12]  if the employee fails to first present sufficient evidence that he or she was "qualified." Id. That, then, is where the analysis must start.
A "qualified individual" for purposes of the ADA (and therefore the Rehabilitation Act) is an individual who "with or without reasonable accommodation can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds or desires." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). In determining whether an individual is qualified, courts in this circuit look first to whether the individual satisfies the prerequisites for the position (e.g., educational background, skills, or licenses) and next to whether the individual can perform the essential functions of the job. Wheatley v. Factory Card & Party Outlet, 826 F.3d 412, 417 (7th Cir. 2016). Only the second prong is at issue here.
The VA argues that Conners was not a qualified individual for purposes of the Rehabilitation Act because her disability prevented her from holding any job. Defendant's Memorandum in Opposition to Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment 8, ECF No. 55. In support of that argument, it points to Conners' 2014 statement before the Social Security Administration in which she explained that she "became unable to work because of [her] disabling condition on October 29, 2011." Defendant's Ex. L at 2. According [*13]  to the VA, that statement constitutes an admission that Conners could not successfully maintain any job as of October 29, 2011 and negates any argument that she was a qualified individual. Drawing all inferences in favor of the VA (as the Court must when considering Conners' motion for summary judgment), that statement (in addition to other evidence discussed below) is enough to support a finding in its favor such that Conners' motion must be denied; to succeed on her motion for summary judgment, Conners would have to show that no reasonable jury could find in the VA's favor, and she has plainly failed to do so.
That does not mean, however, that the VA's cross-motion for summary judgment should be granted on that basis alone—the statement Conners made to the Social Security Administration does not require a jury to find that she was not a qualified individual. The Supreme Court in Cleveland v. Policy Management Systems Corp. recognized that there are "many situations in which an SSDI claim and an ADA claim can comfortably exist side by side." 526 U.S. 795, 806, 119 S. Ct. 1597, 143 L. Ed. 2d 966 (1999). And while "an earlier SSDI claim may turn out genuinely to conflict with an ADA claim," id., Conners' SSDI claim came after the events giving [*14]  rise to her ADA claim. More importantly, she has proffered an explanation for the apparent contradiction: Conners argues that her statement does not suggest that she was completely unable to work as of October 29, 2011 (in fact, she continued to work after that period), but rather that she eventually became unable work as the injuries she sustained on that date were exacerbated by the VA's failure to accommodate her over time. Such an interpretation of Conners' statement is not unreasonable and therefore must be credited when assessing the VA's motion for summary judgment. Indeed, because "the nature of an individual's disability may change over time . . . a statement about that disability at the time of an individual's application for SSDI benefits may not reflect an individual's capacities at the time of the relevant employment decision." Id.
That said, Conners does not argue in any of her briefs that she could perform the essential functions of her job without accommodation, nor has she established that the accommodations she sought would have enabled her to perform those functions. The VA argues, and the record supports, that an LPN's major responsibilities include administering [*15]  immunizations, treating patients, and responding to medical emergencies. Conners does not dispute that those duties require LPNs to walk and stand for long periods of time. See Defendant's Ex. A-2 (job description identifying "major duties"); Plaintiff's Ex. F at 13:10-16 (Nurse Bailey testifying that LPNs are "constantly on their feet"). Far from enabling her to perform the job's essential functions, then, the accommodations Conners sought—some of which amount to not walking or standing for prolonged periods of time—would make it impossible for her to do so.3 And it is well established that an employer need not "strip a current job of its principal duties to accommodate a disabled employee." Gratzl v. Office of Chief Judges of 12th, 18th, 19th, & 22nd Judicial Circuits, 601 F.3d 674, 680 (7th Cir. 2010). To this, Conners responds only that the recommendations set forth by her physicians "would have allowed [her] to continue to perform the essential duties of her position." Plaintiff's Memorandum in Opposition to Defendant's Motion for Summary 14, ECF No. 51. But without further elaboration, that conclusory statement is insufficient to satisfy her burden of establishing that she was a qualified individual.
That said, reassignment to a different, vacant position may be a [*16]  reasonable accommodation under the statute. Severson v. Heartland Woodcraft, Inc., 872 F.3d 476, 482 (7th Cir. 2017), cert. denied, 138 S. Ct. 1441, 200 L. Ed. 2d 717 (2018). The plaintiff, however, bears the burden of showing that a vacant position exists and that the plaintiff is qualified for that position. McCreary v. Libbey-Owens-Ford Co., 132 F.3d 1159, 1165 (7th Cir. 1997). Conners has presented evidence that vacant positions existed. Specifically, she points to a list of vacant positions maintained by the VA during the relevant time-period which was not shared with Conners during her employment. Plaintiff's Ex. F-26 Bate Stamped Docs. 308-331, ECF No. 43. But Conners has not presented evidence of what any of those vacant positions required, and apart from vague statements suggesting she could perform "clerical or supervisory" work, she has not presented evidence of her qualifications for those positions. Cf. Ozlowski v. Henderson, 237 F.3d 837, 841 (7th Cir. 2001) (summary judgment in favor of defendant affirmed where plaintiff presented a printout identifying vacant positions but presented no evidence, "other than his own statements," that he was qualified to perform any of them).
Conners cites to Corbett v. General Services Administration, EEOC DOC 03A10017, 2001 WL 402494, at *2 (Apr. 12, 2001), an EEOC administrative decision, for the proposition that "employers are in the best position to know which positions are vacant" and that they should "ask the employee about his/her qualifications and interests." [*17]  The EEOC also stated in that decision that the Rehabilitation Act permits an employer to conclude that an employee is not a qualified individual "[o]nly after determining that reassignment to a vacant position was not possible or would result in an undue hardship." Id. That is reasonable enough—the Seventh Circuit has similarly described an employer's duty to engage in an interactive process with the employee as a "mandate." Stern v. St. Anthony's Health Ctr., 788 F.3d 276, 292 (7th Cir. 2015). But that mandate does not shift the burden of production to the employer; to survive a motion for summary judgment, the plaintiff must sufficiently demonstrate that he or she was a qualified individual. As discussed above, failure to do so renders a defendant's alleged failure to engage in the interactive process immaterial. See id. at 293 (explaining that an employer's refusal to interact may curtail the record but that the burden is nevertheless on the employee to present evidence sufficient to reach the jury on the question of whether she was able to perform the essential functions of the job); see also Jackson v. City of Chicago, 414 F.3d 806, 813 (7th Cir. 2005) ("It is the plaintiff's burden to show that a vacant position exists for which [s]he was qualified. If such a position is available, then the court may consider whether failure to provide [*18]  that accommodation was due to a breakdown in the interactive process.") (internal citations omitted). The VA might have been in the best position to facilitate reassignment at the time Conners initially requested accommodations, and it is somewhat troubling that it apparently had a list of vacant positions that it did not share with her. But once she initiated this action, and with the device of discovery at her disposal, it became Conners' responsibility to identify a position that was vacant and produce evidence that she was qualified to hold that position. She has not done so. For that reason, the VA's summary judgment motion must be granted with respect to Conners' failure to accommodate claim.

II. Retaliation & Hostile Work Environment
In addition to her failure to accommodate claim, Conners advanced in her complaint a retaliation claim alleging that the VA terminated her for complaining about its failure to accommodate her and a hostile work environment claim alleging that her supervisors failed to respond when she informed them that naval corpsmen were harassing her about her disability. Compl. ¶¶ 45, 58. The VA argues in its motion for summary judgment that as to the former, [*19]  Conners failed to establish a causal connection between her protected activity and subsequent termination given that the individuals in charge of making the employment decision were unaware that she had engaged in protected activity. As to the latter, the VA argues that the alleged harassment was neither severe nor pervasive. See Bellino v. Peters, 530 F.3d 543, 551 (7th Cir. 2008) (assuming without deciding that the Rehabilitation Act incorporates Title VII hostile work environment standards requiring that the plaintiff be the object of unwelcome harassment based on disability that is "sufficiently severe and pervasive so as to alter the conditions of employment.").
Conners did not respond to either argument. In fact, she did not address either her retaliation claim or her hostile work environment claim at all. Instead, she focused solely on her failure to accommodate claim in both her motion for summary judgment and her response to the VA's motion.4 The Court therefore concludes that Conners abandoned her retaliation and harassment claims and grants the VA's motion for summary judgment as to those claims. See Maclin v. SBC Ameritech, 520 F.3d 781, 788 (7th Cir. 2008) (failure to defend claims in response to motion for summary judgment results in abandonment of those claims); Little v. Mitsubishi Motors N. Am., Inc., 261 Fed. Appx. 901, 903 (7th Cir. 2008) (affirming district court's entry [*20]  of summary judgment in defendant's favor where plaintiff abandoned retaliation and harassment claims by failing to present facts or develop legal arguments on those issues).
Regardless, the Court agrees with the arguments set forth by the VA. As far as the Court can tell based on its own review of the record, there is nothing therein suggesting that Conners was terminated for any reason other than her inability to perform certain essential tasks or that the ultimate decision makers knew she had filed formal complaints. And with respect to her hostile work environment claim, the record is devoid of anything even bordering on severe or pervasive harassment. Indeed, in responding to the VA's Rule 56.1 Statement of Facts, Conners conceded that when she complained about the behavior of naval corpsmen working under her—they had apparently made fun of her limp on a couple of occasions, see Plaintiff's EEO Affidavit, Plaintiff's Ex. C at ¶ 24, ECF No. 42—her supervisor asked them to stop speaking to her. Plaintiff's Response to DSOF at ¶ 33. And while a failure to accommodate could potentially create a hostile work environment in itself, see Ekstrand v. Sch. Dist. of Somerset, 583 F.3d 972, 978 (7th Cir. 2009), the evidence shows that the VA made at least some sort [*21]  of effort to accommodate her, and "an offer to accommodate [the plaintiff's] disability is inconsistent with hostility on that basis." Bellino, 530 F.3d at 552.
In short, it was Conners' responsibility to advance arguments in support of her retaliation and harassment claims. She did not do so, so the Court need not consider those claims in any more depth than it already has. United States v. Dunkel, 927 F.2d 955, 956 (7th Cir. 1991) ("Judges are not like pigs, hunting for truffles buried in briefs.").
* * *
Conners has failed to adduce evidence sufficient to sustain a jury verdict in her favor on any of her claims. Accordingly, the VA's motion for summary judgment is granted and Conners' motion for summary judgment is denied.
Date: June 12, 2019
/s/ John J. Tharp, Jr.
John J. Tharp, Jr.
United States District Judge

JUDGMENT ORDER
This action having been decided on a motion for summary judgment by Judge John J. Tharp, Jr., it is hereby ORDERED:
Judgment is hereby entered in favor of defendant Robert L. Wilkie, Secretary of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, and against plaintiff Priscilla L. Conners. Defendant shall recover costs from plaintiff.
Dated: June 12, 2019
/s/ John J. Tharp, Jr.
John J. Tharp, Jr.
United States District Judge


End of Document

