Conway v. City of Palm Desert
United States District Court for the Central District of California
April 17, 2023, Decided; April 17, 2023, Filed
Case No. 5:21-cv-01144-SPG-SP

Reporter
2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 67923 *; 2023 WL 5505869
JAMES CONWAY, Plaintiff, v. THE CITY OF PALM DESERT, et al., Defendants.
Counsel:  [*1] For Esteban Molina, an individual, Joe Ruiz, an individual, The County of Riverside, a public entity, Defendants: Adrian Michael Paris, Lee H Roistacher, Mitchell Dean, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Rachel Marie Zuckowich, Dean Gazzo Roistacher LLP, Solana Beach, CA.
For James Conway, an individual, Plaintiff: Nicole Norris Meyers, Law Office of Nicole Meyers APC, Los Angeles, CA; Oshea V Orchid, Ronald P Ackerman, Vasili George Brasinikas, Public Employees Legal LLP, Los Angeles, CA.
For The City of Palm Desert, a municipal corporation, Defendant: Michael T Gibbs, LEAD ATTORNEY, Kevin L Borgen, Gibbs and Fuerst LLP, San Diego, CA; Steven J Lowery, Declues Burkett and Thompson LLP, Huntington Beach, CA.
Judges: HON. SHERILYN PEACE GARNETT, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: SHERILYN PEACE GARNETT
Opinion



ORDER GRANTING DEFENDANTS' MOTIONS TO DISMISS

[ECF NOS. 56, 59]
Before the Court are Defendants City of Palm Desert's ("Palm Desert") and Defendants County of Riverside's, Esteban Molina's, and Joe Ruiz's ("County Defendants") motions to dismiss Plaintiff James Conway's fourth amended complaint ("FAC") pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6). (ECF Nos. 56, 59). The Court held a hearing on April 12, 2023. Having considered the submissions of the parties, [*2]  the relevant law, the record in this case, and the arguments of counsel during the hearing, the Court hereby GRANTS Defendants' motions.

I. BACKGROUND
The Court incorporates by reference its recitation of the facts from its prior order granting in part and denying in part Defendants' motion to dismiss Plaintiff's second amended complaint. See ECF No. 46 ("Prior Order")). After the Court issued its Prior Order, on October 12, 2022, the Riverside County Superior Court (the "Superior Court") denied Plaintiff's Petition in the administrative proceeding. (ECF No. 59-10).1 The Superior Court ruled that Plaintiff had "not established that the decision to terminate was an abuse of discretion or that he was denied a fair hearing." (Id.). The Superior Court explained that Palm Desert had an "adequate justification for the termination based on the disruption to its relationship with the Sheriff's Department resulting from [Plaintiff's] attempt to use his position as a Code Compliance Officer with the City and his relationships with other deputies to influence the Sheriff's deputies in performance of their duties." (Id.). On February 1, 2023, the California Court of Appeal dismissed Plaintiff's appeal [*3]  for failure to pay the statutory filing fee. See (ECF No. 59-14).
On February 3, 2023, Plaintiff filed the operative FAC. (ECF No. 52). On March 7, 2023, County Defendants moved to dismiss Plaintiff's seventh cause of action, the only cause of action alleged against them. (ECF No. 56). On March 8, 2023, Palm Desert moved to dismiss the remaining causes of action. (ECF No. 59 ("Palm Mot.")). Plaintiff filed oppositions to the motions on March 22, 2023, (ECF Nos. 62 ("County Opp."), 63 ("Palm Opp.")). County Defendants filed their reply on March 28, 2023, (ECF No. 64), and Palm Desert filed its reply on March 29, 2023. (ECF No. 65). On April 12, 2023, the Court heard oral argument.

II. LEGAL STANDARD
Rule 8(a)(2) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure requires a complaint to include "a short and plain statement of the claim showing that the pleader is entitled to relief." A complaint that fails to meet this standard may be dismissed pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6). "Dismissal under Rule 12(b)(6) is proper when the complaint either (1) lacks a cognizable legal theory or (2) fails to allege sufficient facts to support a cognizable legal theory." Somers v. Apple, Inc., 729 F.3d 953, 959 (9th Cir. 2013). To survive a 12(b)(6) motion, the plaintiff must allege "enough facts to state a claim to relief that is plausible on its [*4]  face." Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 556, 127 S. Ct. 1955, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929 (2007). "A claim has facial plausibility when the plaintiff pleads factual content that allows the court to draw the reasonable inference that the defendant is liable for the misconduct alleged." Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678, 129 S. Ct. 1937, 173 L. Ed. 2d 868 (2009). "The plausibility standard is not akin to a probability requirement, but it asks for more than a sheer possibility that a defendant has acted unlawfully." Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). When ruling on a Rule 12(b)(6) motion, the Court "accept[s] factual allegations in the complaint as true and construe[s] the pleadings in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party." Manzarek v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 519 F.3d 1025, 1031 (9th Cir. 2008).

III. DISCUSSION

A. Palm Desert's Rule 12(b)(6) Motion
1. Preclusion Doctrines—First and Eighth Causes of Action
When the Court issued its Prior Order, Plaintiff's Petition was still pending. See (Prior Order at 7). The Court noted that the administrative agency's decision would have preclusive effect on Plaintiff's claims so long as the underlying proceeding satisfied the fairness requirements established in United States v. Utah Construction & Mining Co., 384 U.S. 394, 86 S. Ct. 1545, 16 L. Ed. 2d 642, 176 Ct. Cl. 1391 (1966). (Id. at 7-8). However, the Court declined to reach the merits of the issue because neither party provided any basis to conclude that the administrative proceedings satisfied the Utah Construction fairness requirements, particularly given that counsel [*5]  for Palm Desert raised the argument for the first time at the hearing on its motion to dismiss. (Id. at 8). After the Court issued its Prior Order, on October 12, 2022, the Superior Court denied Plaintiff's Petition. (ECF No. 59-10). The Superior Court ruled that Plaintiff had "not established that the decision to terminate was an abuse of discretion or that he was denied a fair hearing." (Id.). Plaintiff appealed that decision, and on February 1, 2023, the California Court of Appeal dismissed Plaintiff's appeal for failure to pay the statutory filing fee. See (ECF No. 59-14).
In its motion to dismiss presently before the Court, Palm Desert argues that Plaintiff's causes of action are precluded by both the administrative decision and the Superior Court's mandamus decision. (Palm Mot. at 28-34). Specifically, Palm Desert argues that claim preclusion applies from the administrative decision and issue preclusion applies from the mandamus decision.2 The Court considers each in turn.
a) Claim Preclusion
As this Court noted in its Prior Order, a federal court gives preclusive effect to an agency's adjudication of factual issues during an administrative proceeding if the proceeding met the [*6]  fairness requirements as established in Utah Construction. See Doe v. Regents of Univ. of Cal., 891 F.3d 1147, 1154 (9th Cir. 2018); Miller v. Cnty. of Santa Cruz, 39 F.3d 1030, 1032-33 (9th Cir. 1994). Those requirements are that: (1) the administrative agency was acting in a judicial capacity; (2) the agency resolved disputed issues of fact properly before it; and (3) the parties had an adequate opportunity to litigate the issues. Utah Construction, 384 U.S. at 422. Because California has adopted for its administrative proceedings the standard for fairness set forth in Utah Construction, a federal court must give the factfinding of an administrative agency the same preclusive effect that the agency's decisions would be entitled to in state court. Doe, 891 F.3d at 1155. If the administrative proceedings satisfied all three Utah Construction factors, the administrative decision will be entitled to preclusive effect and will bar future claims that fall within the administrative decision's preclusive scope. Id.; see also White v. City of Pasadena, 671 F.3d 918, 927 (9th Cir. 2012) ("Under California law, a prior administrative proceeding, if upheld on review (or not reviewed at all), will be binding in later civil actions to the same extent as a state court decision if 'the administrative proceeding possessed the requisite judicial character.'" (quoting Runyon v. Bd. of Tr., 48 Cal. 4th 760, 108 Cal. Rptr. 3d 557, 229 P.3d 985 (2010))).
Palm Desert contends—and Plaintiff does not dispute—that Plaintiff's administrative proceeding satisfies Utah Construction. Plaintiff [*7]  was given a pre-termination Skelly hearing. The subsequent administrative appeal was conducted in a judicial-like proceeding, as outlined in Palm Desert Municipal Code § 2.52.935. Witnesses in the proceeding testified under oath and were subject to cross-examination, and the parties had the right to subpoena witnesses and present documentary evidence. The proceedings were held before an impartial hearing officer. A court reporter maintained a verbatim record of the proceedings. The hearing officer issued a written and well-reasoned decision. The proceeding also was subject to judicial review via a petition for a writ of mandate pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.5. Thus, the administrative proceedings complied with the requirements as set forth in Utah Construction. Accord Garcia v. Bostic, 818 F. App'x 686, 688-89 (9th Cir. 2020) (finding a similar administrative proceeding satisfied Utah Construction and therefore was afforded preclusive effect on a subsequent federal proceeding).
Because Plaintiff's administrative proceeding was sufficiently judicial in character, the Court next determines the preclusive effect of the administrative decision. See White, 671 F.3d at 926. "California's claim preclusion doctrine provides that a 'valid final judgment on the merits in favor of a defendant serves as a complete bar to further litigation on the [*8]  same cause of action.'" Id. at 927 (quoting Slater v. Blackwood, 15 Cal. 3d 791, 795, 126 Cal. Rptr. 225, 543 P.2d 593 (1975)). "In determining what constitutes the 'same cause of action,' California applies 'the "primary rights" theory, under which the invasion of one primary right gives rise to a single cause of action.'" Id. (quoting Slater, 15 Cal. 3d at 795). A "primary right" is "the right to be free from a particular injury, regardless of the legal theory on which liability for the injury is based." Fed'n of Hillside & Canyon Ass'ns v. City of Los Angeles, 126 Cal. App. 4th 1180, 1202, 24 Cal. Rptr. 3d 543 (2004). In addition to identity of claims, for claim preclusion to apply, "the decision in the prior proceeding [must be] final and on the merits" and "the parties in the present proceeding or parties in privity with them were parties to the prior proceeding." Id.; see Cell Therapeutics, Inc. v. Lash Grp. Inc., 586 F.3d 1204, 1212 (9th Cir. 2010).
Palm Desert argues that the administrative decision upholding Plaintiff's termination precludes every cause of action based on the same primary right—the right to continued employment. However, Palm Desert does not specify which of Plaintiff's causes of action are based on that right. In response, Plaintiff argues that the issues raised in his state administrative and mandamus proceedings are not identical to the causes of action raised in this case. Namely, the administrative and mandamus proceedings were limited to whether Palm Desert [*9]  could establish just cause for Plaintiff's termination.
The issue before the hearing officer was whether Palm Desert had just cause to terminate Plaintiff's employment. (ECF No. 59-3 at 758-64). The hearing officer concluded that "there was just cause to terminate" Plaintiff. (Id. at 762). Based on the evidence presented, the hearing officer found that Plaintiff "had previously been put on notice that he needed to exercise good judgement related to his employment with [Palm Desert]. In fact, he was specifically previously admonished about trying to use his position with [Palm Desert] to gain advantage for himself or those close to him. That was exactly the type of conduct that was the basis for his termination." (Id.). The hearing officer also rejected Plaintiff's arguments that Palm Desert violated his Due Process rights. (Id. at 764).
As pleaded in the FAC, Plaintiff's first cause of action for illegal discharge in violation of California Labor Code § 98.6 is based on the same primary right as Plaintiff's administrative proceeding—the right to employment. In Plaintiff's first cause of action, he alleges that Palm Desert "illegally terminated" his employment. (FAC ¶ 70). Thus, the harm for which Plaintiff seeks [*10]  redress here is identical to the harm at issue in the underlying administrative proceeding—Plaintiff's loss of employment—and therefore an identity of claims exists between the two proceedings.3 Accordingly, because there is an identify of claims, the administrative decision is final,4 and the parties in this proceeding were parties to the administrative proceeding,5 Plaintiff's first cause of action for illegal discharge is barred under the doctrine of claim preclusion. The Court therefore grants Palm Desert's motion to dismiss Plaintiff's first cause of action with prejudice.
b) Issue Preclusion
In addition to arguing for claim preclusion, Palm Desert asserts that the underlying state court mandamus proceeding bars Plaintiff's eighth cause of cation for violation of due process rights under the doctrine of issue preclusion. (Palm Mot. at 31). California's doctrine of "[i]ssue preclusion 'prevents a party from obtaining a second adjudication of an issue that has already been adjudicated against that party on the merits by a court of competent jurisdiction.'" Hardwick v. Cnty. of Orange, 980 F.3d 733, 740 (9th Cir. 2020) (quoting Pajaro Valley Water Mgmt. Agency v. McGrath, 128 Cal. App. 4th 1093, 27 Cal. Rptr. 3d 741 (2005)). "Issue preclusion applies: '(1) after final adjudication (2) of an identical issue (3) actually litigated [*11]  and necessarily decided in the first suit and (4) asserted against one who was a party in the first suit or one in privity with that party.'" Id. (quoting DKN Holdings LLC v. Faerber, 61 Cal. 4th 813, 189 Cal. Rptr. 3d 809, 352 P.3d 378 (2015)). The Ninth Circuit recently confirmed that a state court's decision denying a writ of mandate following an administrative decision may serve as an independent basis for issue preclusion. See Chen Through Chen v. Albany Unified Sch. Dist., 56 F.4th 708, 725 (9th Cir. 2022). Therefore, the Court considers whether Plaintiff's eighth cause of action is barred by issue preclusion from the Superior Court's mandamus proceeding.
For the reasons explained above, factors one, three, and four are established for the underlying state mandamus proceeding for the same reasons as they were for the administrative proceeding. Thus, the Court need only determine whether there is an identity of issues. In the Petition, Plaintiff asserted, among other allegations, that Palm Desert's administrative proceeding violated his constitutional right to due process. See (ECF No. 59-7 at 14-17). Plaintiff argued that Palm Desert failed to provide an evidentiary hearing in a reasonable amount of time and that the hearing officer excluded relevant evidence.6 (Id.). The Superior Court denied Plaintiff's Petition, expressly finding that he was [*12]  not denied a fair hearing. (ECF No. 59-10). Here, Plaintiff again alleges that Palm Desert deprived him of his constitutional due process rights.7 (FAC ¶¶ 111-17). Accordingly, "the due process issue that [Plaintiff] seeks to raise in federal court is one that he has already litigated and lost on the merits in a full and fair de novo review by a California state court. See Chen, 56 F.4th at 726. The Superior Court's decision is therefore entitled to preclusive effect, and it requires the dismissal with prejudice of Plaintiff's eighth cause of action for violation of his due process rights. See id.
2. Failure to Engage & Failure to Accommodate—Second and Third Causes of Action
"Under section 12940, subdivision (m), it is an unlawful employment practice for an employer or other entity covered by this part to fail to make reasonable accommodation for the known physical or mental disability of an applicant or employee." Doe v. Dep't of Corr. & Rehab., 43 Cal. App. 5th 721, 738, 255 Cal. Rptr. 3d 910 (2019) (quotation marks and alterations omitted). The FEHA "requires an employer to accommodate only a 'known' disability." Id. (emphasis in original). "Thus, the duty of an employer reasonably to accommodate an employee's handicap does not arise until the employer is aware of respondent's disability and physical limitations."  [*13] Id. (quotation marks and alterations omitted). "The employee bears the burden of giving the employer notice of his or her disability." Id. Moreover, "[w]here the disability, resulting limitations, and necessary reasonable accommodations, are not open, obvious, and apparent to the employer, the employee bears the burden to specifically identify the disability and resulting limitations, and to suggest the reasonable accommodations." Id. at 738-39 (quotation marks and alterations omitted). "An employer's general knowledge of certain symptoms of an employee's disability is insufficient to put an employer on notice of the particular accommodations required." Issaian v. J.B. Hunt Transp. Servs. Inc., No. 2:20-cv-00732-SVW-MAA, 2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 114195, 2021 WL 2450784, at *5 (C.D. Cal. May 14, 2021).
Palm Desert argues that Plaintiff does not allege a qualifying disability under the FEHA. (Palm Mot. at 13-14). Plaintiff responds that he provided Palm Desert with medical documentation supporting his need for leave and surgery and requested a reasonable accommodation to allow him to recover and return to work. (Palm Opp. at 9). According to the complaint, Plaintiff sustained a "knee injury" in or around spring of 2017. (FAC ¶ 18). He requested "to take time off because of the injury and to get surgery to repair the injury." (Id.). After initially [*14]  declining his request to take time off "due to staffing levels," Plaintiff proceeded "to perform his job duties in pain without any accommodation for his injury" for more than one year. (Id. ¶ 21). Despite his pain, Plaintiff "worked competently and capably" without any accommodation until July 2019 when he again requested time off for surgery and Palm Desert granted Plaintiff six months leave with a scheduled return in January 2020. (Id. ¶¶ 11, 22).
Plaintiff's allegations are like those in Doe, where the California Court of Appeal affirmed the denial of a plaintiff's claim for failure to engage in an interactive process and provide a reasonable accommodation where the employer was not on notice "of the extent of the limitations his disability caused." 43 Cal. App. 5th at 739. The plaintiff "provided no information describing the extent of his disabilities" or what kind of work limitations his disabilities caused. The court reasoned that the information regarding the extent and nature of plaintiff's claimed disabilities was "crucial" to the employer's ability to determine whether it was able to reasonably accommodate those disabilities. Id. at 740. The court found "fatal" to both his interactive and accommodation [*15]  claims the fact that plaintiff had not shown that he provided that information to his employer. Id. See also Goos v. Shell Oil Co., No. C 07-6130 CRB, 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 47067, 2010 WL 1526284, at *11 (N.D. Cal. Apr. 15, 2010) (notice insufficient where plaintiff "never informed anybody at [employer] what she could and could not do" and employer therefore "simply had no metric by which to determine that a given job would or would not be suitable to somebody with plaintiff's disability").
Here, Plaintiff does not allege that he provided Palm Desert with information about the nature of his disability and resulting limitations. Instead, the only allegation regarding Palm Desert's purported knowledge of Plaintiff's knee injury is that Plaintiff requested time off for a surgery. See (FAC ¶ 18). However, "pain alone without some corresponding limitation on activity is insufficient to establish a disabling impairment." Arteaga v. Brink's, Inc., 163 Cal. App. 4th 327, 348, 77 Cal. Rptr. 3d 654 (2008). And aside from experiencing pain, Plaintiff does not allege that he was limited in any way from performing his job or that he informed Palm Desert that he needed any accommodations in the workplace. To the contrary, Plaintiff continued to competently perform his job without any accommodation for over a year. As such, Palm Desert could not have known that Plaintiff required an accommodation [*16]  or that it had a duty to engage in an interactive process. Accordingly, because Plaintiff does not allege facts to demonstrate that Palm Desert was on notice of any purported disability, or that he was unable to perform his job duties without an accommodation, Plaintiff's second and third causes of action are dismissed without prejudice.8
3. Retaliation—Fourth Cause of Action
To establish a prima facie case of retaliation under the FEHA, "a plaintiff must show (1) he or she engaged in a 'protected activity,' (2) the employer subjected the employee to an adverse employment action, and (3) a causal link existed between the protected activity and the employer's action." Doe, 43 Cal. App. 5th at 734.
Palm Desert argues that Plaintiff's retaliation cause of action fails because he does not identify the supposed retaliation or allege any factual basis to plausibly show that Palm Desert retaliated because Plaintiff requested a reasonable accommodation. (Palm Mot. at 19). Plaintiff responds that Palm Desert retaliated against Plaintiff by "subjecting him to adverse employment actions such as the fact that when Plaintiff was cleared by his doctor to return to work, [Palm Desert] swiftly placed him on administrative leave, [*17]  and informed him he was under investigation." (Palm Opp. at 11 (citing FAC ¶ 49)). Plaintiff further argues that he was retaliated against "in part" because he exercised his right to request a reasonable accommodation for his knee injury. (Id.). Even if placing him on administrative leave and under investigation qualifies as an adverse action, taking the allegations in the FAC as true, Plaintiff alleges that he was placed on leave "due to the investigation [Palm Desert] initiated in the beginning of December 2019." (FAC ¶ 49). However, that investigation, which began while Plaintiff was on leave recovering from his knee surgery, dealt with Plaintiff's involvement with the arrest of Almanza and Gassner, not Plaintiff's request for a reasonable accommodation. Plaintiff alleges that Palm Desert initiated the investigation into his conduct shortly after the incident based on Molina and Ruiz's purported false reporting. (Id. ¶ 47). Therefore, as alleged in the FAC, any adverse employment action was not linked to Plaintiff having requested an accommodation but was instead linked to his involvement with Molina and Ruiz. Because there is no indication that Plaintiff can cure the deficiencies [*18]  outlined above if he was given a fifth opportunity to amend his complaint, the Court dismisses Plaintiff's fourth cause of action with prejudice.
4. Harassment & Failure to Prevent Harassment—Fifth and Sixth Causes of Action
In its Prior Order, the Court found "Plaintiff's conclusory harassment allegations insufficient." (Prior Order at 19). As pleaded, Plaintiff's allegations still simply recite the standard for FEHA workplace harassment, but do not actually describe any actionable conduct that is either severe or pervasive. Plaintiff still fails to allege how frequently "negative comments" were made, who made them, or when management learned of the comments. Instead, the only allegation regarding workplace harassment is that Plaintiff's "supervisor otherwise made negative comments about him taking time off." (FAC ¶ 19). Though Plaintiff "may have understandably found the incidents frustrating or upsetting, they were not so severe as to alter the conditions of his employment or create an abusive working environment." Doe, 43 Cal. App. at 737 (internal quotation and alterations omitted). Accordingly, Plaintiff has failed to state a claim for harassment. Moreover, Plaintiff's failure to prevent harassment fails [*19]  because it is derivative of her harassment claim. See Brent v. Boeing Co., No. 2:17-cv-04429-ODW (Ex), 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 159276, 2019 WL 4450424, at *11 (C.D. Cal. Sept. 17, 2019) ("It is well-settled law that no action lies for failure to take necessary steps to prevent discrimination or harassment if no such conduct in fact occurs."). Because any amendment would be futile given Plaintiff's numerous attempts to plead a cause of action for harassment, the Court dismisses Plaintiff's fifth and sixth causes of action with prejudice. See Rutman Wine Co. v. E. & J. Gallo Winery, 829 F.2d 729, 738 (9th Cir. 1987) (affirming denial of leave to amend where amended complaint failed to cure defects identified in order dismissing prior complaint).

B. County Defendants' Rule 12(b)(6) Motion
The Court previously granted the County Defendants' motion to dismiss because Plaintiff failed to allege that a "retaliatory motive was the 'but for' cause for any adverse action by Molina or Ruiz." (Prior Order at 21-22). Having found that neither Molina nor Ruiz violated Plaintiff's constitutional rights, the Court dismissed Plaintiff's § 1983 cause of action against the County for failure to plead Monell liability. (Id.).
As this Court previously established in its Prior Order, "[i]f an official takes adverse action against someone based on that forbidden motive, and 'non-retaliatory grounds are in fact insufficient to [*20]  provoke the adverse consequences,' the injured person may generally seek relief by bringing a First Amendment claim." Nieves v. Bartlett, 139 S. Ct. 1715, 1722, 204 L. Ed. 2d 1 (2019) (quoting Hartman v. Moore, 547 U.S. 250, 256, 126 S. Ct. 1695, 164 L. Ed. 2d 441 (2006)). "To prevail on such a claim, a plaintiff must establish a 'causal connection' between the government defendant's 'retaliatory animus' and the plaintiff's 'subsequent injury.'" Id. (quoting Hartman, 547 U.S. at 259). "It is not enough to show that an official acted with a retaliatory motive and that the plaintiff was injured—the motive must cause the injury. Specifically, it must be a 'but-for' cause, meaning that the adverse action against the plaintiff would not have been taken absent the retaliatory motive." Id. (citing Hartman, 547 U.S. at 260).
Plaintiff still has not alleged that either Molina or Ruiz had a retaliatory animus that caused them to take adverse action. Regarding Molina, this Court previously found that "there is an 'obvious alternative explanation' for the conduct rather than retaliatory motive: Molina intended to inform Ruiz of what happened before Plaintiff could share a competing account." (Prior Order at 22). However, as the County Defendants point out, the FAC provides no further allegations to support a finding that Molina acted out of a "retaliatory animus" rather than the "obvious alternative [*21]  explanation" for his motivation that the Court alluded to in its Prior Order. In fact, Plaintiff confirms as much in his opposition. Plaintiff asserts that "Deputy Molina preemptively complained to his supervisor, Sergeant Ruiz, with a false account of what happened during the interaction, in an attempt to 'taint the well,' and prevent any further objective analysis of the situation, so that Conway's actions were under scrutiny, and not the Deputies' [actions]." (County Opp. at 10). As for Ruiz, the SAC still does not allege what his intent may have been to call Lieutenant Matthew Martello to "report the incident." (Id. ¶¶ 40-46). In his opposition, Plaintiff suggests that, like Molina, Ruiz believed Plaintiff would be reporting the incident to Martello first. (County Opp. at 10). Thus, there continues to be an obvious alternative explanation for Molina and Ruiz's conduct other than a retaliatory motive.
Based on Plaintiff's acknowledgment that Molina and Ruiz informed Martello of the incident to prevent Plaintiff from sharing a contradictory account, as well as the facts alleged in the complaint, (FAC ¶¶ 40-46), the Court finds that Plaintiff has failed to show that a retaliatory motive [*22]  was the "but for" cause for any adverse action by Molina or Ruiz. Accordingly, Plaintiff cannot sustain a § 1983 claim against either Molina or Ruiz. Because Plaintiff has failed to cure his claim that Molina and Ruiz violated his constitutional rights, Plaintiff also fails to plead Monell liability against the County.
Lastly, the Court determines that granting further leave to amend Plaintiff's § 1983 claim against the County Defendants for a fifth time would be futile. See Rutman, 829 F.2d at 738.

IV. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, the Court orders as follows:
(1) Defendant Palm Desert's motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's first, fourth, fifth, sixth, and eighth causes of action, which are dismissed with prejudice;
(2) Defendant Palm Desert's motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's second and third causes of action, which are dismissed without prejudice;
(3) County Defendants' motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's seventh cause of action, which is dismissed with prejudice;
Any amendment of Plaintiff's second and third causes of action to cure the deficiencies discussed in this order must be filed no later than fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of this Order. Failure to amend by the deadline will result in dismissal [*23]  of the case and the docket will be closed.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
DATED: April 17, 2023
/s/ Sherilyn Peace Garnett
HON. SHERILYN PEACE GARNETT
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

