Cowart v. L.A. Cnty. Metro. Transp. Auth.
United States District Court for the Central District of California
October 13, 2015, Decided; October 13, 2015, Filed
Case No. CV-14-08092-MWF (PJWx)

Reporter
2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 181035 *
Chris Cowart -v- Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority
Subsequent History: Judgment entered by, Request denied by, Costs and fees proceeding at Cowart v. L.A. County Metro. Transp. Auth., 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 98213 (C.D. Cal., July 26, 2016)
Affirmed by, Request denied by Cowart v. Lac Metro, 2017 U.S. App. LEXIS 26550 (9th Cir. Cal., Dec. 22, 2017)
Counsel:  [*1] Chris Cyril Cowart, Plaintiff, Pro se, Los Angeles, CA.
For LAC Metro, Defendant: Calvin R House, LEAD ATTORNEY, Caroline Shahinian, Gutierrez Preciado and House LLP, Pasadena, CA.
Judges: Honorable MICHAEL W. FITZGERALD, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: MICHAEL W. FITZGERALD
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES—GENERAL

Proceedings (In Chambers): ORDER RE PLAINTIFF'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT [26]; DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT, OR ALTERNATIVELY, SUMMARY ADJUDICATION OF ISSUES [27]
Before the Court are the parties' cross-motions for summary judgment. Pro se Plaintiff Chris Cowart filed a Motion for Summary Judgment (the "Motion") on July 29, 2015. (Docket No. 26). On the same day, Defendant Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority filed a Motion for Summary Judgment, or Alternatively, Summary Adjudication of Issues (the "Cross-Motion"). (Docket No. 27). The Court reviewed and considered the parties' submissions and deemed the matter appropriate for decision without oral argument. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 78(b); Local Rule 7-15. Accordingly, the hearing set for September 14, 2015, was removed from the Court's calendar.
For the reasons set forth below, Plaintiff's Motion is DENIED for numerous deficiencies under the Local Rules, and more [*2]  importantly, for failure to establish Plaintiff's entitlement to judgment as a matter of law on any particular issue or claim.
In addition, for the reasons set forth below, Defendant's Cross-Motion is GRANTED in part and DENIED in part, as follows:
■ Title I of Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"): DENIED
■ Title VII of Civil Rights Act: GRANTED for failure to raise a genuine issue of material fact regarding discrimination based on Plaintiff's gender
■ Fair Employment and Housing Act: DENIED
■ Intentional infliction of emotional distress: GRANTED for failure to raise a genuine issue of material as to intent and outrageous conduct beyond the bounds of decency
■ Fraudulent concealment of disease: GRANTED for being barred by res judicata
■ Fraudulent concealment of material: GRANTED for failure to raise a genuine issue of material fact as to any alleged concealment for the purpose of denying worker's compensation
■ Retaliation: GRANTED for failure to raise a genuine issue of material fact as to causation
■ Harassment: GRANTED for failure to raise a genuine issue of material fact as to the severity and pervasiveness of the allegedly harassing conduct

I. BACKGROUND
The parties appear to agree generally [*3]  on the background facts, and the Court limits its recitation of transpired events only to the extent necessary for context.
Plaintiff works as a part-time bus operator for Defendant, the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority. (Def. Statement of Uncontroverted Facts ("DSUF"), Docket No. 27-1, ¶ 1). This action arises from Plaintiff's claim that Plaintiff developed a respiratory condition as a result of exposure to chemical pesticides used to treat the buses. (Id. ¶ 3-4). Plaintiff subsequently submitted a work restriction notice from his physician requesting that Plaintiff not be assigned to buses that have been recently treated with chemicals. (Id. ¶ 5; Docket No. 26, Ex. 1). According to Plaintiff's medical evaluation, Plaintiff reports experiencing difficulty breathing, headaches, chest congestion, and nasal congestion after exposure to the chemicals. (Docket No. 26, Exs. 6-7). Between March 2013 and December 2014, Plaintiff alleges that he was nevertheless assigned to recently chemically treated buses on 14 different occasions. (DSUF, ¶ 6). Of the 14 occasions, after requesting reassignment, Plaintiff was reassigned to a different bus five times. (Id. ¶ 7). Plaintiff [*4]  claims that he often was met with resistance and even ridicule when he requested reassignments. (Deposition of Chris Cowart, Docket No. 27-2, Ex. 2, at 83:12-84:8). During this period, Plaintiff also filed multiple internal grievances in the form of "Miscellaneous Report[s] to Division Manager" regarding the assignment problem. (Docket No. 26, Ex. 13).
On December 5, 2014, Plaintiff met with Defendant's Return-to-Work Coordinator and Division Manager. (DSUF, ¶8). When asked what kind of accommodation would meet Plaintiff's work restriction, Plaintiff indicated that he should be assigned buses that are not recently treated with chemicals. (Id.). After the meeting, although the timing is not entirely clear from the record, Plaintiff was placed on unpaid leave. (Id. ¶ 9). During this time, Defendant contacted Plaintiff about other vacancies that would not involve driving a bus. (Id.).
Plaintiff has filed numerous charges with various administrative agencies. In particular, on July 10, 2014, he completed a dual filing with the California Department of Fair Employment Housing ("DFEH") and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC"), alleging violations under the ADA and Civil Rights Act. [*5]  (Docket No. 27-2, Ex. 9). A right-to-sue notice from the EEOC issued on August 28, 2014. (Id., Ex. 3).
Plaintiff also filed an action in state court in 2012 against Defendant ("2012 Action"), alleging, inter alia, breach of contract and fraudulent concealment of disease. (DSFU, ¶ 27). On April 28, 2014, the 2012 Action was dismissed on summary judgment in favor of Defendant. (Id. ¶ 28).
On October 27, 2014, Plaintiff initiated this lawsuit in federal court against Defendant. (Docket No. 3). The operative First Amended Complaint ("FAC") filed March 24, 2015, alleges violations of Title I of the ADA, Title VII of the Civil Rights Act, Fair Employment and Housing Act ("FEHA"), as well as claims for intentional infliction of emotional distress, fraudulent concealment of disease, fraudulent concealment of material, retaliation, and harassment. (Docket No. 23).
As discussed above, currently pending before the Court are the parties' cross-motions for summary judgment.

II. DISCUSSION

A. Evidentiary Objections
Defendant objects to each and every exhibit attached to Plaintiff's Motion as well as Opposition to Defendant's Cross-Motion. (Docket Nos. 29-3 and 33-1).
The Court finds many of these objections [*6]  unconvincing. While they may be cognizable at trial, on a motion for summary judgment the Court is concerned only with the admissibility of the relevant facts at trial, and not the form of these facts as presented in the motion. See Burch v. Regents of Univ. of California, 433 F. Supp. 2d 1110, 1119-20 (E.D. Cal. 2006) ("Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56(e), not the Federal Rules of Evidence, specifies the required format and significantly demands only that '[s]upporting and opposing affidavits . . . set forth such facts as would be admissible in evidence.'" (emphasis added)). As the Court only relies on admissible, material facts, the individual objections raised here are OVERRULED without prejudice to their being renewed at trial. See id. at 1119 ("[A]ttorneys routinely raise every objection imaginable without regard to whether the objections are necessary, or even useful, given the nature of summary judgment motions in general, and the facts of their cases in particular.").

B. Legal Standard
In deciding motions under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56, the Court applies Anderson, Celotex, and their Ninth Circuit progeny. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986); Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). "The court shall grant summary judgment if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). "Where the non-moving party bears the burden of proof at trial, the [*7]  moving party need only prove that there is an absence of evidence to support the non-moving party's case." In re Oracle Corp. Sec. Litig., 627 F.3d 376, 387 (9th Cir. 2010). "The evidence of the non-movant is to be believed, and all justifiable inferences are to be drawn in his favor." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 255.
The Court has a duty to evaluate the evidence independently when it decides a dispositive pre-trial motion. Credit Managers Ass'n of S. California v. Kennesaw Life & Acc. Ins. Co., 25 F.3d 743, 749 (9th Cir. 1994). The Court must grant summary judgment if it ultimately determines that no rational or reasonable jury might return a verdict in the nonmoving party's favor based on all the evidence. T.W. Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Pac. Elec. Contractors Ass'n, 809 F.2d 626, 631 (9th Cir. 1987) (explaining the standard for summary judgment).

C. Plaintiff's Motion
As a preliminary matter, Plaintiff's Motion does not identify which issues or claims Plaintiff is entitled to on summary judgment. (See Docket No. 26). Instead, the Motion reiterates many of Plaintiff's allegations from the FAC. (Id.). Furthermore, as outlined by Defendant, Plaintiff's Motion suffers numerous other deficiencies under the Local Rules. (See Docket No. 29, at 1 ("Plaintiff's motion for summary judgment ("motion") is further defective because Plaintiff has failed to: (1) confer with Defense counsel prior to filing his motion pursuant to Local Rule 7-3; (2) provide notice of the motion, stating the time, date [*8]  and place of the hearing; the specific order or judgment sought, the grounds on which the motion is made and the documents or evidence relied upon; (3) lodge a proposed Judgment or a proposed Order; (4) lodge a proposed "Statement of Uncontroverted Facts and Conclusions of Law" setting forth the material facts as to which Plaintiff contends there is no genuine dispute . . . .")).
Recognizing that Plaintiff proceeds pro se, however, the Court does not deny Plaintiff's Motion solely on the basis of these technical defects. Instead, on the face of the record submitted by both parties on summary judgment, the Court finds that there are no issues ripe for summary judgment in Plaintiff's favor. Therefore, the Court DENIES Plaintiff's Motion.
The Court now turns to examine the merits of Defendant's Cross-Motion.

D. ADA and Civil Rights Act Claims

1. Statute of limitations
Plaintiff must bring a civil action under Title VII or the ADA within 90 days of receipt of a notice of right to sue from the EEOC. Scholar v. Pac. Bell, 963 F.2d 264, 268 (9th Cir.1992). When a claimant fails to file within the 90-day statute of limitations, the action is barred. Id. at 267-68.
Defendant asserts that the EEOC right-to-sue notice issued July 10, 2014, but this is false on the [*9]  face of the notice. (Docket No. 27-2, Ex. 10). In support of this assertion, Defendants cite to the right-to-sue notice issued by the DFEH after Plaintiff completed a dual filing with the DFEH and EEOC. (Id.). Notably, the letter is not dated July 10, 2014, but rather indicates that the date that Plaintiff filed his complaint was July 10, 2014. (Id.). More critically, however, the letter is not a purported right-to-sue notice issued by the EEOC. The letter indicates that Plaintiff has "one year from the date of this notice" to file suit in "a State of California Superior Court." Nowhere does the notice address the 90-day limitations period Plaintiff has from receiving notice of his right to sue from the EEOC. The notice even states that "If you have any questions about the right to file under federal law, please contact the EEOC office nearest to you." (Id.).
As Plaintiff correctly points out, the EEOC right-to-sue notice issued instead on August 28, 2014. (Docket No. 3, Ex. 12-13). Therefore, Plaintiff had to initiate his action by November 26, 2014. Plaintiff filed a timely Complaint on October 27, 2014, well within the 90-day limitations period.
The Court next turns to whether Defendant [*10]  is entitled to summary judgment on the merits of Plaintiff's ADA and Title VII claims.

2. Title I of ADA
Title I of the ADA prohibits discrimination "against a qualified individual with a disability because of the disability of such individual in regard to job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). The ADA specifies a number of actions that constitute discrimination, including "not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who is an applicant or employee . . . ." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A).
To make out a prima facie case under the ADA, Plaintiff must demonstrate that "(1) he is disabled within the meaning of the ADA; (2) he is a qualified individual able to perform the essential functions of the job with reasonable accommodation; and (3) he suffered an adverse employment action because of his disability." Samper v. Providence Sacred Heart Med. Ctr., 675 F.3d 1233, 1237 (9th Cir. 2012).

a. Disability
The ADA defines "qualified individual with a disability" as "an individual with a disability who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions [*11]  of the employment position that such individual holds or desires." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). Plaintiff bears the burden of proving that he is qualified. Weyer v. Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp., 198 F.3d 1104, 1108 (9th Cir. 2000).
In a medical evaluation dated October 24, 2013, Ronald D. Zlotolow, M.D., diagnosed Plaintiff with "small airway disease, rhinosinusitis, and a positive methacholine challenge test." (Docket No. 26, Ex. 7). In addition, Dr. Zlotolow described "small airway disease" as a "reactive airway disease that occur[s] when an individual is exposed to an irritant and develops a reaction which could be inflammation and constriction." (Id.). Although later evaluating physicians have made different assessments of Plaintiff's condition (see e.g., id. ("This reaction would be categorized as an irritant induced asthmatic airway injury with occupational rhibitis and not a reactive airway disease syndrome.")), the Court is satisfied that Plaintiff has adduced sufficient evidence to raise a triable issue as to whether Plaintiff suffers a physical impairment. Furthermore, Plaintiff has also put forth sufficient evidence that raises a triable issue as to whether his condition substantially limits his major life activities of working and breathing. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(i) ("Major life activities include [*12]  "caring for oneself, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, and working."). For example, Plaintiff has reported repeatedly that symptoms of his condition include difficulty breathing, headaches, chest congestion, and nasal congestion. (Docket No. 26, Exs. 6-7).
Based on the above, the Court finds that genuine issues of material fact exist as to whether Plaintiff's respiratory condition substantially limited his major life activities of working and breathing.
Having found triable issues of material fact exist as to whether Plaintiff's respiratory condition substantially limits his ability to breathe and work, the Court must also consider whether Defendant reasonably accommodated Plaintiff's condition.

b. Reasonable accommodation
A reasonable accommodation includes "modifications or adjustments to the work environment ... that would enable a qualified individual with a disability to perform the essential functions of that position." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(1)(ii). The ADA requires that employers engage in a good-faith interactive process with employees in order to identify and implement appropriate reasonable accommodations. Barnett v. U.S. Air, 228 F.3d 1105, 1111 (9th Cir. 2000). The interactive process requires communication and [*13]  good faith exploration of possible accommodations between the employer and the individual employee, without delay or obstruction by either side. Id. at 1114-15. An employer's duty to engage in an interactive process is triggered "either by a request for accommodation by a disabled employee or by the employer's recognition of the need for such an accommodation." Id.
There is no dispute that Plaintiff timely alerted Defendant of his respiratory condition. In September 2013, Plaintiff obtained a work restriction notice from Ronald D. Zlotolow, M.D. that restricted Plaintiff from "driv[ing] buses which have just been treated with chemicals." (Docket No. 26, Ex. 1). Defendant argues that "MTA attempted to assign Plaintiff busses that were not wet or that were not recently chemically treated." (Mot. at 6). Between March 2013 and December 2014, Plaintiff was assigned to recently chemically treated buses on 14 different occasions. (Deposition of Chris Cowart, Docket No. 27-2, Ex. 2, at 57:9-17, 59:4-25). Five of those 14 occasions, Plaintiff was reassigned to a different bus. (Id.). Plaintiff has also put forth evidence that he had great difficulty obtaining a reassignment after an initial assignment to a chemically [*14]  treated bus. When Plaintiff protested about a chemically treated bus, he was directed in circles and teased about "crying about the buses being chemically treated." (Cowart Depo. at 83:12-84:8). Plaintiff also filed multiple internal grievances in the form of "Miscellaneous Report[s] to Division Manager" regarding the assignment problem. (Docket No. 26, Ex. 13).
According to Defendant, because Plaintiff was still able to detect odors on certain buses, the MTA met with Plaintiff to discuss other possible accommodations. (Mot. at 6). This particular meeting took place on December 5, 2014, between Plaintiff and Defendant's Return-to-Work Coordinator and Division Manager. (Docket No. 27, at 2-3; Deposition of Chris Cowart, Docket No. 27-2, Ex. 2, at 107:7-21). In the meeting, Plaintiff sought a reasonable accommodation in the form of only driving buses that were "not recently treated with chemicals." (Id.). Defendant argues that, "[b]ecause all buses are treated with some sort of chemical, Plaintiff was placed on leave." (Docket No. 27, at 3). While on unpaid leave, Defendant contacted Plaintiff and informed him of vacancies that would not involve driving a bus. (Id.).
Based on the above, the only evidence [*15]  of an attempt by Defendant to engage in an interactive process with Plaintiff is the following (1) the December 2014 meeting, and (2) the follow-up contact regarding other vacancies. On the other hand, after the December 2014 meeting, Plaintiff was placed on unpaid leave. Although Defendant argues that "all buses are treated with some sort of chemical," a reasonable jury could conclude that Plaintiff's request to drive buses not freshly treated with chemicals would be a reasonable accommodation. At a minimum, Plaintiff has raised a triable issue of material fact as to whether Defendant reasonably accommodated his respiratory condition.

c. Adverse employment action
The Court also concludes that Plaintiff has raised triable issues of material fact as to whether Plaintiff suffered adverse employment actions as a result of Defendant's failure to accommodate. For example, drawing all inferences in Plaintiff's favor, a reasonable jury could conclude that Plaintiff was forced on nine occasions to drive freshly treated buses that aggravated his respiratory condition, treated harshly when he sought reassignments, and ultimately forced to take unpaid medical leave because of his respiratory condition. [*16] 
Therefore, Plaintiff has adduced sufficient evidence to withstand summary judgment, and Defendant's Cross-Motion is DENIED as to Plaintiff's ADA claim.

3. Title VII of Civil Rights Act
Defendant only argued that Plaintiff's Title VII claim is barred by the statute of limitations. Even though that argument fails, the Court has an independent obligation to examine the record to determine whether Plaintiff's Title VII claim is adequately supported by the record to be heard by a jury.
After reviewing the evidence before the Court, the Court finds that Plaintiff failed to raise a genuine issue of material fact as to gender discrimination. Even assuming that Plaintiff suffered adverse employment actions, there is nothing on the record or even in the FAC to support a finding that Plaintiff was discriminated against based on his gender. It appears that Plaintiff stakes this claim on the sole fact that, on one particular morning, a female co-worker who works a later shift was assigned a bus that had not been freshly chemically treated. (Docket No. 26, at 2). No reasonable jury could conclude on this fact alone that Plaintiff was discriminated against because of his gender.
Therefore, Defendant's [*17]  Cross-Motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's Title VII claim.
Because Plaintiff's ADA claim remains, the Court does not address Defendant's argument that the Court should decline to exercise supplemental jurisdiction over the state law claims.

E. FEHA Violation
California Government Code Section 12940(n) requires that qualifying employers "engage in a timely, good faith, interactive process with the employee or applicant to determine effective reasonable accommodations, if any, in response to a request for reasonable accommodation by an employee or applicant with a known physical or mental disability or known medical condition." Cal. Gov't. Code § 12940(n).
Defendant argues that, "[b]ecause the MTA has and continues to engage in [] discussions [with Plaintiff], Plaintiff's [failure to engage in an] interactive process claim should be summarily adjudicated." (Mot. at 6-7). This is an intensive factual inquiry that the Court does not consider appropriate to decide as a matter of law. As discussed above, the only evidence of an attempt by Defendant to engage in an interactive process with Plaintiff are (1) the December 2014 meeting, and (2) the follow-up contact regarding other vacancies. On the other hand, shortly after the December 2014 meeting, Plaintiff was placed [*18]  on unpaid leave, which could undercut a reasonable jury's finding of "good faith." At a minimum, Plaintiff has raised a triable issue of material fact as to whether Defendant engaged in the interactive process required under California Government Code Section 12940(n).
Therefore, Defendant's Cross-Motion is DENIED as to Plaintiff's FEHA violation claim.

F. Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress
Defendant argues that Plaintiff's intentional infliction of emotional distress claim is derivative of Plaintiff's FEHA claim. Because the Court finds that Plaintiff's FEHA claim survives summary judgment, the Court must determine whether there are any genuine issues of material fact as to Plaintiff's intentional infliction of emotional distress claim.
Under California law, "the elements of the tort of intentional infliction of emotional distress are (1) extreme and outrageous conduct by the defendant with the intention of causing, or reckless disregard of the probability of causing, emotional distress; (2) the plaintiff's suffering severe or extreme emotional distress; and (3) actual and proximate causation of the emotional distress by the defendant's outrageous conduct.... The defendant must have engaged in 'conduct intended to inflict [*19]  injury or engaged in with the realization that injury will result.'" Whitlock v. Pepsi Americas, 681 F. Supp. 2d 1116, 1120 (N.D. Cal. 2010) (citations omitted).
To sustain a claim for intentional or negligent infliction of emotional distress, California courts require evidence of conduct so extreme and outrageous as to exceed all bounds of that usually tolerated in a civilized community. Cervantez v. J.C. Penney Co., 24 Cal. 3d 579, 593, 156 Cal. Rptr. 198, 595 P.2d 975 (1979). The record is devoid of evidence of such conduct. Furthermore, the Court finds that there is no evidence to support the element that Defendant acted "with the intention of causing, or reckless disregard of the probability of causing, emotional distress." Accordingly, Defendant's Cross-Motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's intentional infliction of emotional distress claim.

G. Fraudulent Concealment of Disease
Defendant argues that Plaintiff's fraudulent concealment of disease claim is barred by res judicata. (Mot. at 9).
Embodied in the doctrine of res judicata "is that a right, question or fact distinctly put in issue and directly determined by a court of competent jurisdiction . . . cannot be disputed in a subsequent suit between the same parties or their privies . . . ." Montana v. U.S., 440 U.S. 147, 153, 99 S. Ct. 970, 59 L. Ed. 2d 210 (1978) (internal quotation marks omitted). If the former judgment is a state court judgment, the Court applies [*20]  the res judicata rules of the state. See Migra v. Warren City School Dist. Bd. of Ed., 465 U.S. 75, 81, 104 S. Ct. 892, 79 L. Ed. 2d 56 (1984).
Under California law, res judicata has a "double aspect." 7 Bernard E. Witkin, California Procedure § 281 (4th ed. 2004); People v. Barragan, 32 Cal. 4th 236, 252, 9 Cal. Rptr. 3d 76, 83, 83 P.3d 480 (2004). In its primary aspect, also known as claim preclusion, a prior judgment is a complete bar on a new suit between the same parties on the same claim; in its secondary aspect, also known as issue preclusion, the prior judgment operates "as an estoppel or conclusive adjudication as to such issues in the second action as were actually litigated and determined in the first action." Barragan, 32 Cal. 4th at 252-53 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). The prerequisite elements for applying res judicata to a claim or an issue are the same:
(1) A claim or issue raised in the present action is identical to a claim or issue litigated in a prior proceeding;
(2) the prior proceeding resulted in a final judgment on the merits; and
(3) the party against whom the doctrine is being asserted was a party or in privity with a party to the prior proceeding.
Id. at 253.
As Plaintiff acknowledges, Plaintiff asserted the same fraudulent concealment of disease claim in the 2012 Action against Defendant. (Docket No. 28; Docket No. 27, Ex. 12). In addition, the state court granted Defendant's [*21]  motion for summary judgment and dismissed the 2012 Action with prejudice. (Docket No. 27, Exs. 13-14).
Accordingly, the three elements of res judicata are met, and Defendant's Cross-Motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's fraudulent concealment of disease claim.

H. Fraudulent Concealment of Materials
California Insurance Code Section 1871.4(a) makes it unlawful to "[m]ake or cause to be made a knowingly false or fraudulent material statement or material representation for the purpose of obtaining or denying any compensation." Cal. Ins. Code § 1871.4(a).
Defendant again argues that this claim is barred by res judicata, but the Court agrees with Plaintiff that the prior litigation did not encompass Plaintiff's fraudulent concealment of materials claim. This claim was not an enumerated cause of action in the FAC of the 2012 Action. (Docket No. 27-2, Ex. 12). Defendant's reliance on the single reference in the FAC to Defendant's "concealment of [Plaintiff's] medical information" is insufficient for a finding that the claim was actually litigated in the 2012 Action. In his Opposition, Plaintiff makes a passing request for sanctions based on Defendant's "misrepresentation" that this claim was already litigated in the prior action. The Court DENIES the request as Defendant's [*22]  argument was not wholly frivolous.
However, even assuming Insurance Code Section 1871.4 provides a private cause of action and that Defendant is not immune to liability, Plaintiff has failed to demonstrate a triable issue as to Defendant's alleged concealment for the purpose of denying worker's compensation. Plaintiff points to no evidence in support of a finding of intent, and it would be unreasonable for the Court to draw such an inference solely from the medical evaluations indicating that the evaluating physician has not received the Material Safety Data Sheets from Defendant's Human Resources department. (See, e.g., Docket No. 26, Ex. 7).
Therefore, Defendant's Cross-Motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's fraudulent concealment of material claim.

I. Retaliation and Harassment Claims
Defendant argues Plaintiff fails to allege a statutory basis for his harassment and retaliation claims. (Mot. at 7).
The Court does not credit Defendant's argument that a failure to allege the statutory basis in Plaintiff's FAC is fatal to these claims. Cf. Scott v. Mortgage Elec. Registration Sys., Inc., 605 F. App'x 598, 599 (9th Cir. 2015) (A "complaint need not identify the statutory or constitutional source of the claim raised in order to survive a motion to dismiss."); Fidge v. Lake Cnty. Sheriff's Dep't, No. 13-CV-5182 YGR, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 29825, 2014 WL 969297, at *4 (N.D. Cal. Mar. 6, 2014) [*23]  (rejecting argument that pro se plaintiff's tort claims must be dismissed for failure to allege the statutory basis). The case that Defendant relies on also does not stand for the proposition that claims must be dismissed absent an identification of the specific statutory basis. See Searcy v. Hemet Unified Sch. Dist., 177 Cal. App. 3d 792, 800, 223 Cal. Rptr. 206 (1986) (finding that defendants did not have a mandatory duty under any statute to provide the remedy sought by plaintiff).
Plaintiff does not state a statutory basis for his harassment and retaliation claims in the FAC, but his Opposition brief indicates that the retaliation claim is alleged under FEHA and the harassment claim is alleged under FEHA and Title VII. (See Opp. at 3 ("I would like to address the harassment[] under 12940(k) and Title VII . . . Public employee supervisors is [sic] not immune from liability and can be held personally liable for retaliation under th[e] FEHA Act."). Therefore, the Court considers these claims to have been alleged under FEHA and Title VII. See Fidge, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 29825, 2014 WL 969297, at *4 ("'Pleadings should be liberally construed in the interests of justice, particularly when a pleader is not learned in the law.' Plaintiff's inability to cite a precise statutory basis for liability does not compel automatic dismissal [*24]  of his tort claims against the County." (citing Johnson v. Reagan, 524 F.2d 1123, 1124 (9th Cir. 1975))). Nevertheless, for the reasons below, the Court finds that these claims fail.
To establish a prima facie claim of retaliation under FEHA, Plaintiff must prove that he engaged in protected activity, Defendant subjected him to adverse employment action, and there was a causal link between the protected activity and Defendant's action. See Raad v. Fairbanks N. Star Borough Sch. Dist., 323 F.3d 1185, 1196-97 (9th Cir. 2003). "Causation sufficient to establish the third element of the prima facie case may be inferred from circumstantial evidence, such as the employer's knowledge that the [P]laintiff engaged in protected activities and the proximity in time between the protected action and the allegedly retaliatory employment decision." Yartzoff v. Thomas, 809 F.2d 1371, 1376 (9th Cir. 1987). Even assuming Plaintiff engaged in protected activity, Plaintiff fails to adduce sufficient evidence to raise a genuine issue of material fact as to causation. There is no evidence on the record to support Plaintiff's claim that he was retaliated against because he had protested about assignments to chemically treated buses. Plaintiff argues in his Opposition that Defendant intentionally assigned freshly chemically treated buses to him in retaliation (Opp. at 4), but Plaintiff points to no evidence in support [*25]  of this alleged intent to retaliate. It would be unreasonable for the Court to draw an inference of intent based on the lack of supporting evidence on the record.
To the extent Plaintiff asserts a harassment claim, Defendant also seeks to dismiss this claim on summary judgment. (Mot. at 7 n.5). Although Plaintiff's FAC does not specifically enumerate harassment as a separate claim, the Court finds that this claim necessarily fails because Plaintiff has not met his prima facie burden of proof at the summary judgment stage.
FEHA makes it illegal for an employer "because of ... physical disability ... [or] sex ... to harass an employee ...." Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(j)(1). Similarly, Title VII prohibits sexual harassment that is so "severe or pervasive" as to "alter the conditions of [the victim's] employment and create an abusive working environment." Meritor Sav. Bank, FSB v. Vinson, 477 U.S. 57, 67, 106 S. Ct. 2399, 91 L. Ed. 2d 49 (1986). FEHA and Title VII require the same showing for a prima facie case:
To prevail on a hostile work environment claim under California's FEHA, an employee must show that the harassing conduct was severe enough or sufficiently pervasive to alter the conditions of employment and create a work environment that qualifies as hostile or abusive to employees because of their sex [*26]  [or disability]. There is no recovery for harassment that is occasional, isolated, sporadic, or trivial.
Hughes v. Pair, 46 Cal. 4th 1035, 1043, 95 Cal. Rptr. 3d 636, 209 P.3d 963 (2009) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted); see Craig v. M & O Agencies, Inc., 496 F.3d 1047, 1054-55 (9th Cir. 2007) (Title VII sexual harassment). The environment must be both objectively and subjectively offensive. Hughes, 46 Cal. 4th at 1044.
As discussed previously, there is scant evidence on the record in support of any adverse acts taken against Plaintiff because of his gender. The sole fact that one of Plaintiff's female co-workers was assigned a bus that Plaintiff would have been able to drive is insufficient to establish a harassment claim under Title VII. Furthermore, as to harassment under FEHA because of Plaintiff's respiratory condition, the Court finds that Plaintiff has failed to raise a triable issue as to whether the allegedly harassing conduct was "severe enough or sufficiently pervasive to alter the conditions of employment." Id. at 1044. At most, Plaintiff has pointed to two isolated incidents of harsh or unpleasant conversations with a supervisor. (Opp. at 4-5). This is not enough to alter the conditions of employment.
Accordingly, Defendant's Cross-Motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's FEHA retaliation and FEHA/Title VII harassment claims.

III. CONCLUSION
Plaintiff's Motion [*27]  is DENIED. Defendant's Cross-Motion is GRANTED in part and DENIED part. Plaintiff may proceed on the remaining ADA and FEHA (Section 12940(n)) claims.
IT IS SO ORDERED.


End of Document

