Craven v. Alpha Omega Constr. Grp., Inc.
United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division
March 8, 2022, Decided; March 8, 2022, Filed
CIVIL ACTION NO. 1:20-CV-3116-CAP-LTW

Reporter
2022 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 244797 *
MARVIN CRAVEN, Plaintiff, v. ALPHA OMEGA CONSTRUCTION GROUP, INC., Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Marvin Craven, Plaintiff: Douglas R. Kertscher, LEAD ATTORNEY, Hill Kertscher & Wharton LLP, Atlanta, GA.
For Alpha Omega Construction Group Inc., Defendant: Alex Michael Barfield, Stanton Law LLC, Atlanta, GA.
For Alpha Omega Construction Group Inc., Defendant: Amy Bajek Thomson, Stanton Law LLC, Atlanta, GA.
For Marvin Craven, Plaintiff: Julie Anne Hoehn Burke, LEAD ATTORNEY, Hill Kertscher & Wharton LLP, Atlanta, GA.
Judges: CHARLES A. PANNELL, JR., United States District Judge.
Opinion by: CHARLES A. PANNELL, JR.
Opinion



ORDER
The plaintiff, Marvin Craven, filed this action on July 27, 2020, against his former employer, Alpha Omega Construction Group, Inc. ("AOCG"), alleging that it violated the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq. He alleges that AOCG unlawfully terminated his employment because he required replacement knee surgery, and that AOCG refused to provide him reasonable accommodations during his employment. Both sides have filed motions for summary judgment. [Doc. Nos. 69, 70]. The magistrate judge has issued a report and recommendation ("R&R") that Craven's motion for summary judgment be denied and AOCG's motion for summary judgment be granted in part and denied in part. [Doc. No. 84]. AOCG has filed objections to the [*2]  R&R. [Doc. No. 88]. Craven has filed a response to AOCG's objections. [Doc. No. 89]. The matter is before the court for consideration.

I. Background
AOCG is a roofing and siding company that has eleven locations across the United States. Craven began working for AOCG on April 11, 2016, as a field supervisor in the siding division at the company's Raleigh, North Carolina location. In December 2018, he transferred to the Atlanta, Georgia location and worked as a field supervisor in the roofing division. Craven experienced issues with his left knee as far back as 2008. In 2016, he began to receive injections for the injury. In November 2019, he was diagnosed with tricompartmental disease, and his orthopedic doctor informed him that he needed knee replacement surgery. Craven notified AOCG in January 2020 that he needed the surgery would thus be unable to work for approximately three to four weeks. On February 6, 2020, he submitted a written form to AOCG requesting eight weeks of leave beginning on February 24, 2020. This request was accompanied by a statement from his orthopedic doctor indicating that he was expected to be able to return to work on April 20, 2020, with restrictions including [*3]  no driving, no squatting, no kneeling, an inability to walk long distances or stand for long periods of time, limited stair climbing, and the need to use ambulatory aids. On February 14, 2020, AOCG notified Craven that his leave request was denied. AOCG explained that he was not eligible for leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act ("FMLA") "due to the small number of employees in the Atlanta Office." [PSMF ¶11, Doc. No. 60-7 at 1]. Because the request was for non-FMLA leave, AOCG employed its usual practice of reviewing the doctor's note in conjunction with the employee's job duties. After receiving input Javier Ruiz, the manager of the Atlanta office, the Director of Operations Stuart Greifinger, Chief Operating Officer Chris Stafford, and the Human Resources department, AOCG informed Craven on February 14, 2020, that it could not accommodate this request as it posed an undue hardship on the company.
On February 17, 2020, Craven sent Shavon Bell, a Human Resources employee, an email requesting that he be allowed to return to work on March 30, 2020, instead of April 20, 2020, with restrictions different than those contained in the doctor's note. Bell informed him that this was [*4]  a revised request for medical leave, and that he would need to resubmit it with the appropriate medical documentation so that it could reviewed in accordance with company policy. She stated that unless a revised request for medical leave was submitted, the company planned to terminate his employment on February 21, 2020, as his only official request for medical leave to this point had been denied.
Craven submitted the revised request for medical leave with the required doctor's note shortly before the close of business on February 20, 2020. In the revised request, he states that he anticipates returning to his normal schedule and normal work duties on March 30, 2020. However, the attached doctor's note states that he could return to work on March 30, 2020, with various restrictions. These limitations included "[n]o climbing, no lifting more than 5 lbs., allow patient to work from home and MUST attend scheduled PT sessions." [Doc. No. 60-13 at 7].
On February 21, 2020, Bell sent the revised leave request to Greifinger, Stafford, and Ruiz. AOCG decided not to approve the revised leave request. That same day, Bell sent Craven an email stating that AOCG could not accommodate the limitations [*5]  set forth in the doctor's note. She explained that many of his duties as a field supervisor required him to climb ladders and be in the field on a regular basis. AOCG then terminated his employment on February 21, 2020. At that time, Craven was one of two field supervisors at the Atlanta office. The other five or six employees in the Atlanta office worked in office and/or sales positions, including a scheduler position. There was thus no position at the Atlanta office to which Craven could be temporarily transferred and for which he was qualified.

II. Standard of Review
After conducting a careful and complete review of the findings and recommendations, a district judge may accept, reject, or modify the magistrate judge's R&R. 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1); United States v. Powell, 628 F.3d 1254, 1256 (11th Cir. 2010). A district judge "shall make a de novo determination of those portions of the report or specified proposed findings or recommendations to which objection is made." 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(C); see also Fed. R. Civ. P. 72(b)(2) (requiring the objecting party's objections to be "specific"). This requires that the district judge "give fresh consideration to those issues to which specific objection has been made by a party." Jeffrey S. v. State Bd. of Educ. of Ga., 896 F.2d 507, 512 (11th Cir. 1990). The district judge reviews legal conclusions de novo, even in the absence of an objection. [*6]  See Cooper-Houston v. S. Ry. Co., 37 F.3d 603, 604 (11th Cir. 1994). "[T]he district court will review those portions of the R & R that are not objected [to] under a clearly erroneous standard." Liberty Am. Ins. Group, Inc. v. WestPoint Underwriters, L.L.C., 199 F.Supp.2d 1271, 1276 (M.D. Fla. 2001).
Since the underlying motions in this case are motions for summary judgment, the court will also set forth the applicable legal analysis for resolving those motions. Rule 56(a) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure authorizes summary judgment "if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." The party seeking summary judgment bears the burden of demonstrating that no dispute as to any material fact exists. Adickes v. S.H. Kress & Co., 398 U.S. 144, 157 (1970); Johnson v. Clifton, 74 F.3d 1087, 1090 (11th Cir. 1996). The moving party's burden is discharged merely by "'showing'—that is, pointing out to the district court—that there is an absence of evidence to support [an essential element of] the nonmoving party's case." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 325 (1986).
In determining whether the moving party has met this burden, the district court must view the evidence and all factual inferences in the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion. Johnson, 74 F.3d at 1090. Once the moving party has adequately supported its motion, the nonmovant then has the burden of showing that summary judgment is improper by coming forward with specific facts showing a genuine dispute. Matsushita Electrical Industrial Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586 (1986).
When ruling [*7]  on a motion for summary judgment, it is not the court's function to decide issues of material fact but to decide only whether there is such an issue to be tried. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 251 (1986). The applicable substantive law will identify those facts that are material. Id. at 247. Facts that in good faith are disputed, but which do not resolve or affect the outcome of the case, will not preclude the entry of summary judgment as those facts are not material. Id. Genuine disputes are those by which the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmovant. Id. "Genuine" factual issues must have a real basis in the record. See Matsushita, 475 U.S. at 586. "Where the record taken as a whole could not lead a rational trier of fact to find for the non-moving party, there is no 'genuine issue for trial.'" Id. at 587 (citations omitted).

III. Craven's Motion for Summary Judgment and AOCG's Denial of Craven's First Leave Request
As an initial matter, the court notes that there are no objections to the magistrate judge's analysis of Craven's motion for summary judgment or her recommendation that the motion be denied. After carefully considering the final report and recommendation of the magistrate judge and finding no error, the court receives [*8]  the report and recommendation with approval and ADOPTS it as the opinion and order of this court. Craven's motion for summary judgment is DENIED. [Doc. No. 69].
The magistrate judge also recommends that AOCG's motion for summary judgment be granted as to Craven's failure to accommodate claim (Count II) to the extent that the claim is based on the first leave request Craven submitted on February 6, 2020. The magistrate judge found that Craven had not met his burden of identifying a reasonable accommodation that would allow him to perform his job, because that leave request included a restriction of "no driving" that was not limited to a definite duration and a field supervisor was required to do a significant amount of driving, often numerous hours per day. The magistrate judge also remarked that Craven did not address this "no driving limitation in his response to AOCG's motion for summary judgment. [Doc. No. 84 at 46-47].1
No objections to either the magistrate judge's analysis or recommendation on this portion of AOCG's motion for summary judgment have been submitted. The court has reviewed the report and recommendation on this issue and receives it with approval, ADOPTING it as the [*9]  opinion and order of this court. AOCG's motion for summary judgment is GRANTED on Craven's failure to accommodate claim (Count II) to the extent that it is based on Craven's first leave request that was submitted on February 6, 2020.

IV. AOCG's Objections to the R&R
The court now turns to AOCG's objections to the portion of the R&R concerning its motion for summary judgment as to Craven's wrongful termination claim (Count I) and his failure to accommodate claim (Count II) to the extent that the claim is based on the revised leave request he submitted on February 20, 2020. AOCG objects to the R&R on the following grounds: (1) that the magistrate judge misconstrued both the law and the evidence when she found that there was an issue of material fact concerning whether Craven is qualified individual under the ADA, based on her analysis of the essential duties of the field supervisor position, (2) that the magistrate judge erred in determining that AOCG had not proffered a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for terminating Craven's employment, and (3) that the magistrate judge erred when she determined there was an issue of material fact concerning whether the restrictions contained in [*10]  Craven's revised leave request were reasonable and did not pose an undue hardship on AOCG. Interspersed among the objections is an argument that the magistrate judge erred "in substituting the Court's business judgment for AOCG's" [Doc. No. 88 at 4]. Craven responds that these objections should be overruled "because they fail to apply the correct legal standard, improperly construe the evidence in Defendant's favor at summary judgment, or just outright misstate the record." [Doc. No. 89 at 1]. The court addresses AOCG's objections as follows.

a. Whether the magistrate judge misconstrued both the law and the evidence in her analysis of whether Craven was a qualified individual for purposes of the ADA
The ADA prohibits discrimination against a "qualified individual on the basis of disability in regard to job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees . . . and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). Courts apply the burden shifting analysis of Title VII employment discrimination cases in resolving claims under the ADA. Hilburn v. Murata Electronics North America, Inc., 181 F.3d 1220, 1226 (11th Cir. 1999). The plaintiff therefore must establish a prima facie case of discrimination. Raytheon Co. v. Hernandez, 540 U.S. 44, 49 n.3 (2003). To establish a prima facie case under [*11]  the ADA, a plaintiff must show that (1) he is disabled, (2) he is a qualified individual, and (3) he was subjected to unlawful discrimination because of his disability. Hilburn at 1226. The third element is sometimes bifurcated, requiring the plaintiff to prove (1) a discriminatory act and (2) that her disability was a substantial or motivating factor that prompted the defendant to take that action. Collado v. United Parcel Service, 419 F.3d 1143, 1152 n.5 (11th Cir. 2005).
The ADA defines a "qualified individual" as "an individual who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds or desires." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). The magistrate judge found that there was an issue of material fact concerning what constituted the essential duties of the field supervisor position and whether Craven could perform the essential functions of the position under the restrictions noted in his revised leave request.
AOCG avers that the magistrate judge "erred in allowing Plaintiff, not AOCG, to define the Field Supervisor position's essential duties." [Doc. No. 88 at 3]. AOCG argues that the undisputed evidence shows that both climbing and lifting more than 5 lbs. are essential duties of a field supervisor, yet the magistrate judge [*12]  improperly disregarded this evidence. It contends that the magistrate judge also misapplied the law when she determined that these two duties were not essential. AOCG avers that "a job duty can be essential even if infrequent," so the fact that a field supervisor did not have to regularly climb or lift more than 5 lbs. should not have rendered those two duties unessential. [Id. at 6-7].
The magistrate judge found that there was an issue of material fact as to whether climbing and lifting 5 lbs. were essential duties of the field supervisor position. The magistrate judge noted that the record evidence disputed AOCG's contention that Craven could not perform the essential functions of his job with the restrictions included in his revised leave request. [Doc. No. 84 at 26]. For instance, the magistrate judge pointed out that "AOCG's written job description of the Field Supervisor position does not list 'ladder climbing,' 'lifting over 5 pounds,' or getting on a roof as a job duty." [Id. at 28]. David Mendoza, who also worked as a field supervisor at the Atlanta office for approximately a year, testified that the job could be done without climbing. He stated that "[f]ield supervisors were [*13]  not required to climb ladders." [Doc. No. 69-2, Mendoza Decl. ¶4]. He explained that the service techs and crew members were responsible for climbing ladders and repairing any leaks. He indicated that for approximately 4-5 months he did not even have a ladder on his truck, nor was he ever provided the requisite safety harness for going onto a roof. [Id. at 2, Mendoza Decl. ¶¶5-7]. Craven himself testified that he climbed a ladder only twice in over a year and that he lifted over five pounds only approximately once a month. As for lifting over 5 lbs., Javier Ruiz, the manager of the Atlanta office, testified that supplies were delivered directly to jobsites, and that at the jobsites, the subcontracted installation crew did all the picking and lifting of materials. [Doc. No. 65 at 50-51, Ruiz Dep. 50:13-51:6].
Contrary to AOCG's position, the determination of what is an essential duty does not rest solely with the employer's judgment. As the Eleventh Circuit explained in Bagwell v. Morgan Cnty. Comm'n., 676 F. App'x 863, 865-66 (2017), the Code of Federal Regulations provides guidance regarding what type of evidence may weigh in such a determination:
In determining if a task is an essential function, relevant evidence may include: (1) the employer's [*14]  judgment as to what functions are essential, (2) a written job description, (3) the amount of time spent on the job performing the function, (4) the consequences of not requiring the employee to perform the function, (5) the terms of a collective bargaining agreement, (6) the work experience of past employees in the position, and (7) the current work experience of employees in similar jobs.
(citing 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(3)). Although "consideration shall be given to the employer's judgment as to what functions of a job are essential." Holly v. Clairson Ind., L.L.C., 492 F.3d 1247, 1258 (11th Cir. 2007), that does not mean that the court cannot consider other evidence. Indeed, in Holly, the Eleventh Circuit reiterated that "[w]hether a function is essential is evaluated on a case-by-case basis by examining a number of factors." Id. at 1258 (quoting D'Angelo v. ConAgra Foods, Inc., 422 F.3d 1220, 1230 (11th Cir. 2005, quotation marks omitted and emphasis added). The magistrate judge did exactly that. The court disagrees with AOCG's contention that the magistrate judge found that climbing and lifting 5 lbs. were not essential duties. In weighing all the evidence before her, not just Craven's testimony, she found that there is an issue of material fact as to whether climbing and lifting 5 lbs. are essential duties of the field supervisor position. If a reasonable [*15]  juror can "draw more than one inference from the facts, and that inference creates a general issue of material fact, then the court should refuse to grant summary judgment." Barfield v. Brierton, 883 F.2d 923, 933-34 (11th Cir. 1989) (citation omitted). Viewing the facts and inferences in the light most favorable to Craven, as the court must do on AOCG's motion for summary judgment, the court agrees with the magistrate judge that a reasonable jury could find that climbing and lifting 5 lbs. were not essential requirements of the field supervisor job.
Next, the court turns to the "work from home" restriction and whether Craven could perform the essential duties of his job by working from home. AOCG informed Craven that it denied his revised leave request in part because "[m]any of the essential duties of a Field Supervisor involve being in the field . . . so working from home would not be something [AOCG] can accommodate at this point in time." [Doc. 60-14 at 1]. The magistrate judge found that "a reasonable factfinder could examine the relevant evidence in the light most favorable to Plaintiff and conclude that Dr. Lane was not stating that Plaintiff was required to work from home all day for an indefinite period of time."2 [Doc. No. 84 at 48]. [*16]  She noted that the field supervisor position involved administrative work that did not require the field supervisor to be in the field all of the time.
AOCG contends that "[t]he issue is not whether Plaintiff has created an issue of fact as to whether he was requesting to work from home. The issue is whether Plaintiff has created an issue of fact as to whether AOCG reasonably believed Plaintiff was requesting to work from home." [Id. at 15] (emphasis in original). AOCG contends that it believed Craven sought to exclusively work from home rather than "whenever possible" and "AOCG's belief is all that matters for summary judgment." [Doc. No. 88 at 18]. It avers that "the Magistrate Judge is not empowered to second-guess AOCG's personnel decisions 19 months later, or to decide for AOCG which alternate interpretation of Plaintiff's requested restrictions was 'reasonable.'" [Id. at 18].
Craven responds that a reasonable jury could find that AOCG's belief was unreasonable in light of the evidence. [Doc. No. 89 at 14]. He maintains that his February 17th email to Bell, in conjunction with the February 20th revised leave request, support an understanding that he was not seeking to exclusively [*17]  work from home. He further points the court to the language in that email that he indicates he routinely performed work from home prior to submitting his leave request. Dr. Lane testified that the restriction regarding working from home should not have been interpreted to mean that Craven would have to work exclusively from home. [Doc. No. 64 at 27, Lane Dep. 27:2-27:15].
AOCG objects to the magistrate judge's statement that "a jury could also find that Defendant did not sufficiently engage in an informal, interactive process to identity Plaintiff's limitations and possible accommodations." [Doc. No. 84 at 51]. AOCG contends that it was Craven's responsibility to clarify the work from home restriction, i.e., whether Craven was requesting to work from home only when possible or exclusively. Craven responds that "Defendant is wrong on the law." [Doc. No. 89 at 16].
"The regulations governing the ADA provide that, to determine the appropriate reasonable accommodation, it may be necessary for an employer 'to initiate an informal, interactive process with the qualified individual with a disability in need of an accommodation' to identify the person's limitations and possible accommodations." [*18]  Gilliard v. Georgia Dept. of Corr., 500 F. App'x 860, 868 (11th Cir. 2012) (quoting 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3)). While the regulation does not squarely place on the employer the burden to engage in the interactive process, the Eleventh Circuit has been clear that "[l]iability simply cannot arise under the ADA when an employer does not obstruct an informal interactive process; makes reasonable efforts to communicate with the employee and provide accommodations based on the information it possesses; and the employee's actions cause a breakdown in the interactive process." Stewart v. Happy Herman's Cheshire Bridge, Inc., 117 F.3d 1278 (11th Cir. 1997). There is no indication in the record that AOCG "made reasonable efforts to communicate with" Craven. As the magistrate judge noted, there was a "lack of consideration that was apparently given to Plaintiff's February 17th email." [Doc. No. 84 at 51]. Thus, she found there was an issue of fact whether AOCG had sufficiently engaged in the interactive process such as to avoid liability under the ADA.
The court agrees with the magistrate judge that a reasonable factfinder could find that Craven could perform the essential duties of his job with a limited work from home restriction and that "a reasonable factfinder could examine the relevant evidence in the light most favorable to Plaintiff and conclude that Dr. Lane [*19]  was not stating that Plaintiff was required to work from home all day for an indefinite period of time." [Doc. No. 84 at 48]. The court agrees that if Dr. Lane intended for Craven to be restricted to working exclusively from home, then the other restrictions of no climbing and no lifting of more than 5 lbs. would have been superfluous.
For the reasons explained above, the court OVERRULES AOCG's objection.

b. Whether the magistrate judge erred in finding that AOCG did not offer a legitimate reason for terminating Craven's employment
Once a plaintiff has established a prima facie case of discrimination, the burden then shifts to the defendant employer to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its employment action. If the employer meets this burden, the presumption of intentional discrimination disappears, but the plaintiff can still prove disparate treatment by, for example, offering evidence demonstrating that the employer's explanation is pretextual. AOCG disputes the magistrate judge's position that it did not offer any legitimate reason for terminating Craven's employment such as is necessary to rebut Craven's allegation that he was terminated because of his disability. [*20]  [Doc. No. 88 at 21-22]. AOCG contends that its briefing is clear that it terminated Craven's employment because "because it had no obligation to accommodate his unreasonable leave request." [Id. at 21].3 Craven responds that it "waived this argument that it now belatedly seeks to make" because it moved for summary judgment only on the first two prima facie elements.
AOCG's motion for summary judgment is clear that it does not address the third prima facie element. Had AOCG provided any rebuttal to that element, it would have been clear to the magistrate judge, the plaintiff, and this court, that AOCG had addressed Craven's argument on that element. "[A]rguments made for the first time in a reply brief are not properly before the Court." Fogade v. ENB Revocable Tr., 263 F.3d 1274, 1296 n.19 (11th Cir. 2001) (citing United States v. Oakley, 744 F.2d 1553, 1556 (11th Cir. 1984). See also Randolph v. Green Tree Fin. Corp., 244 F.3d 814, 816 (11th Cir. 2001) ("[W]e note that issues that clearly are not designated in the initial brief ordinarily are considered abandoned.") (internal quotation omitted). Because AOCG did not provide argument in rebuttal to the third prima facie element, Craven was denied the opportunity to respond that the proffered legitimate reason for his termination was pretext. Although the court has the discretion to consider arguments that were not raised before the [*21]  magistrate judge, Williams v. McNeil, 557 F.3d 1287, 1292 (11th Cir. 2009), the court finds that AOCG's argument constitutes a different strategy or theory that "would frustrate the purpose of the Magistrates Act," Greenhow v. Sec'y of Health & Human Servs., 863 F.2d 633, 638 (9th Cir. 1988), overruled on other grounds by United States v. Hardesty, 977 F.2d 1347, 1348 (9th Cir. 1992) (en banc). The court therefore declines to consider it.
Furthermore, the court agrees with the magistrate judge that "[b]ecause the Court has already determined that whether Plaintiff was a qualified individual is a material fact in dispute, the case is not due to be dismissed on [the] basis" of whether Craven has established the third prima facie element, i.e., that he was subjected to unlawful discrimination because of his disability. [Doc. No. 84 at 34, quoting Abdur-Rahman v. Dekalb Cnty., No. 1:18-CV-00252-AT-LTW, 2019 WL 12494879, at *17 (N.D. Ga. July 17, 2019), report and recommendation adopted by 2019 WL 12494878 (N.D. Ga. Sept. 25, 2019)].
AOCG's objection on this issue is OVERRULED.

c. Whether the magistrate judge erred in finding that there was an issue of material fact concerning AOCG's undue hardship defense
In a failure to accommodate claim, the Title VII burden shifting framework outlined in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973), is modified. Fenney v. Dakota, Minn. & E.R. Co., 327 F.3d 707, 712 (8th Cir. 2003). The plaintiff has to establish both a prima facie case and identify a reasonable accommodation that would allow him to perform his job. Terrell v. USAir, 132 F.3d 621, 624 (11th Cir. 1998). Once the plaintiff meets this burden, the defendant employer can rebut the claim by [*22]  presenting evidence that the requested accommodation imposes on it an undue hardship. Id.
The magistrate judge determined "that a reasonable jury could find that Plaintiff's requested accommodations would not have imposed an undue hardship on AOCG." [Doc. No. 84 at 53]. AOCG object that "the Magistrate Judge acted as a super-personnel department, usurping AOCG's business judgment." [Doc. No. 88 at 22]. AOCG points the court to its testimony that it needed more than one field supervisor to effectively operate its Atlanta territory. AOCG neglects the other evidence in the record, however, that suggests having one field supervisor for a finite period of time would not pose an undue hardship. Such evidence includes the testimony of Javier Ruiz, the branch manager for the Atlanta office, that he was unaware of any "significant expense or difficulty" that AOCG would incur if Craven was given five weeks of unpaid leave. [Doc. No. 65 at 108, Ruiz Dep. 108:7-108:10]. Craven himself testified that he had once covered the Atlanta territory as the sole field supervisor for a period of four months. [Doc. No. 62 at 54-55, Craven Dep. 54:24-55::3]. The field supervisor at AOCG's Greensboro, North [*23]  Carolina branch was approved in 2019 for four and a half weeks of medical leave due to a knee issue. [Doc. No. 60-1]. After that field supervisor's return to the office, he worked with restrictions of "no ladders, no high pitched [sic] roofs; level surfaces are okay." [Id. at 3]. After his return to work with restrictions, it was another two months before that employee was cleared by his doctor to return to regular work without restrictions. [Id. at 4]. During the time this employee was on leave, AOCG used other employees to cover his duties. [Doc. No. 61 at 16-18, 42-44, Brookshire Dep. 16:5-18:18, 42:7-44:9]. The Greensboro office is similar in size to the Atlanta office.
The Eleventh Circuit has listed factors that the court can consider in determining whether an action would impose an undue hardship:
The ADA defines "undue hardship" as "an action requiring significant difficulty or expense" when considered along with the following factors: (1) the nature and cost of the reasonable accommodation; (2) the overall financial resources and number of employees of the affected facility, and the effect that the reasonable accommodation would have on the facility's expenses and resources [*24]  or other impacts on the operation of such facilities; (3) the employer's overall financial resources, number and type of facilities, and number of employees; and (4) the type of operation run by the employer, "including the composition, structure, and functions of the workforce" as well as "the geographic separateness, administrative, or fiscal relationship of the facility or facilities in question" to the employer.
Davis v. ColumbusConsol. Gov't., 826 F. App'x 890, 893 (11th Cir. 2020) (quoting 42 U.S.C. § 12111(10)(A)-(B)). Applying these factors to the evidence in the instant action, the court agrees with the magistrate judge that "AOCG has not carried its burden of showing that the requested accommodation would have imposed an undue hardship on the company." [Doc. No. 84 at 55].
AOCG's objection is OVERRULED.

V. Conclusion
For the reasons stated above, the court OVERRULES AOCG's objections and ADOPTS the magistrate judge's R&R. [Doc. No. 84]. The plaintiff's motion for summary judgment is DENIED. [Doc. No. 69]. The defendant's motion for summary judgment is GRANTED IN PART AND DENIED IN PART. [Doc. No. 70]. It is denied as to the plaintiff's ADA termination claim (Count I). It is granted on the plaintiff's ADA failure to accommodate claim (Count II) to the extent that claim is based [*25]  on the plaintiff's first leave request that was submitted on February 6, 2020. The motion is denied on the plaintiff's ADA failure to accommodate claim (Count II) to the extent that claim is based on the plaintiff's revised leave request that was submitted on February 20, 2020. The parties are DIRECTED to file their proposed consolidated pretrial order within 30 days of the entry date of this order.
SO ORDERED this 8th day of March, 2022.
/s/ Charles A. Pannell, Jr.
CHARLES A. PANNELL, JR.
United States District Judge


End of Document

