Crook v. Rite Aid Corp.
United States District Court for the Central District of California
January 7, 2015, Decided; January 7, 2015, Filed
CV 13-6381 PA (JCx)

Reporter
2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 201112 *; 2015 WL 13915424
Christine Crook v. Rite Aid Corp., et al.
Counsel:  [*1] For Christine Crook, Plaintiff: Stephen A Ebner, LEAD ATTORNEY, Stephen A Ebner Law Offices, Calabasas, CA.
For Rite Aid Corporation, Defendant: Barbara A. Fitzgerald, Kathryn Teresa McGuigan, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Morgan Lewis and Bockius LLP, Los Angeles, CA.
Judges: PERCY ANDERSON, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: PERCY ANDERSON
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES - GENERAL

Proceedings: IN CHAMBERS — COURT ORDER
Before the Court is a Motion for Summary Judgment filed by defendant Thrifty Payless, Inc., d/b/a Rite Aid ("Defendant"). (Docket No. 20.) Plaintiff Christine Crook ("Plaintiff") has filed an Opposition (Docket No. 29), to which Defendant has filed a Reply (Docket No. 32). Pursuant to Rule 78 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and Local Rule 7-15, the Court finds that these matters are appropriate for decision without oral argument. The hearing calendared for January 5, 2015, is vacated, and the matter taken off calendar.

I. Background

A. Plaintiff's Employment History & Injury
Defendant owns and operates Rite Aid drugstores. Plaintiff worked for Rite Aid in various capacities beginning in 1993. Most recently, from October 2005 to March 2013, she was employed as Store Manager for Rite Aid Store No. 5573 in Studio City, California. The last day that Plaintiff actually worked [*2]  in the Studio City store was October 22, 2010. That morning, she was violently attacked in the store by a customer who grabbed her, hit her, and told her that he loved her and that he was going to kidnap her. The customer took Plaintiff to a back room and, when she tried to run, grabbed and removed her sweater. Plaintiff fell, and the customer fell on top of her. Plaintiff was only able to escape when a delivery driver intervened and distracted the customer.
It is undisputed that Plaintiff suffered various physical and psychological injuries as a result of the attack, including injuries to her back, neck, arm, and knees, as well as depression, anxiety, and posttraumatic stress disorder. Plaintiff filed a worker's compensation claim and went on leave.

B. Responsibilities of Store Manager
A Rite Aid Store Manager manages the operation of an individual Rite Aid store. According to the Store Manager job description, this position's "physical demands" require the Store Manager to, among other things:
• "Regularly . . . stand dynamically for long periods without a break";
• "Frequently . . . stoop, kneel, crouch, and/or crawl";
• "Frequently . . . push and/or pull up to fifty (50) pounds a distance [*3]  of one hundred (100) feet";
• "Occasionally . . . stand statically for long periods without a break"
• "Occasionally . . . climb stairs and/or ladders";
• "Occasionally . . . lift up to twenty-five (25) pounds and carry a distance of one hundred (100) feet";
• "Rarely . . . remain seated in a normal position for long periods"; and
• "Rarely . . . lift and push/pull up to one hundred (100) pounds a distance of ten (10) feet."
(Crook Depo., Ex. 7.) In her deposition, Plaintiff agreed that "the physical demands listed here accurately represent the physical demands for a store manager." (Crook Depo. 157:3-6.) The job description also indicates that the Store Manager is also "regularly" responsible for "internal customer contact" and "external customer contact." (Crook Depo., Ex. 7.)
In addition to the physical and interactive demands of the position, Store Managers are required to be able "to work weekends and extended days on a frequent basis." (Id.) Plaintiff indicated that she typically worked 10- and 11-hour days, five days per week. (Crook Depo. 150:8-18.)

C. Discussions Concerning Plaintiff's Return to Work
Although there appears to be some dispute as to when Plaintiff first contacted Defendant [*4]  about returning to work,1 there is no question that the interactive process began in earnest in October 2012, approximately two years after the October 22, 2010 attack, when Plaintiff spoke with an employee from Defendant's Human Resources department named Lenora Bejarano ("Bejarano"). (Crook Depo. 297:11-298:18.) During this conversation, Plaintiff indicated that she believed she was able to return to work without restriction. (Bejarano Decl. ¶ 7.) This representation was consistent with the determination of the agreed medical examiner, Dr. Roger Sohn ("Dr. Sohn"), who evaluated Plaintiff in connection with her workers' compensation claim and found her to be permanent and stationary with no restrictions for her physical injuries. (Bejarano Decl. ¶¶ 7-8.)
However, on or about October 15, 2012, Plaintiff followed up on her conversation with Bejarano by sending another of Defendant's employees, Rosa Barbosa ("Barbosa"), an email attaching work restrictions imposed by her personal physician, Dr. Randall Caldron ("Dr. Caldron"). (Crook Depo., Ex. 9.) These restrictions included (1) "no heavy lifting over 25 lbs." and (2) "no repetitive bending or stooping." (Id.)
On December 6, 2012, another [*5]  employee of Defendant, Kelly Sage ("Sage"), sent Plaintiff a letter noting that she was unable to return to work and extending her leave on a discretionary basis through January 2, 2013. (Crook Depo., Ex. 10.) Sage sent another letter to Plaintiff on December 14, 2012, reminding Plaintiff to contact Defendant "no later than 12/28/2012 as to whether [she would] be able to return to work on or before 12/28/2012." (Sage Decl., Ex. A.)
On December 20, 2012, Defendant received a copy of a psychiatric evaluation from Dr. Arnold Gilberg ("Dr. Gilberg"), an agreed-upon medical examiner who evaluated Plaintiff on November 15, 2012. The evaluation noted that Plaintiff "continue[d] to have ongoing emotional problems and symptoms" and that "[s]he could not return" to work. (Crook Depo. 370:25-380:11.)
On December 21, 2012, Plaintiff submitted an updated assessment by Dr. Caldron further restricting Plaintiff's activity. The restrictions included:
• "Sitting: 8 hours per day, 10 min. standing per hour";
• "Walking: 8 hours per day with intermittent sitting";
• "Bending: Occasional";
• "Squatting/Stooping: Occasional";
• "Climbing stairs: Occasional";
• "Climbing ladders: Occasional";
• "Kneeling: Occasional"; [*6] 
• "Length of work day: 8 hours";
• "Lifting: No more than 20 pounds";
• "Pushing/Pulling: No more than 25 pounds."
(Crook Depo., Ex. 13.) Dr. Caldron indicated that the "probable duration of the restrictions" was "permanent." (Id.) Bejarano contacted Plaintiff to discuss the restrictions, but Plaintiff was unable to explain them or to suggest any potential accommodations. (Bejarano Decl. ¶ 10.) This is not surprising given that Plaintiff appears to have disagreed with Dr. Caldron's assessment. In her deposition, Plaintiff indicated that she felt that she could have returned to work without any restrictions when she submitted Dr. Caldron's assessment form. (Crook Depo. 218:20-24.)
Defendant sought clarification from Dr. Caldron on January 9, 2013, and received an updated medical questionnaire on February 14, 2013. Dr. Caldron explained that Plaintiff's restrictions included:
• "No heavy lifting over 25 lbs.";
• "No repetitive bending or stooping";
• "Sitting 30 minutes per hour up to 8 hours a day";
• "Walking 30 minutes per hour up to 8 hours a day";
• "Bending, squatting/stooping, climbing stairs, climbing ladders, and kneeling . . . only occasionally."
(Crook Depo., Ex. 15.) Bejarano compared [*7]  the restrictions identified in the medical questionnaire to the job duties of a Store Manager and concluded that Plaintiff could not perform the essential functions of the job. (Bejarano Decl. ¶ 12.) Bejarano had "multiple discussions" with Plaintiff between February 14, 2013 and early March 2013. (Id. ¶ 13.) Among other things, they discussed other potential positions that Plaintiff might fill, including district manager assistant and pharmacy scheduler. (Id. ¶ 14.) Plaintiff told Bejarano that she was not interested in any position that paid less than Store Manager and that she would only return to work as Store Manager at the Studio City store. (Id. ¶¶ 14-15.)2 Plaintiff continued to insist that she could return to her Store Manager position, but was unable to provide a medical certification that she could return to work with or without restrictions or reasonable accommodations. (Id. ¶¶ 17-18.) Instead, Plaintiff suggested that Defendant accommodate any restrictions by allowing her to delegate certain duties. (Id.) At this point, Plaintiff understood that if Defendant could not find a way to accommodate her restrictions so that she could return as Store Manager at the Studio City [*8]  store, she would be terminated. (Crook Depo. 234:7-235:13.) Defendant determined that it could not do so, and Bejarano called Plaintiff on March 27, 2013, to inform her that she was being terminated. (Id. at 235:14-17; Bejarano Decl. ¶ 18.) During this call, Plaintiff indicated that she was willing to take any job that Defendant had available. (Crook Depo. 235:14-236:8.) Defendant's termination was effective on the date of that call.
Plaintiff filed her Complaint in Los Angeles County Superior Court on July 26, 2013. Defendant removed the case on August 30, 2013. Plaintiff's Complaint includes four claims: (1) disability discrimination; (2) failure to provide reasonable accommodation as required by California Government Code § 12940(m); (3) failure to engage in the interactive process required by California Government Code § 12940(n); and (4) retaliation.

II. Summary Judgment Standard
Summary judgment is proper where "the pleadings, the discovery and disclosure materials on file, and any affidavits show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). The moving party has the burden of demonstrating the absence of a genuine issue of material fact for trial. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 256, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 2514, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). "[T]he burden on the moving [*9]  party may be discharged by 'showing'— that is, pointing out to the district court—that there is an absence of evidence to support the nonmoving party's case." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 325, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 2554, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986); see also Musick v. Burke, 913 F.2d 1390, 1394 (9th Cir. 1990). The moving party must affirmatively show the absence of such evidence in the record, either by deposition testimony, the inadequacy of documentary evidence, or by any other form of admissible evidence. See Celotex, 477 U.S. at 322. The moving party has no burden to negate or disprove matters on which the opponent will have the burden of proof at trial. See id. at 325.
As required on a motion for summary judgment, the facts are construed "in the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion." See Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 587, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 1356, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986). However, the nonmoving party's allegation that factual disputes persist between the parties will not automatically defeat an otherwise properly supported motion for summary judgment. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e)(2) (nonmoving party "may not rely merely on allegations or denials in its own pleading; rather, its response must—by affidavits or as otherwise provided in this rule—set out specific facts showing a genuine issue for trial"). A "mere 'scintilla' of evidence will be insufficient to defeat a properly supported motion for summary judgment; instead, the nonmoving party [*10]  must introduce some 'significant probative evidence tending to support the complaint.'" Fazio v. City & County of San Francisco, 125 F.3d 1328, 1331 (9th Cir. 1997) (quoting Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249, 252). Otherwise, summary judgment shall be entered.

III. Analysis
Defendant moves for summary judgment on all four of Plaintiff's claims or, in the alternative, for partial summary judgment. Each of Plaintiff's four claims, as well as the issue of whether she may be entitled to punitive damages, is addressed seriatim. For the reasons set forth below, Defendant's motion is granted.

A. Disability Discrimination
"A prima facie case for discrimination on grounds of physical disability under the FEHA requires plaintiff to show: (1) he suffers from a disability; (2) he is otherwise qualified to do his job; and, (3) he was subjected to adverse employment action because of his disability." Arteaga v. Brink's, Inc., 163 Cal. App. 4th 327, 344-45, 77 Cal. Rptr. 3d 654 (Cal. App. 2008). For purposes of the instant Motion, only the second element is in dispute: Defendant argues that Plaintiff cannot make out a prima facie case of disability discrimination because she is not a "qualified person." A qualified person is one who is able to perform the essential functions of her former position, or of any other vacant position that would not be a promotion, with or without reasonable accommodation. See [*11]  Nadaf-Rahrov v. Neiman Marcus Group., Inc., 166 Cal. App. 4th 952, 963, 83 Cal. Rptr. 3d 190 (Cal. App. 2008).

1. Plaintiff was restricted from performing the essential functions of the Store Manager position
This issue requires the Court to determine (1) the essential functions of the Store Manager position, (2) Plaintiff's ability to perform those functions, and (3) whether Plaintiff could have performed those functions with reasonable accommodations.

a. Essential functions
"A job function may be considered essential for any of several reasons, including, but not limited to, any one or more of the following: (A) The function may be essential because the reason the position exists is to perform that function[;] (B) [t]he function may be essential because of the limited number of employees available among whom the performance of that job function can be distributed[; or] (C) [t]he function may be highly specialized, so that the incumbent in the position is hired for his or her expertise or ability to perform the particular function." Cal. Gov. Code § 12926(f)(1). Importantly, the list is framed such that these factors are sufficient, but not necessary, to support a finding that a particular function is essential. It is not—contrary to Plaintiff's suggestion—a list of factors the absence of any one of which might support [*12]  a finding that a particular function is not essential.
"Evidence of whether a particular function is essential includes, but is not limited to, the following: (A) The employer's judgment as to which functions are essential[;] (B) [w]ritten job descriptions prepared before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job[;] (C) [t]he amount of time spent on the job performing the function[; and] (D) [t]he consequences of not requiring the incumbent to perform the function. . . ." Cal. Gov. Code § 12926(f)(2) (omitting factors for which there is no evidence in the record). Although Plaintiff is correct that the written job description for the Store Manager position is not dispositive of its essential functions, see Cripe v. City of San Jose, 261 F.3d 877, 887 (9th Cir. 2001), the evidence suggests that this document does in fact reflect the essential functions of the position. Plaintiff agreed in her deposition that the physical demands listed in the job description accurately represent the physical demands for a store manager. (Crook Depo. 157:3-6.) Plaintiff also testified that the job description's requirement that Store Managers work extended hours on a frequent basis reflected her former schedule, which included 10 and 11-hour days, five days per week. (Crook Depo. [*13]  150:8-18.) Accordingly, the Court finds that the physical demands and time requirements listed in the Store Manager job description are essential functions of that position.

b. Ability to perform
Although Plaintiff apparently believed that she could perform the essential functions of a Store Manager without accommodation, Dr. Caldron's assessments suggest otherwise. Plaintiff attacks both Defendant's interpretation of the restrictions imposed by Dr. Caldron and its interpretation of the essential functions listed in the Store Manager job description. For example, Plaintiff points out that, at least in her deposition, Bejarano appeared to misconstrue Dr. Caldron's restrictions concerning sitting and walking for long periods as requiring that Plaintiff sit and walk for long periods. Plaintiff also points out that Bejarano appeared to have little guidance in interpreting imprecise terms in the Store Manager job description, such as the requirement that Store Managers stand for "long periods." Although Plaintiff is understandably frustrated with Defendant's evaluation of her ability to perform a Store Manager's essential functions with some of the restrictions imposed by Dr. Caldron, there [*14]  are essential functions that she indisputably could not have performed in light of the restrictions. Plaintiff simply cannot argue, for example, that Defendant misinterpreted Dr. Caldron's injunction against working more than eight hours per day.

c. Reasonable accommodations
Plaintiff argues that she could have performed the essential functions of a Store Manager with reasonable accommodations including (1) organizing her schedule to break up long periods of standing, sitting, or walking, (2) working six eight-hour days instead of five longer days, and (3) delegating tasks involving heavy lifting and stooping to other store employees. Although the first accommodation may be reasonable and effective—there is simply not enough evidence in the record to determine how long a Store Manager must be able to sit, stand, or walk without break—the other two proposed accommodations are not reasonable.
Defendant argues that Plaintiff's proposal that she be allowed to work a schedule of six eight-hour days would require adding another Store Manager: "In effect, Rite Aid would be required to have two employees do a job meant for one. . . ." (Reply at 5.) Plaintiff's contention that this merely amounts [*15]  to a change in "when and how an essential job function is performed" (Opposition at 13) is inaccurate. Rather, this "accommodation" would alter who performs the essential function of working extended hours. Even the case cited by Plaintiff holds that an employer is not required to reallocate essential functions to other employees. See Dark v. Curry County, 451 F.3d 1078, 1088-89 (9th Cir. 2006).
Plaintiff argues that delegating tasks to other employees is not merely the prerogative of the Store Manager, but itself an essential function. (Opposition at 14.) Plaintiff argues, in effect, that any task that can be delegated by the Store Manager is not an essential function of the Store Manager. Plaintiff has not raised a genuine issue. Plaintiff conceded that the Store Manager job description accurately listed the physical demands of the position. Although Plaintiff argues that "prior to her disability, she had delegated certain physical tasks to her staff" (Opposition at 14), this falls short of a showing that she could have worked around her physical restrictions. Plaintiff does not cite to any evidence that she always delegated such tasks to her subordinates. On the contrary, Plaintiff has provided excerpts from her deposition suggesting that [*16]  resources were sometimes stretched too thin for this to be an option.3 Defendant is not required to accommodate Plaintiff by allowing her to delegate essential functions. See Dark, supra, 451 F.3d at 1088-89.

2. No suitable alternative positions were available, and Defendant was not required to offer additional leave
Plaintiff argues that even if Defendant could not have accommodated her return to the position of Store Manager, it could have accommodated her with a different position. The parties disagree about whether Plaintiff bears the burden to establish that an appropriate position was available or Defendant bears the burden to establish that no appropriate positions were available. California law appears to favor Plaintiff. See, e.g., Prilliman v. United Air Lines, Inc., 53 Cal. App. 4th 935, 952, 62 Cal. Rptr. 2d 142 (Cal. App. 1997) ("[O]n summary judgment, the moving party employer has the burden of establishing that there were no vacant positions the employee could have performed."). However, establishing that no other positions were available is only one of several ways that a Defendant may prevail on summary judgment. See, e.g., Claudio v. Regents of Univ. of Cal., 134 Cal. App. 4th 224, 243, 35 Cal. Rptr. 3d 837 (Cal. App. 2005) (in the context of a claim for failure to accommodate, an employer cannot prevail unless "it establishes through undisputed facts that (1) reasonable accommodation was offered [*17]  and refused; (2) there simply was no vacant position within the employer's organization for which the disabled employee was qualified and which the disabled employee was capable of performing with or without accommodation; or (3) the employer did everything in its power to find a reasonable accommodation, but the informal interactive process broke down because the employee failed to engage in discussions in good faith") (quoting Jensen v. Wells Fargo Bank, 85 Cal. App. 4th 245, 263, 102 Cal. Rptr. 2d 55 (Cal. App. 2000)).
Plaintiff makes much of Bejarano's testimony that "there were many things coming up" during the relevant time period in districts where Plaintiff may or may not have been willing to work, but context reveals that these "many things" were Store Manager positions that Plaintiff could not perform.4 Bejarano has testified that she discussed less physically-demanding positions with Plaintiff, but that Plaintiff "insisted that she would only return to work as a Store Manager at Store No. 5573, and no other store position." (Bejarano Decl. ¶ 15.) (Plaintiff counters that she expressed that she was "willing to do any job" when Bejarano called on March 27, 2013, to terminate her, and may have been willing to do other jobs even before then. (Crook Depo. 235:14-236:8.) [*18]  However, she does not dispute Bejarano's testimony that, at some point, she said that she would only return as Store Manager at the Studio City store.) Bejarano reminded Plaintiff that she had been "looking into a pharmacy scheduler [position], but there's nothing available." (Crook Depo. 235:23-25.) It is not clear whether Defendant performed any additional searches after Plaintiff said that she was willing to consider positions other than Store Manager. However, Defendant was not required to do so. At that point, Plaintiff had been on leave since October 2010 and had declined alternative positions in sweeping terms. Defendant was not required to offer additional leave or to continue to explore available positions. See Part III.C, below.
Accordingly, because there is no genuine dispute of material fact regarding Plaintiff's inability to perform the essential functions of Store Manager, with or without accommodation, and it is not reasonable to require Defendant to further extend Plaintiff's leave after more than two years when she had declined other positions presented to her, Defendant's Motion is granted on Plaintiff's first claim.

B. Failure to Accommodate
"The essential elements [*19]  of a claim of failure to accommodate are: (1) the plaintiff has a disability covered by FEHA; (2) the plaintiff is a qualified individual; and (3) the employer failed to reasonably accommodate the plaintiff's disability." Furtado v. State Personnel Bd., 212 Cal. App. 4th 729, 744, 151 Cal. Rptr. 3d 292 (Cal. App. 2013) (citing Jensen v. Wells Fargo Bank, 85 Cal. App. 4th 245, 255-56, 102 Cal. Rptr. 2d 55 (Cal. App. 2000)). As discussed above, Plaintiff was not a qualified individual. Accordingly, Defendant's Motion is granted as to Plaintiff's second claim.

C. Failure to Engage in Interactive Process
"'[T]he interactive process requires communication and good-faith exploration of possible accommodations between employers and individual employees with the goal of 'identify[ing] an accommodation that allows the employee to perform the job effectively.' . . . [F]or the process to work '[b]oth sides must communicate directly, exchange essential information and neither side can delay or obstruct the process.' . . . When a claim is brought for failure to reasonably accommodate the claimant's disability, the trial court's ultimate obligation is to 'isolate the cause of the breakdown . . . and then assign responsibility' so that '[l]iability for failure to provide reasonable accommodations ensues only where the employer bears responsibility for the breakdown.'" Nadaf-Rahrov, 166 Cal. App. 4th at 984-84 (internal citations [*20]  omitted). "Once the interactive process is initiated, the employer's obligation to engage in the process in good faith is continuous. '[T]he employer's obligation to engage in the interactive process extends beyond the first attempt at accommodation and continues when the employee asks for a different accommodation or where the employer is aware that the initial accommodation is failing and further accommodation is needed." Scotch v. Art Institute of California, 173 Cal. App. 4th 986, 1018, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d 338 (Cal. App. 2009) (quoting Humphrey v. Memorial Hospitals Ass'n, 239 F.3d 1128, 1138 (9th Cir. 2001)). However, "[b]oth employer and employee have the obligation 'to keep communications open' and neither has 'a right to obstruct the process.' . . . Liability hinges on the objective circumstances surrounding the parties' breakdown in communication, and responsibility for the breakdown lies with the party who fails to participate in good faith." Id. at 1014.
Here, there is no dispute that Defendant promptly set to work to assess Plaintiff's condition and explore potential accommodations when she indicated that she wanted to return to work in October 2012. Defendant corresponded with Dr. Caldron to clarify restrictions, and Bejarano spoke with Plaintiff on multiple occasions. Because there was no reasonable accommodation that could be made to allow Plaintiff to return [*21]  to her position as Store Manager, Bejarano explored alternative positions with Plaintiff. Plaintiff indicated that she was not interested in other positions. Plaintiff changed her mind, and was apparently willing to do "any job," but did not say so until March 27, 2013, when Bejarano called to inform her that she was being terminated. In her Opposition, Plaintiff attempts to muddy the chronology to suggest that Defendant decided to terminate her only after she expressed her willingness to accept any position.5 However, Plaintiff's testimony makes clear that Bejarano "termed" or terminated her during this call. (Crook Depo. 235:16-17.)
The question, then, is whether the "breakdown" occurred when Plaintiff declined other positions, or when Defendant ultimately terminated her. Given the absolute terms of Plaintiff's refusal to consider any position other than Store Manager in the Studio City store, the Court finds that Plaintiff was responsible for the breakdown. Plaintiff's position appears to be that the interactive process permits her to "bluff" without consequence—that she could impose conditions on her return and later rescind them when they made accommodation impossible. [*22]  The Court finds no authority for this position. See Hanson v. Lucky Stores, Inc., 74 Cal. App. 4th 215, 229, 87 Cal. Rptr. 2d 487 (Cal. App. 1999) (finding "no reason why . . . employer should be subjected to liability for failing to engage in the interactive process where the employee was reasonably accommodated not once but twice," including the offer of a lower-paying, part-time position).
This case is distinguishable from those cited by Plaintiff, in which the employer either utterly failed to engage in the interactive process or else rejected a proposed accommodation without proposing another. See Humphrey, 239 F.3d at 1139 ("[Defendant's] rejection of [plaintiff's] work-at-home request and its failure to explore with [plaintiff] the possibility of other accommodations, once it was aware that the initial arrangement was not effective, constitutes a violation of its duty regarding the mandatory interactive process."); E.E.O.C. v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 417 F.3d 789, 807 (7th Cir. 2005) ("[Defendant] was not obligated to provide [requested] accommodation, but it also could not simply reject the request and take no further action."); Nadaf-Rahrov, 166 Cal. App. 4th at 986 (reasonable jury could find that employer caused breakdown in interactive process by failing to provide information about available positions); Dark, 451 F.3d at 1088 (employer "did not engage in any such process"); Smith v. Midland Brake, 180 F.3d 1154, 1173-74 (10th Cir. 1999) (summary judgment inappropriate when there [*23]  was "a genuine dispute regarding whether [defendant] participated in good faith in attempting to secure a reassignment position for [plaintiff]"); Wysinger v. Auto. Club of S. Cal., 157 Cal. App. 4th 413, 422, 69 Cal. Rptr. 3d 1 (Cal. App. 2007) ("[Defendant] ignored [plaintiff's] repeated requests to discuss his health and commute problems.").
For the foregoing reasons, the Court finds as a matter of law that Defendant participated in the interactive process in good faith and that Plaintiff caused the process to break down when she stated that she would only return to work as a Store Manager in the Studio City store.

D. Retaliation
"[I]n order to establish a prima facie case of retaliation under the FEHA, a plaintiff must show (1) he or she engaged in a 'protected activity,' (2) the employer subjected the employee to an adverse employment action, and (3) a causal link existed between the protected activity and the employer's action. . . . Once an employee establishes a prima facie case, the employer is required to offer a legitimate, nonretaliatory reason for the adverse employment action. . . . If the employer produces a legitimate reason for the adverse employment action, the presumption of retaliation 'drops out of the picture,' and the burden shifts back to the employee to prove [*24]  intentional retaliation." Yanowitz v. L'Oreal USA, Inc., 36 Cal. 4th 1028, 1042, 32 Cal. Rptr. 3d 436, 116 P.3d 1123 (Cal. 2005) (internal citations omitted).
Defendant argues that Plaintiff cannot establish a prima facie case because there is no causal link between the protected activity—seeking accommodations—and her termination. The Court agrees. Defendant considered Plaintiff's requests for accommodations over a period of several months, and even offered accommodations that Plaintiff refused, before reaching the decision to terminate her. Accordingly, Defendant's Motion is granted as to Plaintiff's fourth claim.
Because the Court grants Defendant's Motion on all four of Plaintiff's claims, punitive damages are not available.

Conclusion
For the foregoing reasons, Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment is granted.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
JUDGMENT
Pursuant to the Court's Minute Order of January 7, 2015 granting defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment,
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED, AND DECREED that defendant Thrifty Payless, Inc., d/b/a Rite Aid ("Defendant") shall have judgment in its favor against plaintiff Christine Crook ("Plaintiff") on Plaintiff's claims for disability discrimination, failure to provide reasonable accommodation as required by California Government Code § 12940(m), failure to engage in the interactive process [*25]  required by California Government Code § 12940(n), and retaliation.
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED, ADJUDGED, AND DECREED that Plaintiff shall take nothing on its Complaint and that Defendant shall have its costs of suit.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
DATED: January 7, 2015
/s/ Percy Anderson
Percy Anderson
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

