Crossley v. CSCApplied Techs., LLC
United States District Court for the Northern District of Texas, San Angelo Division
July 23, 2013, Decided; July 23, 2013, Filed
Civil Action No. 6:12-CV-002-C

Reporter
2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 192943 *
PAMELA L. CROSSLEY, Plaintiff, v. CSC APPLIED TECHNOLOGIES, LLC, Defendant.
Subsequent History: Affirmed by Crossley v. CSC Applied Techs., L.L.C., 569 Fed. Appx. 196, 2014 U.S. App. LEXIS 9526 (5th Cir. Tex., 2014)
Counsel:  [*1] For Pamela L Crossley, Plaintiff: William S Hommel, Jr, LEAD ATTORNEY, Hommel Law Firm, Tyler, TX.
For CSC Applied Technologies, LLC, Defendant: Sam Zurik, III, LEAD ATTORNEY, Kullman Firm, New Orleans, LA.
Judges: SAM R. CUMMINGS, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: SAM R. CUMMINGS
Opinion



ORDER
On this date, the Court considered:
(1) Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment, filed May 15, 2013;
(2) Plaintiff's Response, filed June 5, 2013;
(3) Defendant's Reply, filed June 12, 2013; and
(4) the argument of counsel at the hearing held on July 17, 2013.

I. FACTS
Defendant, CSC Applied Technologies, LLC ("CSC"), which provides outsourcing services to commercial and government clients, employed Plaintiff, Pamela L. Crossley ("Crossley"), a United States Army veteran, as an aircraft mechanic. In May 2009, CSC assumed an indefinite delivery, indefinite quantity contract with the United States Army to supplement its aviation support facilities from a previous defense contractor. Under the contract, Crossley's team provided maintenance and modification services for government-owned Apache helicopters.
The United State Army and Boeing determined the delivery schedule to CSC of aircraft requiring modifications. As such, the [*2]  workload and location of the jobs varied depending on the military's needs. The Army routinely supplied a scheduling spreadsheet to CSC management that projected incoming aircraft and modifications. The schedules cautioned that "all dates are tentative and subject to the needs of the Army and production schedule." Therefore, under the contract, CSC was required to provide the needed repairs and modifications whenever needed and wherever the aircraft were located.
CSC employees were required to deploy if and when needed to temporary duty ("TDY") at another location or on the "road team" at other military locations to accommodate work flow. Accordingly, the aircraft mechanic job descriptions expressly stated that travel was a job requirement, as did the detailed job postings.
During Crossley's employment, she requested and was granted time off for weekly medical appointments at the Veterans Affairs ("VA") medical center. Crossley has post traumatic stress disorder ("PTSD") as a result of an incident in the military in Korea in 1998. She began receiving treatment for her PTSD in 2010.
In early February 2011, the Army notified CSC management that there would be a substantial reduction in [*3]  incoming aircraft to the San Angelo site, where Crossley was stationed, in March and April, necessitating a redistribution of the workforce. Additionally, the required modifications on the incoming aircraft were expected to be reduced to half of the man-hours typically required on an aircraft modification
With the reduced aircraft and modifications expected at the San Angelo site, John Young ("Young"), CSC's program manager over operations in Killeen, Temple, and San Angelo, Texas, and his site managers looked for work at other sites to occupy the affected aircraft mechanics. The San Angelo site manager informed the employees of the impending temporary reduction in work at that location and of the possibility of their temporary reassignment.
In an effort to keep the workers employed, CSC offered all affected aviation mechanics, including Crossley, temporary reassignment in March and April 2011. In response, Crossley notified CSC that she was unable to travel. When Crossley explained that she could not travel on the road team or work Saturdays, CSC offered her the accommodation of a temporary transfer to Fort Hood in Killeen. The Killeen positions did not require travel after arrival, [*4]  only temporary relocation. She also would have been able to continue her flexible work schedule, allowing her to return to San Angelo for her medical appointments or to utilize the VA hospitals and clinics in the Fort Hood area.
Crossley was aware that, with the reduced workload, she would be subject to a layoff if she were unable to accept the temporary transfer. Nevertheless, she did not inquire as to whether Killeen or the other transfer locations had VA hospitals or if therapy were available at those hospitals. Instead, she submitted a note from her healthcare provider saying that she was unable to drive long distances or work outside of San Angelo. Then, on February 18, 2011, she submitted another note to CSC declining the transfer offers and acknowledging she could be laid off. CSC considered Crossley's notification that she could not travel or temporarily relocate as her volunteering for layoff when the work in San Angelo dried up.
On March 4, 2011, Young got word that, as of March 10, 2011, there would be insufficient work at the San Angelo site to employ all of CSC's employees. He then contacted human resources, who approved Crossley's layoff That same day, Crossley was informed [*5]  that she would be laid off on March 9, 2011, and that she would be eligible for rehire in the event the workload increased in the future.
Approximately a month after Plaintiff was laid off, the Army notified CSC that it anticipated additional aircraft to be directed to San Angelo in May 2011. Accordingly, CSC posted an aircraft mechanic position on April 6, 2011, for work expected to begin the following month. Crossley, however, did not apply for the position despite being aware of the posting and of her eligibility for rehire. On June 28, 2011, CSC received notice that the military would be cancelling its contract the next month.
On March 15, 2011, one week after her layoff, Crossley filed an application for total disability benefits with the Department of Veterans Affairs due to a claimed disability with 100 percent total unemployability. As part of that application for benefits, she certified that "as a result of my service-connected disabilities, I am unable to secure or follow any substantial gainful occupation . . . ." As part of the disability evaluation process, Crossley underwent a medical examination, which reflected that she was unemployable.
Following her layoff, Crossley [*6]  moved to Georgia in August 2011 and did not receive counseling or medical care for several months. Nevertheless, she maintains that she still is unable to perform any job that would require travel.

II. STANDARD
Summary judgment is proper "if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). A genuine dispute of material fact exists when the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the non-movant, Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986); that is, lain issue is material if its resolution could affect the outcome of the action." Wyatt v. Hunt Plywood Co., 297 F.3d 405, 409 (5th Cir. 2002). When reviewing a motion for summary judgment, the court views all facts and evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. United Fire & Cas. Co. v. Hixson Bros., 453 F.3d 283, 285 (5th Cir. 2006). In doing so, the court "refrain[s] from making credibility determinations or weighing the evidence." Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co. v. Lake Caroline, Inc., 515 F.3d 414, 418 (5th Cir. 2008).

III. DISCUSSION
Crossley claims that CSC failed to reasonably accommodate her disability in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA").1 The ADA prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability and expressly defines such discrimination to include "not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified [*7]  individual with a disability . . . unless such covered entity can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose undue hardship on the operation of the business of such covered entity." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). To establish a claim for failure to accommodate, Crossley must show that (1) she is a qualified individual with a disability, (2) CSC was aware of her disability, and (3) CSC failed to reasonably accommodate the disability. Mzyk v. North East Indep. Sch. Dist., 397 F. Appx. 13, 15 (5th Cir. 2010); Cortez v. Raytheon Co., 663 F. Supp. 2d 514, 524 (N.D. Tex. 2009).
Crossley is not a qualified individual under the ADA because she could not perform an essential function of the job, travel. "An individual is qualified under the ADA if, with or without reasonable accommodation, the person can perform the essential functions of the position." Rodriguez v. ConAgra Grocery Prods. Co., 436 F.3d 468, 477 n.32 (5th Cir. 2006) (citing 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8)). To determine whether a function is essential, courts consider the employer's judgment, as well as written job descriptions, the reason the [*8]  job exists, the degree of specialization required by the job, the work of others who held the position, and consequences if the employee does not perform the function. Hartup v. Am. Std. Inc., No. 3:08-CV-197-0, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 78733, at *37-38 (N.D. Tex. Aug. 31, 2009). The undisputed evidence shows that travel was an essential function of the job.
Under the indefinite delivery, indefinite quantity service contract CSC had with the Army, the military controlled the work flow and location of the jobs. Therefore, CSC needed to be able to provide service wherever the military sent work, which required aviation mechanics to travel. To that end, the job description expressly states the following two requisite qualifications of the position: (1) "must be willing to work any shift and/or flexible schedules as required to support the workload and the mission"; and (2) "must be willing to deploy to support off station exercises and perform other supportive duties as assigned." (Def.'s Appx. 9.) Crossley testified that she understood that all aviation mechanics are required to be able to deploy on an as-needed basis,2 and she has even been deployed to Fort Hood in the past.
Crossley also testified that she could not travel.3 When an employee with a disability cannot travel, and the ability to travel is an essential function of the job, the employee is not a qualified individual under the ADA. In Canales v. Nicholson, the court held that traveling long distances between regional offices to conduct site visits was an essential function of the employee's position as assistant regional manager. 177 F. Appx. 834, 839-40 (10th Cir. 2006). The employee suffered from interstitial cystitis and kidney stones and could not travel long distances. Id. at 836. Because he could not travel, the court held that he could not perform an essential function of the job and was not a qualified individual under the ADA. Id. at 840; see also Digan v. Euro-American Brands, LLC, No. 10-799, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 83078, at *21-24 (N.D. Ill. June 5, 2012) (holding that plaintiff who could not travel as part of her job as a regional sales manager was not a qualified individual). [*10] 
Because travel [*11]  is an essential function of Crossley's job, which she could not perform, she is not a qualified individual under the ADA. Therefore, she cannot, as a matter of law, meet the first element of her failure-to-accommodate claim.
Crossley is also judicially estopped from claiming that she is a qualified individual because of the contrary position she took in her application for disability benefits. In Cleveland v. Policy Management Systems Corporation, the Supreme Court addressed the issue of judicial estoppel in the context of the apparent conflict between a plaintiff's ADA claim that she is a qualified individual capable of performing her job and her application for governmental disability benefits, which requires a sworn statement that the employee is completely unable to work. 526 U.S. 795, 119 S. Ct. 1597, 143 L. Ed. 2d 966 (1999). The Court explained that "an ADA plaintiff cannot simply ignore her SSDI contention that she is too disabled to work." Id. at 798. More recently, the Fifth Circuit addressed the same issue, holding:
[W]hile an employee's boilerplate representation of "total disability" in a benefits application "may be a legal conclusion" that can, through an adequate explanation, be reconciled with a subsequent ADA suit, an employee's "specific [*12]  factual statements" that she was unable to perform her essential job duties at the time of the adverse employment action entitle the employer to summary judgment . . . .
Bell v. Hercules Liftboat Co., LLC, No. 12-30843, 524 Fed. Appx. 64, 2013 U.S. App. LEXIS 7308, at *10 (5th Cir. Apr. 11, 2013).
Crossley's final day of work was March 9, 2011, and on March 15, 2011, she filed an application for disability benefits with the VA in which she claimed to be 100 percent disabled. As part of the application, Crossley certified that "as a result of my service-connected disabilities, I am unable to secure or follow any substantially gainful occupation and that the statements in this application are true and complete to the best of my knowledge and belief." (Def.'s App. 197.) Crossley represented in the certified application that her disability was PTSD and that she left her job because of her disability. She further noted that she had not attempted to obtain other employment since she became too disabled to work. Id.
On April 13, 2011, Crossley's therapist submitted a hardship request in support of her claim for disability benefits, stating that the letter was intended "to facilitate the completion of the claim for individual unemployability of Pamela Crossley." Id. at 132, 180. Additionally, Crossley was required to undergo a medical [*13]  examination ("C&P") to be approved for total disability benefits. Her medical records reflect that on June 15, 2011, she completed her C&P, which included a "psych exam." Id. at 154, 166. That examination resulted in a finding that due to her PTSD, Crossley has a "great deal of difficulty relocating to a new place." Id. at 160, 174. The medical evaluation further stated that "at this time this veteran is unemployable." Id. at 163, 176.
In her deposition Crossley admitted that her treatment sessions were extended after her layoff and that she suffered ongoing mental health issues. Id. at 130-33. She also testified that if she had a job today that required her to go on the road, she would not be able to perform that job. Id. at 136.
To survive CSC's motion for summary judgment, Crossley must explain why her contention that she is totally disabled is consistent with her ADA claim that she could "perform the essential functions" of her previous job, at least with "reasonable accommodation." Cleveland, 526 U.S. at 799. In her response to CSC's motion, Crossley agrees that "[w]hen faced with plaintiff's previous sworn statement asserting 'total disability' or the like, the court should require an explanation of any apparent inconsistency with the necessary elements of an ADA claim." (Pl.'s [*14]  Resp. 9.) Yet, in an attempt to reconcile the inconsistency, Crossley offers only the following explanation: "Plaintiff not only has provided an explanation of the alleged inconsistency through her job application, she also actually successfully performed all essential tasks of her job throughout her employment with Defendant." Id. at 10. What Crossley is attempting to communicate through the first clause of the above statement is not apparent to the Court. As for the second clause, the assertion is untrue. As explained above, she was unable to perform all essential functions of the job because she could not travel. Moreover, this statement does nothing to reconcile Crossley's seemingly inconsistent positions of claiming both to be totally unemployable and to be able to fulfill the essential functions of her job with reasonable accommodation. Because Crossley cannot explain the apparent conflict between her ADA claim, for which she contends that she is a qualified individual capable of performing her job, and her application for governmental disability benefits, for which she contends she is unemployable, she is judicially estopped from claiming that she is a qualified individual under the [*15]  ADA.
In addition to Crossley's failure to demonstrate that she is a qualified individual under the ADA, she has no evidence that CSC failed to offer her reasonable accommodation. When discussions arose about the reduced workload at the San Angelo site and Crossley notified CSC of her inability to travel TDY and work weekends, CSC offered to temporarily reassign her to Ford Hood. Once at Fort Hood, Crossley would not have been required to travel, and there was a medical center on base and a VA medical facility in nearby Temple, Texas, where she could seek treatment for her PTSD. Yet, Crossley turned down the opportunity to relocate to Fort Hood.
Crossley contends that CSC should have offered her "the opportunity to take unpaid medical leave in order to have the opportunity to see if additional jobs opened up in San Angelo which would accommodate her need for treatment at the VA."4 P1.'s Resp. 8. She contends, essentially, that CSC should have placed her on indefinite leave until it had work for her. However, "[i]ndefinite leave is not a reasonable accommodation." Amsel v. Tex. Water Dev. Bd., 464 F. Appx. 395, 400 (5th Cir. 2012) (citing Rogers v. Int'l Marine Terminals, Inc., 87 F.3d 755, 759-60 (5th Cir. 1996) ("Nothing in the text of the reasonable accommodation provision requires an employer to wait an indefinite period for an accommodation [*16]  to achieve its intended effect.") (citation omitted)). At the time of her layoff, CSC did not know when, or even if, the work for which Crossley was employed would return to San Angelo because that determination was made entirely by the Army. Therefore, Crossley's suggestion that CSC should have granted her leave of an indefinite duration is unreasonable.
Furthermore, indefinite leave would not have addressed Crossley's inability to travel. It is well established that eliminating an essential function of the job, such as appearance for work and travel, is not a reasonable accommodation under the ADA. Cortez, 663 F. Supp. 2d at 525 (citing Bradley v. Univ. of Tex. M.D. Anderson Cancer Ctr., 3 F.3d 922, 925 (5th Cir. 1993) (employer not required to eliminate essential job functions in order to furnish an accommodation)). Crossley is unable to demonstrate how she would have been able to perform an essential function of the job, travel, even if CSC had offered her indefinite leave.
Crossley also argues that CSC did [*17]  not engage in the interactive process. While the ADA provides for an interactive process to ascertain reasonable accommodations available given an employee's work restrictions, the employer's obligation to participate is triggered only by the employee's request for accommodation. Taylor v. Principal Financial Group, Inc., 93 F.3d 155, 165 (5th Cir. 1996). "If an employee fails to request an accommodation, the employer cannot be held liable for failing to provide one." Id. at 165. Here, Crossley does not dispute that she did not request an accommodation and that she refused to consider the accommodations CSC proposed. Therefore, this argument is without merit.
Finally, Crossley's objections to CSC's summary judgment evidence are OVERRULED.

IV. CONCLUSION
As discussed above, there is no genuine dispute of material fact as to whether Crossley is a qualified individual under the ADA or whether CSC failed to offer her reasonable accommodation. As such, CSC is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
Therefore, Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment is GRANTED, and Plaintiff's claims are DISMISSED.
SO ORDERED.
Dated this 23rd day of July, 2013.
/s/ Sam R. Cummings
SAM R. CUMMINGS
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

JUDGMENT
On this date the Court granted Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment. [*18]  The following judgment is, therefore, entered:
IT IS ORDERED, ADJUDGED, AND DECREED that Plaintiff, Pamela L. Crossley, take nothing as against Defendant, CSC Applied Technologies, LLC. Costs of court are taxed against Plaintiff.
Dated this 23rd day of July, 2013.
/s/ Sam R. Cummings
SAM R. CUMMINGS
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

