Davis v. Yellowpages.Com LLC
United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division
March 28, 2019, Decided
1:17-CV-00397-ELR

Reporter
2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 250452 *; 2019 WL 13292974
ROBIN LEE "LEAH" DAVIS, Plaintiff, v. YELLOWPAGES.COM LLC and YP HOLDINGS, LLC, Defendants.
Counsel:  [*1] For Robin Lee - Leah Davis, Plaintiff: Brian J. Sutherland, Thomas Joseph Mew IV, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Buckley Beal LLP, Atlanta, GA.
For Yellowpages.com LLC, YP HOLDINGS LLC, Defendants: Ashley D. Brightwell, Alston & Bird LLP-GA, Atlanta, GA; Anna Beth Saraie, Alston & Bird LLP - Atl, Atlanta, GA.
Judges: Eleanor L. Ross, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Eleanor L. Ross
Opinion



ORDER
This case is before the Court on Magistrate Judge John K. Larkins III's Order and Final Report and Recommendation ("R&R") and the objections thereto. The Court's rulings and conclusions are set forth below.

I. Background
Plaintiff Robin Lee "Leah" Davis brings suit against Defendants Yellowpages.com LLC and YP Holdings, LLC for employment discrimination claims arising under the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq., the Family and Medical Leave Act ("FMLA"), 29 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq., Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., and the Equal Pay Act, 29 U.S.C. § 206(d). The R&R sets forth the relevant facts of this case, which the Court will not repeat here. As a general summary, Plaintiff worked for Defendants in a human resources and employee relations position. Plaintiff suffered from fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue syndrome, and migraine headaches.1 Defendants eventually engaged in a reduction in force, and Plaintiff's supervisor, Director Kristen Crossman, was instructed to reduce her department's headcount [*2]  by one employee. Using a specific rank and rate analysis, Crossman selected Plaintiff's position to be eliminated.
After discovery, Defendants moved for summary judgment on all of Plaintiff's claims. The R&R recommends granting summary judgment for Defendants on all of Plaintiff's claims except Plaintiff's compensation claims under the Equal Pay Act and Title VII for gender-based discrimination. Defendants and Plaintiff filed objections to the R&R, which are now before the Court.

II. Standard
The Court "may accept, reject, or modify, in whole or in part, the findings or recommendations made by the magistrate judge." 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1); Fed. R. Civ. P. 72(b)(3). Portions of the R&R, to which no objection has been made, are reviewed for clear error. See Thomas v. Arn, 474 U.S. 140, 154, 106 S.Ct. 466, 88 L.Ed.2d 435 (1985); Macort v. Prem, Inc., 208 F. App'x 781, 784 (11th Cir. 2006); Tauber v. Barnhart, 438 F. Supp. 2d 1366, 1373 (N.D. Ga. 2006). However, the Court "shall make a de novo determination of those portions of the report or specified proposed findings or recommendations to which objection is made." 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1); Fed. R. Civ. P. 72(b)(3). A party objecting to an R&R "must specifically identify those findings objected to. Frivolous, conclusive, or general objections need not be considered by the district court." United States v. Schultz, 565 F.3d 1353, 1361 (11th Cir. 2009) (quoting Marsden v. Moore, 847 F.2d 1536, 1548 (11th Cir. 1988)) (internal quotation marks omitted). The Court has reviewed the portions of the R&R to which no objections were made and finds no clear [*3]  error.

III. Defendants' Objections
Defendants argue that the R&R is incorrect in finding that summary judgment should be denied a Plaintiff's compensation claims under the Equal Pay Act and Title VII. To prove an Equal Pay Act claim, Plaintiff must show that she was paid less than a male employee "for equal work on jobs the performance of which requires equal skill, effort, and responsibility." Mulhall v. Advance Sec., Inc., 19 F.3d 586, 590 (11th Cir. 1994). Plaintiff alleges that she was paid less than Steve Flagler, a male human resources employee. The Court has conducted a de novo review of these claims and finds that the Magistrate Judge's conclusion is correct.
First, regarding whether Plaintiff and Flagler's job duties were substantially similar, Flagler told Plaintiff that her job would be the same as his, Plaintiff was told that Flagler's salary was higher than what she was being offered because Flagler worked with a unionized workforce, Plaintiff took over the unionized Southeast region which used to belong to Flagler, and Plaintiff was promoted to a senior manager, which was Flagler's title. Second, regarding whether Flagler was paid more than Plaintiff, as noted above, Plaintiff was told during salary negotiations that she would not be paid as much as Flagler because [*4]  he was working with a unionized workforce and evidence indicates that he made $120,000. However, Plaintiff was not making $120,000 when she took over Flagler's unionized workforce region. Defendants are correct and as the R&R points out, the factual record on this claim could be more developed. But based on the evidence above, this is sufficient on a motion for summary judgment, when viewing all of the facts in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, for a reasonable factfinder to conclude that Plaintiff was paid less than a male employee "for equal work on jobs the performance of which requires equal skill, effort, and responsibility." Mulhall, 19 F.3d at 590. Thus, genuine issues of disputed facts remain, and the Court overrules Defendants' objections on Plaintiff's Equal Pay Act claim.
As for Plaintiff's Title VII claim, the R&R found that Plaintiff made a prima facie case of intentional compensation discrimination showing that Flagler, a similarly situated male employee, was paid more than her, as supported by the same evidence as the Equal Pay Act claim summarized above. On Plaintiff's single-motive theory of discrimination, the R&R noted that Defendants had offered no legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for paying [*5]  Plaintiff less than Flagler. The R&R then went on to find that Plaintiff had also offered sufficient evidence under a mixed-motive theory of discrimination. Thus, the R&R recommends denying summary judgment on Plaintiff's Title VII claim. In their objections, Defendants object on the same grounds as the Equal Pay Act claim, which the Court has overruled. Defendants next attack the R&R's finding on the mixed-motive theory. Having not objected to the R&R's findings regarding the single-motive theory, the Court finds that the R&R is correct on this ground, and this is sufficient to deny summary judgment to Defendant on Plaintiff's Title VII claim. Accordingly, the Court overrules Defendants' objections on Plaintiff's Title VII compensation claim for gender-based discrimination.

V. Plaintiff's Objections
Plaintiff makes four (4) objections set forth below.

A. Failure to Accommodate
The R&R recommends granting summary judgment for Defendants on Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim. Plaintiff argues that Judge Larkins erred in concluding that Plaintiff had failed to establish evidence that Defendants denied Plaintiff leave to work from home while caring for her medical condition and that Judge Larkins [*6]  overlooked evidence, such as Plaintiff's declaration. The Court has reviewed the record de novo, including Plaintiff's declaration, and concludes that Judge Larkins reached the correct result as stated in the R&R. In particular, and as relevant to Plaintiff's objections, the R&R noted as follows:
Davis indicated in her declaration that Crossman "denied" her leave to work from home (Davis Decl. ¶ 9), but it is clear from the record and Davis's clarification at oral argument that she was never denied leave to work from home to care for her medical condition. Rather, she believed she would have been denied leave to work from home if she had asked, and she believed that [Defendants'] work-from home policy had changed.
R&R at 30, n. 7. See also Deposition of Pl. at 193, 215 [Doc. 63] (wherein Plaintiff stated that she was not denied a request to work from home).
Plaintiff argues further that summary judgment for Defendants should be denied because Defendants failed to engage in an interactive process with Plaintiff to discuss her limitations and accommodations. However, Plaintiff raised this argument before Judge Larkins, [Doc. 68 at 13, n. 3], and he appropriately rejected it because Plaintiff [*7]  was also required to show that Defendants failed to provide her with a reasonable accommodation, which as set forth above, she did not. R&R at 29; see Griffin v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 661 F.3d 216, 224 (5th Cir. 2011) ("[W]hen an employer's unwillingness to engage in a good faith interactive process leads to a failure to reasonably accommodate an employee, the employer violates the ADA.") (quotation omitted and alteration in original); cf. Beck v. Univ. of Wisconsin Bd. of Regents, 75 F.3d 1130, 1137 (7th Cir. 1996) (ADA liability inappropriate where the employer did not obstruct the process and provided accommodations).2 Therefore, the Court overrules Plaintiff's objections on her failure-to-accommodate claim.

B. ADA Retaliation
On her ADA retaliation claim, Plaintiff argues that the R&R erred by concluding that Plaintiff failed to establish a causal connection between her request for accommodation and her termination due to a three-month gap in time. The R&R is correct.
The burden of causation can be met by showing close temporal proximity between the statutorily protected activity and the adverse employment action. See Brungart v. BellSouth Telecomm., Inc., 231 F.3d 791, 798-99 (11th Cir. 2000). But mere temporal proximity, without more, must be "very close." Clark County Sch. Dist. v. Breeden, 532 U.S. 268, 273, 121 S.Ct. 1508, 1511, 149 L.Ed.2d 509 (2001) (internal citations omitted). A three to four month disparity between the statutorily protected expression and the adverse employment action [*8]  is not enough. See id. (citing Richmond v. ONEOK, 120 F.3d 205, 209 (10th Cir. 1997) (3 month period insufficient) and Hughes v. Derwinski, 967 F.2d 1168, 1174-75 (7th Cir. 1992) (4 month period insufficient)). Thus, in the absence of other evidence tending to show causation, if there is a substantial delay between the protected expression and the adverse action, the complaint of retaliation fails as a matter of law. See Higdon v. Jackson, 393 F.3d 1211, 1220 (11th Cir. 2004) (citing Wascura v. City of South Miami, 257 F.3d 1238, 1248 (11th Cir. 2001)).
Thomas v. Cooper Lighting, Inc., 506 F.3d 1361, 1364 (11th Cir. 2007).
In her objections, Plaintiff asserts that the additional evidence of Crossman acting curt and dismissive to her and changing a policy about working from home establishes her claim. The R&R discussed these arguments and rightfully rejected them, and Plaintiff has not elaborated on how the R&R was in error on these issues. See R&R at 43-44.

C. Pretext for ADA Claims
On Plaintiff's claim of discriminatory discharge, the R&R found that Plaintiff could establish a prima facie case of discriminatory discharge and Defendants had offered the legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for Plaintiff's termination as a reduction in force and Crossman's specific analysis of a rate and rank analysis between Plaintiff and employee Shirley Glynn. The burden then shifted to Plaintiff to show that Defendants selected her for a reduction in force based on her disability, such as by showing [*9]  that Defendants' reason was unworthy of credence and a pretext for discrimination. The R&R found that Plaintiff had been unable to show as much and recommends granting Defendants' motion for summary judgment on this issue.
Plaintiff argues that Judge Larkins erroneously misconstrued several pieces of critical evidence relating to pretext. Plaintiff argues that Judge Larkins did not construe the evidence in her favor that Plaintiff had the necessary experience with the digital region and collective bargaining agreements. Plaintiff asserts that Judge Larkins ignored evidence that Plaintiff was "familiar" with part of the digital region. However, the R&R specifically noted that Plaintiff testified that she was "familiar" with the digital region but also it was undisputed that she had less experience than Glynn. R&R at 40. Therefore, Plaintiff is incorrect that the R&R ignored evidence.
Plaintiff also argues that Judge Larkins misconstrued evidence because she could have been brought up to speed on anything she was less familiar with, which is what Defendants did for Glynn. Once again, this issue was addressed by the R&R, and the R&R correctly concluded that these objections are an attempt [*10]  to have the Court second-guess Defendants' business judgment. R&R at 39. "The role of this Court is to prevent unlawful hiring practices, not to act as a super personnel department that second-guesses employers' business judgments." Wilson v. B/E Aerospace, Inc., 376 F.3d 1079, 1092 (11th Cir. 2004) (quotation omitted). Defendants were entitled to make employment decisions based on subjective criteria or even on inconsequential criteria. Rollins v. Cone Distrib., Inc., 710 F. App'x 814, 822 (11th Cir. 2017). But the Court will not second-guess these business judgments. Instead, the Court's "sole concern is whether unlawful discriminatory animus motivates a challenged employment decision." Wilson, 376 F.3d at 1092 (quotation omitted). "A plaintiff proves pretext by showing that the defendant's proffered reason is so weak, implausible, inconsistent, incoherent, or contradictory that a reasonable factfinder could find the reason unworthy of credence." Rollins, 710 F. App'x at 822. The fact that both Plaintiff and others could have been brought up to speed on tasks does not meet this standard, such that a reasonable factfinder could find Defendants' reasons unworthy of credence. Plaintiff "cannot prove pretext by merely recasting the defendant's reason or by arguing her own business judgment over that of the defendant's," which is what Plaintiff is attempting to do here. [*11]  Id. Accordingly, Defendants' objections are overruled.
Plaintiff asserts that while the R&R recognized Defendants' contention that proximity to the Northeast was important and weighed in favor of Glynn, the R&R ignored that Defendants' human resources managers are remote and Defendants spread work supporting the digital region among senior regional field human resources managers. Once again, Plaintiff is asking the Court to second-guess Defendants' business judgment about wanting to have a person with close proximity to a certain region, which the Court cannot do. The evidence Plaintiff points to now does not show a discriminatory animus by Defendants.
Plaintiff next contends that Judge Larkins ignored the fact that two human resources managers were hired just before Plaintiff was let go, and therefore, Defendants' reason about Plaintiff's short tenure as compared to Glynn was pretextual. However, the R&R did not ignore this evidence, specifically addressing the same arguments Plaintiff makes now and appropriately rejecting them because it requires second-guessing Defendants' business judgment. R&R at 34, 38. After a de novo review, the Court does not find that this evidence shows discriminatory [*12]  animus.
Plaintiff also argues that pretext is shown because Crossman shut down any interactive process with Plaintiff and denied her the accommodation of working from home. Yet, as explained above, Plaintiff was not denied the accommodation of working from home, and thus, Plaintiff's argument does not show pretext.
Additionally, Plaintiff asserts that Judge Larkins improperly discounted evidence regarding an open position for which she was not considered. However, once again, the R&R did not discount this evidence and acknowledged Plaintiff's argument on this issue. R&R at 21-22, 35, 41. After a de novo review, the Court agrees with the R&R's finding that Plaintiff has not shown she was qualified for the open position and Defendants had already conducted interviews and selected a final candidate by the time Plaintiff asked about the job. Id. at 41. Whether Defendants should have amended their hiring process to consider Plaintiff when she expressed interest, after the job had been posted and finalists selected, is a business decision this Court will not second-guess. Additionally, Plaintiff has not shown a discriminatory animus with regard to this issue.
In addition to misconstruing or [*13]  overlooking evidence, Plaintiff argues that Judge Larkins erred by not finding that there was a genuine issue of disputed material fact as to pretext. Plaintiff contends that one such issue is that she was a good performer, just like Glynn, and therefore, this shows that Defendants' decision to terminate her was discriminatory. However, the R&R recognized that while Glynn and Plaintiff may have been rated the same in their performance levels for that year, Defendants admitted that Plaintiff's performance evaluation had very little effect on the overall decision to terminate Plaintiff. R&R at 19, 39.
Finally, Plaintiff maintains that Crossman lied at her deposition when she testified that a supervisor approved of the decision to terminate Plaintiff. Plaintiff argues that Crossman's dishonesty at her deposition indicates pretext. The cases Plaintiff cites in support relied on additional evidence to show pretext, not just some untruthfulness, and/or are not similar to the facts presented here. See Pl.'s Objections at 14 [Doc. 85]. Viewing the facts in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, the evidence of Crossman lying at her deposition is insufficient for a reasonable trier of fact to [*14]  find that Defendants' reason for Plaintiff's termination was not legitimate, in light of all of the other facts presented.
In sum, the Court overrules Plaintiff's objections to the R&R's finding that Defendants' elimination of Plaintiff's position during its reduction in force was pretext for disability discrimination. Accordingly, the Court agrees with the R&R's recommendation to grant Defendants' motion for summary judgment on Plaintiff's claim of ADA disability discrimination.

D. FMLA Interference & Retaliation Claims
Plaintiff argues that the R&R erred in finding that Plaintiff did not establish pretext for her FMLA interference and retaliation claims for the same reasons above that the R&R erred in finding pretext on her ADA claims. The Court has already overruled Plaintiff's objections above on the issue of pretext. Additionally, Plaintiff argues in one sentence that she need not prove pretext at all because a "motivating factor" standard applies to FMLA retaliation claims. However, Plaintiff made the same cursory argument before the Magistrate Judge, which the R&R properly and thoroughly rejected. R&R at 53-56. Plaintiff has not pointed to any specific error, and after a de novo [*15]  review, the Court finds none on Plaintiff's FMLA interference and retaliation claims.

VI. Summary
Accordingly, the Court will adopt the R&R and find that summary judgment is due to be granted for Defendants on all of Plaintiff's claims except her substantive Equal Pay Act and Title VII compensation claims. Pursuant to Local Rule 16.7, the Court's review of this case has led it to conclude that mediation may provide savings in time and costs to the litigants without sacrificing the quality of justice. The Court also finds that the parties should share the costs of mediation. Accordingly, the Court will stay this case pending completion of mediation and direct the parties below to submit the names of possible mediators.

VII. Conclusion
For the foregoing reasons, the Court ADOPTS the R&R [Doc. 81] as the opinion of this Court. The Court GRANTS IN PART AND DENIES IN PART Defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. 62]. Specifically, the Court grants summary judgment to Defendants on all of Plaintiff's claims except her compensation claims for gender-based discrimination pursuant to the Equal Pay Act and Title VII; as to those two claims, the Court denies Defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment.
The Court STAYS this case pending [*16]  completion of mediation. The Court DIRECTS the parties, within fourteen (14) days from the date of entry of this order, either (A) to each file with the Court a notice of a list of three (3) possible mediators from which the Court will choose a mediator or (B) to file a joint notice indicating the mediator agreed upon by all the parties. See LR 16.7F(1)-(2), NDGa. After the parties' submissions, the Court will appoint a mediator and direct the parties to participate in mediation. The Court DIRECTS the Clerk to resubmit this case after fourteen (14) days.
SO ORDERED, this 28th day of March, 2019.
/s/ Eleanor L. Ross
Eleanor L. Ross
United States District Judge
Northern District of Georgia


End of Document

