Edwards v. Wellstar Med. Group
United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division
September 8, 2020, Decided; September 8, 2020, Filed
CIVIL ACTION FILE NO. 1:18-CV-4492-MHC-LTW

Reporter
2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 196960 *; 2020 WL 6156566
CINDY EDWARDS, Plaintiff, v. WELLSTAR MEDICAL GROUP, LLC, Defendant.
Subsequent History: Affirmed by Edwards v. Wellstar Med. Grp., LLC, 2022 U.S. App. LEXIS 21036 (11th Cir. Ga., July 29, 2022)
Prior History: Edwards v. Wellstar Med. Group, 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 197210, 2020 WL 6293153 (N.D. Ga., May 15, 2020)
Counsel:  [*1] For Wellstar Medical Group LLC, Defendant: Charles L. Bachman Jr., Gregory Doyle Calhoun & Rogers LLC, Marietta, GA.
For Cindy Edwards, Plaintiff: Meredith J. Carter, LEAD ATTORNEY, M. Carter Law LLC, Smyrna, GA.
Judges: MARK H. COHEN, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: MARK H. COHEN
Opinion



ORDER
This action comes before this Court on the Final Report and Recommendation ("R&R") of Magistrate Judge Linda T. Walker [Doc. 54] recommending that Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. 31] be granted. The Order for Service of the R&R [Doc. 55] provided notice that, in accordance with 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1), the parties were authorized to file objections within fourteen (14) days of the receipt of that order. In response to the R&R, Plaintiff has filed objections ("Pl.'s Objs.") [Doc. 59].

I. LEGAL STANDARD
In reviewing a Magistrate Judge's R&R, the district court "shall make a de novo determination of those portions of the report or specified proposed findings or recommendations to which objection is made." 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1). "Parties filing objections to a magistrate's report and recommendation must specifically identify those findings objected to. Frivolous, conclusive, or general objections need not be considered by the district court." United States v. Schultz, 565 F.3d 1353, 1361 (11th Cir. 2009) (internal [*2]  quotation marks omitted) (quoting Marsden v. Moore, 847 F.2d 1536, 1548 (11th Cir. 1988)). Absent objection, the district court judge "may accept, reject, or modify, in whole or in part, the findings and recommendations made by the magistrate judge," 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1), and need only satisfy itself that there is no plain error on the face of the record in order to accept the recommendation. See United States v. Slay, 714 F.2d 1093, 1095 (11th Cir. 1983). Further, "the district court has broad discretion in reviewing a magistrate judge's report and recommendation"—it "does not abuse its discretion by considering an argument that was not presented to the magistrate judge" and "has discretion to decline to consider a party's argument when that argument was not first presented to the magistrate judge." Williams v. McNeil, 557 F.3d 1287, 1290-92 (11th Cir. 2009). In accordance with 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1) and Rule 72 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, the Court has conducted a de novo review of those portions of the R&R to which Defendant objects and has reviewed the remainder of the R&R for plain error. See Slay, 714 F.2d at 1095.

II. PLAINTIFF'S OBJECTIONS
Plaintiffs Amended Complaint includes the following five counts: (1) retaliation under the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993, 29 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq. ("FMLA"), Am. Compl. [Doc. 14] ¶¶ 37-44 (Count I); (2) interference under the FMLA, id. ¶¶ 45-50 (Count II); (3) violation of the Americans With Disabilities Act ("ADA"), as amended [*3]  by the ADA Amendments Act of 2008, 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq., id. ¶¶ 51-57 (Count III1; (4) disability discrimination and failure to accommodate under the ADA, id. ¶¶ 58-68 (Count IV); and (5) retaliation under the ADA, id. ¶¶ 69-76 (Count V). The R&R recommends that Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment be granted on all five counts of Plaintiffs Amended Complaint.
Plaintiff objects generally to the Magistrate Judge's alleged misapplication of the summary judgment standard and argues that the Magistrate Judge erroneously excluded evidence. Pl.'s Objs. at 8-12, 39-41. Plaintiff also objects to two specific conclusions in the R&R, urging the Court to reject the Magistrate Judge's recommendation as to the FMLA retaliation claim in Count I and the ADA discrimination and failure to accommodate claim in Count IV. Id. at 13-39.

A. Plaintiff's General Objection
Plaintiff generally argues that the Magistrate Judge misapplied the summary judgment standard by relying too heavily on Defendant's alleged facts and failing to view the evidence in a light most favorable to Plaintiff. Pl.'s Objs. at 10-12. Beyond these conclusory assertions, Plaintiff fails to identify any specific fact which the Magistrate Judge erroneously relied upon, [*4]  fails to identify any fact that the Magistrate Judge failed to consider, and fails to identify any fact that was viewed by the Magistrate Judge in a light more favorable to Defendant. Without the identification of the evidence that was allegedly misconstrued or the specific misapplication of a standard, the Court is unable to assess Plaintiff's objection.
The Court has reviewed the R&R and finds that the Magistrate Judge applied the correct standard in deciding Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment. See, e.g., R&R at 24 (noting that it was construing the facts in a light most favorable to Plaintiff and that the existence of a disputed issue of material fact precludes summary judgment). Accordingly, to the extent that Plaintiff is generally objecting to the standard applied by the Magistrate Judge, this objection is OVERRULED. See Schultz, 565 F.3d at 1361.2

B. The Magistrate Judge Did Not Improperly Exclude Evidence.
Plaintiff argues that the Magistrate Judge improperly limited the evidence considered on summary judgment to her Amended Complaint. Pl.'s Objs. at 39-42 (citing R&R at 51 n.6 & 57 n.9). Plaintiff fails to identify any evidence that she contends was excluded, nor does Plaintiff explain how that evidence would have affected [*5]  the ruling on any of her claims. The Court finds that Plaintiff's objection is without merit.
A cursory review of the two sections of the R&R to which Plaintiff cites reveals that the Magistrate Judge did not exclude any evidence, but instead refused to permit Plaintiff to amend her complaint through argument in a summary judgment brief.
It appears from Plaintiff's response brief that she is now alleging that her ADA retaliation claim is based not only on her termination, but on other adverse employment actions. [Doc. 35 at 22-23]. To the extent that Plaintiff seeks to amend her ADA retaliation claim through her response brief, this is not permitted. See Gilmour v. Gates, McDonald & Co., 382 F.3d 1312, 1315 (11th Cir. 2004) ("A plaintiff may not amend her complaint through argument in a brief opposing summary judgment.") (citation omitted). Because Plaintiff's Amended Complaint makes it clear that the only adverse action upon which her ADA retaliation claim is based is her June 2018 termination, this is the only adverse action properly before the Court. [Doc. 14 ¶ 72].
R&R at 51 n.6.
Plaintiff alleges in her response brief that her retaliation claim is also based on a number of other adverse employment actions which are not alleged in her Amended Complaint. [Doc. 35 [*6]  at 22-23]. But as noted supra, Plaintiff is not permitted to amend her claims through a response brief See Gilmour, 382 F.3d at 1315. The only adverse employment actions properly before the court that form the basis of Plaintiff's FMLA retaliation claim are the termination, transfer, and [performance improvement plan].
R&R at 57 n.9.
Plaintiff has cited to no evidence that was excluded by the Magistrate Judge and has presented no argument as to why either of the rulings cited were in error. Upon a de novo review of the record, viewing the evidence in a light most favorable to Plaintiff, the Court finds that the Magistrate Judge did not err in refusing to permit Plaintiff to effectively amend her complaint through argument in the summary judgment brief. See Gilmour, 382 F.3d at 1315. Accordingly, Plaintiff's objection that the Magistrate Judge erred by improperly limiting evidence is OVERRULED.

C. Plaintiff's ADA Claim
Count IV of Plaintiff's Amended Complaint includes a claim that Defendant failed to accommodate Plaintiffs disability and discriminated against her in violation of the ADA. Am. Compl. ¶¶ 58-68. In order to establish a prima facie case of discrimination under the ADA, a plaintiff must show the following three elements: (1) that she has [*7]  a disability within the meaning of the ADA; (2) that she is a "qualified individual," meaning that, with or without reasonable accommodations, she can perform the essential functions of the job she holds; and (3) that she was discriminated against because of her disability. Mazzeo v. Color Resolutions Int'l, LLC, 746 F.3d 1264, 1267-68 (11th Cir. 2014) (citing Holly v. Clairson Indus., L.L.C., 492 F.3d 1247, 1255-56 (11th Cir. 2007)).
The term "discriminate" includes not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who is an employee, unless such covered entity can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business. 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). Thus, an employer's failure to reasonably accommodate a disabled individual itself constitutes discrimination under the ADA, so long as that individual is "otherwise qualified," and unless the employer can show undue hardship.
Holly, 492 F.3d at 1262 (internal punctuation omitted).
The Magistrate Judge found that although Plaintiff met the first element of her prima facie case, Plaintiff failed to present evidence sufficient to establish the second and third elements: that she was qualified individual and that, even if she was so qualified, that Defendant discriminated against her because of her disability. R&R at 31-51. Plaintiff objects [*8]  to the Magistrate Judge's conclusion that Defendant did not violate the law when it terminated her employment instead of accommodating her reasonable request for accommodation, specifically arguing that the Magistrate erred by (1) misapplying the law when there is evidence that the employer impeded the interactive process, and (2) ignoring evidence in reaching the conclusion that she was not a qualified individual under the ADA. Pl.'s Objs. at 12-27.

1. The Magistrate Judge Did Not Misapply the Law Regarding the Alleged Impeding of the Interactive Process.
Plaintiff argues that Defendant "only gave Plaintiff two opportunities, May 25 and June 5, to identify additional accommodations after [denying] her reassignment accommodation request" and instead fired her on June 8 without asking for medical documentation supporting her requests or meeting with her to discuss her requests. Id. at 15-27. Plaintiff argues that these facts demonstrate that Defendant cut off the interactive process regarding accommodating Plaintiff's disability and that it is "well settled that liability arises when the employer obstructs the informal interactive process." Id. at 21-22. Plaintiff's objection is both factually and legally flawed. [*9] 
Federal regulations implementing the ADA envision an interactive process that requires participation by the employer as well as the employee: "Once an individual with a disability has requested provision of a reasonable accommodation, the employer must make a reasonable effort to determine the appropriate accommodation. The appropriate reasonable accommodation is best determined through a flexible, interactive process that involves both the employer and the individual with a disability." 29 C.F.R. Pt. 1630, App. "This process should identify the precise limitations resulting from the disability and potential reasonable accommodations that could overcome those limitations." Id. § 1630.2.
Upon a de novo review of the record, the Court finds that Defendant did not obstruct the informal interactive process related to the accommodations requested by Plaintiff. The Magistrate Judge noted the long history of Defendant considering and granting Plaintiff's ADA work accommodation requests:
Plaintiff was on FMLA leave from May 2017 to August 21, 2017, and she was on paid administrative leave from September 14 to October 14, 2017. [PSMF ¶¶ 23, 34]. Plaintiff went back on FMLA leave on Monday, October 16, 2017, and remained [*10]  on FMLA leave until February 23, 2018. [DSMF ¶¶ 47, 50; PSMF ¶¶ 55, 56; Hunt Dep. at 114; Pla. Dep. at 84-85]. . . . Plaintiff also requested intermittent FMLA leave from February 22, 2018 to February 23, 2019, which was approved on April 11, 2018. [PSMF ¶ 67].
R&R at 10. In addition to the FMLA leave that was requested and granted, Plaintiff asked for an ADA work accommodation in the form of a reduced schedule of four hours per day based on a recommendation by her doctor. Id. at 10-11. Defendant approved Plaintiff's requested ADA accommodation for a four-hour workday when Plaintiff returned from FMLA leave on February 23, 2018. Id.
On March 1, 2018, approximately one week after Plaintiff returned from FMLA-approved leave, Plaintiff complained that two of Defendant's employees questioned her need for FMLA leave and the four-hour workday to accommodate her ADA disability. Id. at 11. Defendant's Assistant Vice President of Human Resources Joey Hunt ("Hunt") met with Plaintiff the next day and she was placed on administrative leave while Defendant investigated her complaint because Plaintiff feared losing her job due to the individuals questioning her need for FMLA leave and an ADA work accommodation. Id. at 12. A month later, [*11]  on April 9, 2018, Hunt informed Plaintiff that he did not find sufficient evidence that a hostile work environment had been created when her colleagues questioned her FMLA leave and ADA work accommodation; nevertheless, Defendant also was informed that she would be relocated from the Powder Springs, Georgia, office to a new office to be opened in Douglasville, Georgia in order to give her a fresh start while maintaining the same office manager position. Id. at 13. Hunt also said that Plaintiff temporarily would be placed on a special project for several months until the new office opened. Id. Hunt then e-mailed Plaintiff on April 10, 2018, setting up an in-person meeting with the individuals Plaintiff would be working with, Amber Thomas Hutson ("Hutson") and Adewale Adebayo ("Adebayo"). Id. at 1415. Adebayo was one of her colleagues who previously questioned her FMLA leave and ADA work accommodations. Id. Plaintiff responded the same day indicating that she could not attend any meeting: "out of concerns of retaliation, I did not feel safe working with Adewale Adebayo and Amber Thomas Hutson. In fact, due to my current health condition, I cannot meet with Mr. Adebayo or Ms. Hutson." Id. at 15 (quoting e-mail from [*12]  Plaintiff to Hunt (Apr. 10, 2018) [Doc. 452 at 30]).
Subsequently, in May of 2018, Defendant contacted Plaintiff to discuss her ADA accommodation request and informed her that her administrative leave would end on May 18, 2018, and that she would need to report to work on the interim special project on May 21, 2018. Id. at 16. Plaintiff responded that she would not be able to report at 9 A.M. and requested an additional ADA accommodation for her to attend therapy on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays from 9 A.M. to 12:30 P.M. Id. Hunt met with Plaintiff on May 21, 2018, to discuss her ADA work accommodation request. Id. at 17. Plaintiff informed Hunt that she could not work with Adebayo and Hutson and made an additional ADA work accommodation request to be transferred to another position where she did not have to report to those individuals. Id. at 17-19.
Hunt wrote Plaintiff a letter on May 25, 2018, in which he denied her request to be transferred to a different manager because it was not a reasonable accommodation request under the ADA to ask Defendant to change the structure of its organization. Id. at 19. Plaintiff responded via e-mail the same day, stating that if she was going to remain under the supervision of Adebayo [*13]  and Hutson, she requested the following accommodations:
• Telecommuting and/or working from home. (On an as needed basis only due to medication side effects)[.]
• Part-time work hours, job sharing, adjustments in the start or end of work hours (as needed due to medication side effects)[.]
• Sick leave for reasons related to mental health, flexible use of vacation time, additional unpaid or administrative leave for treatment or recovery, leaves of absence and/or use of occasional leave (a few hours at a time) for therapy and other related appointments.
• Breaks according to individual needs rather than a fixed schedule, more frequent breaks and/or greater flexibility in scheduling breaks, provision of backup coverage during breaks, and telephone breaks during work hours to call professionals and others needed for support.
• Reduction and/or removal of distractions in the work area.
• Tape recorders for recording/reviewing meetings and training sessions. (due to medication side effects and symptoms of my health condition).
• Modification or removal of non-essential job duties or restructuring of the job to include only the essential job functions.
• Division of large assignments into smaller [*14]  tasks and goals.
• Additional assistance and/or time for orientation activities, training and learning job tasks and new responsibilities. (based on my individual needs).
• Additional training or modified training materials. (based on my individual needs).
• Implementation of flexible and supportive supervision style; POSITIVE reinforcement and feedback; adjustments in level of supervision or structure, such as more frequent meetings to help prioritize my daily tasks; and open communication DIRECTLY with supervisors regarding performance and work expectations.
• Additional forms of communication and/or written and visual tools, including communication of assignments and instructions in my preferred learning style (written, or e-mail demonstration) creation and implementation of written tools such as daily "to-do" lists, step-by-step checklists, written (in addition to typed minutes of meetings).
• Regularly scheduled meetings (weekly) to discuss workplace issues and productivity, including annual discussions as part of performance appraisals to assess abilities and discuss promotional opportunities/performance deficiencies.
• Development of strategies to deal with problems BEFORE they arise. [*15] 
• Written work agreements that include any agreed upon accommodations, long-term and short-term goals, expectations of responsibilities and performance standards.
• ALL meetings must be scheduled with at least a week prior notice. The meeting agenda and attendees must be disclosed at the time the meeting is scheduled.
• Any cancellation, rescheduling or postponing of meetings will need to be done so in writing with explanation at least 24hrs in advance.
• There will be no behavior or violation of the code of conduct of any kind that will exacerbate my mental health condition.
Id. at 20-21 (quoting e-mail from Plaintiff to Hunt (May 25, 2018) [Doc. 45-2 at 41-42]). Plaintiff admits that the requests in her May 25 e-mail were options she cut and pasted directly from the ADA website. R&R at 22. Hunt responded to Plaintiff on June 5:
I received your e-mail in response to my May 25 letter asking you to identify any reasonable accommodation that you believe will allow you to perform in your position in light of the health condition identified by your doctor.
In that e-mail, you list a series of requested changes to the workplace. It is unclear whether you are requesting all the stated modifications or whether you believe [*16]  that any of them individually will allow you to perform the essential functions of your position. It is also unclear how any of the changes you identified will allow you to perform your position in light of the health condition identified by your doctor, and many of your requests are non-specific.
WellStar is committed to working with you in good faith to determine whether a reasonable accommodation exists. Please keep in mind that the purpose of an accommodation is to allow an employee to perform the essential functions of her position that she cannot otherwise perform because of her health condition, and is not an opportunity to request any and all changes to the workplace the employee would like to see happen. For me to evaluate your request for an accommodation(s), I need you to identify what accommodation(s) you are requesting or, if there are multiple requested accommodations, to be specific whether you believe all the accommodations must be implemented. Please also explain how the requested accommodation(s) will allow you to perform in your position considering the health condition identified by your doctor. Finally, please provide specific information about the nature of the [*17]  requested accommodation(s). For example, you request additional training without identifying what training you believe you need or providing any information about how this will allow you to perform in the position considering your health condition.
Without this information, I cannot determine whether an accommodation is available that will allow you to continue working in your position and, thus, can only assume that no such accommodation exists. Please provide this information by Wednesday, June 6, 2018 so we can make a decision about how to move forward.
E-mail from Hunt to Plaintiff (June 5, 2018) [Doc. 45-2 at 44-45]; R&R at 20-21. Plaintiff responded the same day, stressing that she was diagnosed with major depressive disorder with anxious stress and requested the following accommodations, which were largely repetitive of her May 25 request:
• Adjustments in the start or end of work hours (as needed due to health conditions and/or medication side effects)[.]
• Sick leave for reasons related to mental health, flexible use of vacation time, additional unpaid or administrative leave for treatment or recovery, leaves of absence and/or use of occasional leave (a few hours at a time) for therapy and [*18]  other related appointments. PLEASE NOTE: I am already APPROVED for INTERMITTENT FMLA.
• Flexibility in scheduling breaks, and telephone breaks during work hours to call professionals and others needed for mental health support.
• Reduction and/or removal of distractions in the work area.
• Tape recorders for recording/reviewing meetings and training sessions. (due to medication side effects and symptoms of my health condition)[.]
• Modification or removal of non-essential job duties or restructuring of the job to include only the essential job functions. ( due to health condition)[.]
• Division of large assignments into smaller tasks and goals.
• If you are removing me from Powder Springs Medical Center, Additional assistance and/or time for orientation activities, training and learning job tasks and new responsibilities. (based on my individual needs) If I'm remaining at Powder Springs, Additional assistance and or time to get re-acclimated with my work environment. I have been away for quite some time and because of the depressive disorder symptoms[.]
• Additional training or modified training materials that will assist in me learning my new job or getting re-acclimated with my current [*19]  job. (based on my individual needs)[.]
• Due to the symptoms of Anxiety and Depression the Implementation of flexible and supportive supervision style; POSITIVE reinforcement and feedback; adjustments in level of supervision or structure, such as more frequent meetings to help prioritize my daily tasks; and open communication DIRECTLY (not a third party) with supervisors regarding performance and work expectations.
• Due to Anxiety and Depression, Additional forms of communication and/or written and visual tools, including communication of assignments and instructions in my preferred learning style (written, or e-mail demonstration) creation and implementation of written tools such as daily "to-do" lists, step-by-step checklists, written (in addition to typed minutes of meetings).
• Regularly scheduled meetings (weekly) to discuss workplace issues and productivity, including annual discussions as part of performance appraisals to assess abilities and discuss promotional opportunities/performance deficiencies.
• Development of strategies to deal with problems BEFORE they arise.
• Written work agreements that include any agreed upon accommodations, long-term and short-term goals, expectations [*20]  of responsibilities and perfat mance standards.
• Due to my anxiety ALL meetings must be scheduled with at least a week prior notice. The meeting agenda and attendees must be disclosed at the time the meeting is scheduled.
• Due to my Depressive/ Anxiety Disorder, Any cancellation, rescheduling or postponing of meetings will need to be done so in writing with explanation at least 24hrs in advance.
• Due to my Major Depressive/Anxiety Disorder, There will be no behavior or violation of the code of conduct of any kind that will exacerbate my mental health condition.
E-mail from Plaintiff to Hunt (June 5, 2018) [Doc. 45-2 at 46-48]; R&R at 21-22. As with her previous request, Plaintiff admits that the requests in her June 5 e-mail were options she cut and pasted directly from the ADA website. R&R at 22. Hunt responded two days later:
I have reviewed your requested accommodations as set forth in your email of June 5, 2018. The requested accommodations would create an undue burden on WellStar in that they are unduly extensive, substantial, and disruptive. Not only would some of the requested accommodations make it impractical for the department to operate — i.e., scheduling all meetings a week in advance and providing [*21]  an agenda and attendee list for all meetings — many of the requested accommodations are too general to implement in any meaningful way — i.e., development of strategies to deal with problems before they arise. Therefore, I am unable to grant your request. At this point, we have provided you with multiple opportunities to identify a reasonable accommodation that would allow you to perform the essential functions of your position. You have not done so. Accordingly, I can only conclude that no such accommodation exists, and WellStar is terminating your employment effective immediately.
R&R at 23 (quoting Letter from Hunt to Plaintiff (June 8, 2018) [Doc. 45-2 at 50]).
It is clear from a de novo review of the record that there was a long history of Defendant considering and granting many of Plaintiff's ADA work accommodation requests. It is also clear from the record that Defendant specifically considered Plaintiff's May 21, 2018, request for different supervisors, rejected it, but invited Plaintiff to propose an alternative accommodation. Plaintiff responded on May 25 with a voluminous list of generic requests that were cut and pasted from a website and did not appear to be related to her health [*22]  condition or tailored to her job function. Nevertheless, Defendant asked Plaintiff for clarification as to which requests she needed to accommodate her health condition and requested an explanation as to how the requested accommodations would allow her to perform her work considering the health condition. Instead of clarifying her request, Plaintiff sent another, largely repetitive, laundry list of cut-and-pasted requests without any explanation. Based on this record, no reasonable juror could conclude that Defendant cut off the interactive process regarding the reasonable accommodation of Plaintiff's disability.3
Almost all of the cases cited by Plaintiff support Defendant's position given the facts of this case. In Stewart v. Happy Herman's Cheshire Bridge, Inc., the court affirmed the grant of summary judgment to the employer finding that "[t]o the extent that the ADA requires an employer in some limited circumstances to engage in an 'interactive process' with the disabled employee, [the employer] met its burden in that regard." Stewart v. Happy Herman's Cheshire Bridge, Inc., 117 F.3d 1278, 1286-87 (11th Cir. 1997). Similarly, in Beck v. Univ. of Wis. Bd. of Regents, the court affirmed the grant of summary judgment to the employer where the evidence revealed that the [*23]  employer took reasonable efforts to participate in an interactive process to identify accommodations for the employee. Beck v. Univ. of Wis. Bd. of Regents, 75 F.3d 1130, 1137 (7th Cir. 1996) ("[W]here, as here, the employer does not obstruct the process, but instead makes reasonable efforts both to communicate with the employee and provide accommodations based on the information it possessed, ADA liability simply does not follow. Because the [u]niversity was never able to obtain an adequate understanding of what action it should take, it cannot be held liable for failure to make 'reasonable accommodations.'"); see also Brown v. Milwaukee Bd. of Sch. Dirs., 855 F.3d 818, 826 (7th Cir. 2017) (affirming the grant of summary judgment to employer where employee "failed to hold up her end of the interactive process by clarifying the extent of her medical restrictions."); Williamson v. Clarke Cty. Dep't of Human Res., 834 F. Supp. 2d 1310, 1319-21 (S.D. Ala. 2011) (granting summary judgment to the employer, specifically recognizing that the interactive process involves mutual obligations and that "an employer cannot be liable for failure to accommodate if a breakdown in that process is attributable to the employee.").
A de novo review of the entire record reveals that Defendant did not obstruct the informal interactive process, and it follows that the Magistrate Judge did not err by misapplying any law related to the obstruction [*24]  of the interactive process. Plaintiff's objection is OVERRULED.
2. The Magistrate Judge Did Not Err in Concluding that Plaintiff was Not a Qualified Individual.
Plaintiff argues that the Magistrate Judge's conclusion that she was not a qualified individual under the ADA is erroneous because the Magistrate Judge improperly ignored evidence that Defendant admitted could have accommodated ten of the seventeen requests made by Plaintiff and that it may have been able to accommodate seven other requests. Id. at 12, 18-21. Plaintiff's objection is without merit.
The R&R details the fact that Defendant (1) accommodated Plaintiffs February request for a reduced work schedule in February, (2) considered and rejected Plaintiff's request for different supervisors, (3) considered Plaintiff's voluminous request for accommodations on May 25, (4) requested clarification from Plaintiff on her voluminous request, and (5) again considered the largely repetitive voluminous request. R&R at 10-22, 39-41. The Magistrate Judge noted that Hunt's June 5 e-mail to Plaintiff requesting clarification specifically asked Plaintiff if she was requesting all of the accommodations or if any of them individually would allow her to perform her job. Id. at 41. Instead [*25]  of clarifying her position, Plaintiff sent a second, largely repetitive list of proposed accommodations. Id. at 43-44. Based on this evidence, the Magistrate Judge found that Plaintiff failed to show that her requested accommodations were reasonable and therefore failed to establish that she was a qualified individual under the ADA. Id. at 45. The Magistrate Judge found that "the evidence reveals that WellStar made a reasonable effort to determine an appropriate accommodation when Plaintiff submitted her numerous requests." Id. at 45 (citing Bralo v. Spirit Airlines, Inc., No. 13-60948-CIV, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 36042, 2014 WL 1092365, at *16 (S.D. Fla. Mar. 19, 2014) (internal quotation and citation omitted) ("An employer who is aware of its responsibility to provide a reasonable accommodation must make a reasonable effort to deteimine the appropriate accommodation.")). Notably, the Magistrate Judge correctly found that "Hunt provided Plaintiff with numerous opportunities to identify reasonable accommodations to her disability, but Plaintiff refused to identify any accommodations that were reasonable." Id.
Plaintiff's argument that the Magistrate Judge erred by not considering the fact that Defendant could have accommodated some of the requests that Plaintiff made does not change the fact that [*26]  Plaintiff never (and still has not) identified what accommodation(s) she needed to appropriately address her disability and that would permit her to do her job. Because Plaintiff failed to clarify what accommodation(s) she needed to address her disability, she has failed to show that her requested accommodations were reasonable and therefore failed to establish that she was a qualified individual under the ADA. See Stewart, 117 F.3d 1278, 1286-87 (affirming the grant of summary judgment to the employer where "the record is clear that [the employee] failed to engage [the employer] in an interactive process after it offered accommodations, in that she did not provide [the employer] with any substantive reasons as to why all five of the proffered accommodations were unreasonable given her medical needs."); see also Williamson, 834 F. Supp. 2d at 1319-21 (S.D. Ala. 2011) (granting summary judgment to the employer, finding that the "plaintiff did not make an 'adequate request' to put his employer on notice of his need for reasonable accommodation").
Upon a de novo review of the record, the Magistrate Judge did not err by ignoring evidence that Defendant could have accommodated some of the requested accommodations and Plaintiff's objection is OVERRULED. Further, upon a de [*27]  novo review of the record, the Court concurs with the Magistrate Judge's recommendation to grant Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment as to Plaintiff's failure to accommodate and ADA discrimination claim (Count IV).

D. Plaintiff's FMLA Retaliation Claim
The FMLA proscribes the discrimination against an individual based on that individual's attempt to exercise their rights guaranteed by the FMLA. Bartels v. S. Motors of Savannah, Inc., 681 F. App'x 834, 837 (11th Cir. 2017) (citing 29 U.S.C. § 2615(a)(1)). Plaintiff alleges that Defendant unlawfully retaliated against her for exercising her right to take FMLA leave by taking three different adverse employment decisions against her: (1) transferring her to a different position, (2) issuing a performance improvement plan ("PIP"), and (3) ultimately terminating her employment.4 Am. Compl. ¶¶ 37-44.
Because Plaintiff's case is based on circumstantial evidence, the Court applies the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework used by the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit for Title VII retaliation claims. See Batson v. Salvation Army, 897 F.3d 1320, 1328-29 (11th Cir. 2018) (citing McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973)). Under the McDonnell Douglas framework, the plaintiff must establish a prima facie case of FMLA retaliation and if she does so, the burden then shifts to the employer to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory [*28]  reason for the adverse action taken against the plaintiff. Id. at 1329. If the employer does so, the burden shifts back to the plaintiff "to demonstrate that the "employer's proffered reason was pretextual by presenting evidence sufficient to permit a reasonable factfinder to conclude that the reasons given by the employer were not the real reasons for the adverse employment decision." Id. (internal quotation and citation omitted).
In order to demonstrate pretext, the plaintiff "must demonstrate such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, incoherencies, or contradictions in the employer's proffered legitimate reasons for its action that a reasonable factfinder could find them unworthy of credence." McCann v. Tillman, 526 F.3d 1370, 1375 (11th Cir. 2008) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted).
A plaintiff is not allowed to recast an employer's proffered nondiscriminatory reasons or substitute his business judgment for that of the employer. Provided that the proffered reason is one that might motivate a reasonable employer, an employee must meet that reason head on and rebut it, and the employee cannot succeed by simply quarreling with the wisdom of that reason.
Chapman v. AI Transp., 229 F.3d 1012, 1030 (11th Cir. 2000). There is no dispute that the McDonnell Douglas framework is the appropriate [*29]  framework with which to analyze Plaintiffs FMLA retaliation claim.
Applying this standard, the Magistrate Judge found that Plaintiff established a prima facie case of FMLA retaliation. R&R at 55-59. The Magistrate Judge also found that Defendant articulated the following legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for Plaintiffs termination: "Defendant WellStar contends that it terminated Plaintiff's employment because she was unable to perform the essential functions of the and because she could not identify a reasonable accommodation that would allow her to do so." Id. at 65. The Magistrate Judge then concluded that Plaintiff failed to show that Defendant's stated reason was a pretext for discrimination. Id. at 65-70.
Plaintiff argues that Defendant's stated reason was a pretext for discriminating against her lawful exercise of her FMLA rights and that the Magistrate Judge erred by (1) failing to construe the facts and inferences in her favor in finding that she failed to demonstrate that Defendant's proffered reasons for terminating her were a pretext for discrimination and (2) applying the incorrect "but for" standard in analyzing the causation element. Pl.'s Objs. at 29-39.

1. The Magistrate Judge Correctly Found that [*30]  Plaintiff Failed to Present Sufficient Evidence Demonstrating Pretext.

Pretext is only proven if it is shown both that the reason was false, and that discrimination was the real reason behind the challenged action. This evidence must reveal such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, incoherencies or contradictions in the employer's proffered legitimate reasons for its actions that a reasonable factfinder could find them unworthy of credence. . . . In addition, an employer may fire an employee based upon erroneous facts, as long as it is not for a discriminatory reason.
Daugherty v. Mikart, Inc., 205 F. App'x 826, 827 (11th Cir. 2006) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).
Plaintiff argues that Defendant's stated reason for terminating her employment is not worthy of credence because Defendant never informed her of what the essential functions were for the new employment positions they offered her, either the temporary project job or the officer manager position. P1.'s Objs. at 33-35. This is a variation of an argument made to the Magistrate Judge and appropriately rejected. See R&R at 64-65.
At summary judgment, Plaintiff argued that, with regard to Defendant's decision to transfer her, Defendant's "retaliatory animus is demonstrated by the fact that Hunt [*31]  would not tell Ms. Edwards what her essential functions would be on the project." Id. at 64. The Magistrate Judge noted the following undisputed facts: because Plaintiff expressed that she did not feel that her job was safe in her then-current position as an office manager at the Powder Springs location, Plaintiff was informed on April 9, 2018, that she was going to be transferred to a temporary special project on an interim basis and then ultimately transferred to her same office manager position at the Douglasville, Georgia location when that office was established in July or August of 2018. Id. at 65. After informing Plaintiff of the response to her complaint, Defendant suggested that Plaintiff have a meeting to "discuss the transition," but Plaintiff declined, writing: "due to my current health condition I cannot meet with Mr. Adebayo or Ms. Hutson"; moreover, as a result of her refusal to attend the meeting to discuss the temporary project, Plaintiff "remained uninformed about the job functions of the project." Id. at 64-65 (citation omitted). The Magistrate Judge correctly concluded that, under these circumstances, a reasonable juror could not conclude that the fact that Defendant did not inform Plaintiff [*32]  about the essential functions of the special project job indicated that Defendant wanted to transfer her to the temporary project because of a retaliatory animus. R&R at 65. Plaintiff does not substantively dispute the Magistrate Judge's conclusion as it relates Defendant's decision to temporarily assign Plaintiff to the special project, nor do Plaintiffs objections give reason for this Court to question the Magistrate Judge's conclusion. See Pl.'s Objs. at 32 n.5.
Similarly, Plaintiff now argues in her objections that the Defendant's failure to identify for Plaintiff the essential functions of the office manager position at the new location demonstrates Defendant's retaliatory animus when it fired her in June. PL's Objs. at 14. This argument is even less persuasive. There is no dispute that the office manager position at the Douglassville location was the same as the position she already held at the Powder Springs location, or that Plaintiff never questioned what the essential functions of the office manager position would be at the new location. There is no reason that Defendant would have been on notice to remind Plaintiff of the essential functions of a job she already had. As such, upon a de novo review of the [*33]  record, it is clear that no reasonable juror could conclude that the fact that Defendant did not articulate the essential functions of the office manager position at the new location before it terminated Plaintiff's employment is evidence of any retaliatory animus based on her decision to exercise her FMLA rights.
Plaintiff also argues that the following facts, among others, which were not considered by the Magistrate Judge demonstrate that Defendant's retaliatory animus: (1) Defendant did not acknowledge to Plaintiff that it could accommodate some of the ADA disability accommodation requests she made on May 25 and June 5, (2) Plaintiff never intended Defendant to accommodate all of the May 25 and June 5 ADA disability accommodation requests, (3) Defendant never told Plaintiff that her ADA disability accommodation requests were an undue burden, and (4) Defendant never met personally with Plaintiff to discuss her ADA accommodation requests.
None of the evidence that Plaintiff alleges the Magistrate Judge ignored is sufficient to show that the reason Defendant gave for Plaintiff's termination was false. Nor does Plaintiff even attempt to show that this evidence, all of which appears to [*34]  be related to Plaintiff's ADA work accommodation requests, demonstrates that discrimination against Plaintiff for exercising her FMLA rights was the real reason behind Plaintiff's tettnination. Accordingly, Plaintiff's objection is OVERRULED.
2. The the Correct Standard.
Plaintiff objects that the Magistrate Judge erroneously "applied the 'but for' causation standard to analyze the causation element instead of the motivating factor standard. P1.'s Objs. at 29-30. Pretermitting an examination of whether this Court should apply the "but for" or "motivating factor" standard in establishing causation, the third element of Plaintiffs prima facie case of FMLA retaliation, the Court notes that the Magistrate Judge applied the "but for" standard to find in Plaintiffs favor that she offered sufficient evidence to establish a causal connection in support of her FMLA retaliation claim. R&R at 58-59. Because the Magistrate Judge found in Plaintiffs favor on this issue, the question of what standard the Magistrate Judge applied with regard to the third element of the prima facie case is moot. Accordingly, Plaintiffs objection is OVERRULED.

III. CONCLUSION
The Court has reviewed the portions of the R&R that Plaintiff did not [*35]  object to for plain error and finds none. Additionally, after a consideration of Plaintiff s objections and a de novo review of the record, it is hereby ORDERED that Plaintiffs objections [Doc. 59] are OVERRULED.
Accordingly, the Court APPROVES AND ADOPTS the Final Report and Recommendation [Doc. 54] as the opinion and order of the Court. It is hereby ORDERED that Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. 31] is GRANTED.
The Clerk is directed to close this case.
IT IS SO ORDERED this 8 day of September, 2020.
/s/ Mark H. Cohen
MARK H. COHEN
United States District Judge


End of Document

