Evans v. UDR Inc.
United States District Court for the Eastern District of North Carolina, Southern Division
March 24, 2009, Decided
No. 7:07-CV-136-FL

Reporter
644 F. Supp. 2d 675 *; 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 31844 **; 2009 WL 875321
ROBIN M. EVANS and EAST COAST SOLUTIONS, INC., Plaintiffs, v. UDR INC., (f/k/a United Dominion Realty Trust, Inc.), UDR OF NC, LIMITED PARTNERSHIP, REBECCA LYNN, in her official capacity as Property Manager of Forest Hills Apartment Homes, and RACHELLE JACOBS, in her official capacity as District Manager, UDR, Inc. and UDR of NC, Limited Partnership, Defendants.
Prior History: Evans v. UDR, Inc., 644 F. Supp. 2d 675, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 117868 (E.D.N.C., 2009)
Counsel:  [**1] For Robin M. Evans, East Coast Solutions, Inc., Plaintiffs: Jack Holtzman, LEAD ATTORNEY, N. C. Justice Center, Raleigh, NC; Susan H. Pollitt, LEAD ATTORNEY, Disability Rights of North Carolina, Raleigh, NC.
For UDR, Inc., f/k/a United Dominion Realty Trust, Inc., UDR of NC, Limited Partnership, Property Manager Rebecca Lynn, in her official capacity as Property Manager of Forest Hills Apartment Homes, Rachelle Jacobs, in her official capacity as District Manager, UDR, Inc. and UDR of NC, Limited Partnership, Defendants: A. Bartlett White, LEAD ATTORNEY, Hatch Little & Bunn, LLP, Raleigh, NC; Theresa L. Kitay, LEAD ATTORNEY, Marina del Rey, CA.
Judges: LOUISE W. FLANAGAN, Chief United States District Judge.
Opinion by: LOUISE W. FLANAGAN
Opinion


 [*676] ORDER
(References to Sealed Material Redacted)
This matter is before the court on defendants' motion for summary judgment, (DE # 30), the memorandum and recommendation ("M&R") of United States Magistrate Judge James E. Gates, (DE # 43), plaintiffs' timely objections to the M&R, and defendant's response. (DE ## 47, 52.) In this posture, the issues presented are ripe for decision.

Statement of the Case
Plaintiffs initiated this action by complaint filed August 9, 2007, (DE # 1),  [**2] seeking declaratory, injunctive and monetary relief based on defendants' denial of plaintiff Robin Evans's ("Evans") application for an apartment and subsequent failure to consider a requested "reasonable accommodation" of Evans's alleged disability, in violation of the Fair Housing Act ("FHA"), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 3601, et seq. Defendants timely answered denying any violation of the FHA. (DE # 19.) After discovery, plaintiffs stipulated to dismissal of their claims to injunctive relief in this action as to all defendants. (DE # 26.) Defendants then filed the instant motion for summary judgment, asserting that their decision to deny Evans's application for an apartment was based solely on her criminal record, not on her alleged disabilities. 1 After the parties completed briefing on the instant summary judgment motion, the United States Magistrate Judge recommended granting defendants' motion for summary judgment. Plaintiffs' timely objected  [*677]  to the M&R, and defendants have now responded. In this posture, the issues raised in their motion for summary judgment are ripe for decision.

Statement of the Undisputed Facts
The salient facts in this case are not in dispute for purposes of the instant motion. Plaintiff East Coast Solutions, Inc. ("ECS") is a North Carolina non-profit corporation with its principal place of business in Wilmington, North Carolina. (Compl. P 8.) ECS provides substance abuse treatment, housing and supportive services to alcoholics and drug addicts. (Id.) To this end, ECS operates the SEARISE Program, a highly structured, year-long intensive substance abuse program for women with young children. (Id. at P 9, 18.) The SEARISE Program is the only substance abuse program in the New Hanover County, North Carolina, area that accepts and provides housing and rehabilitation services to women with one or more children. (Id. at P 9.) As part of the SEARISE Program, ECS has rented a group of apartments in the Forest Hills Apartment Homes complex ("Forest Hills"). (Id. at P 19.) Residence in one of these apartments is a necessary component of the SEARISE Program. (Id.)
Evans is a young mother with diagnosed mental disabilities who  [**5] is recovering from substance abuse and addiction (collectively her "disabilities"). 2 (Id. at P 7.) [TEXT REDACTED BY THE COURT] Evans's youngest son was taken from her by the local Department of Social Services in 2007, and one of the prerequisites for Evans to be granted custody of him is her participation in the SEARISE Program. (Compl. P 16.) Evans is an approved applicant to the SEARISE Program who is not a current user of alcohol or illegal drugs. (Id. at P 14.) However, to participate in the Program, Evans needed to qualify as an occupant of one of the Forest Hills apartment units by completing defendants' application form and satisfying defendants' qualification requirements. (Id. at P 23; Pls. Mem. in Opp'n 2, DE # 34.)
Defendant UDR, Inc. is a private corporation organized under Maryland law. (Compl. P 10.) Defendant UDR of North Carolina is a North Carolina limited partnership. (Id. at P 11.) At all times relevant to the instant motion, UDR and UDR of North Carolina (collectively "UDR") jointly owned, operated, and/or managed the Forest Hills apartment complex. (Roger J. Ivey Aff. P 3, DE # 30-13.) Defendant Rebecca Lynn ("Lynn") was employed by UDR as the Property Manager (also known as "Community Director") of Forest Hills at the times relevant to the instant motion. (Compl. P 12; Rebecca Lynn Aff. P 2, DE # 30-14.) 3 Defendant Rachelle Jacobs ("Jacobs") was, at all times relevant to the instant motion, employed by UDR as the District Manager in Wilmington, North Carolina. (Compl. P 13.)
Evans was accepted into the SEARISE Program on or about April 16, 2007, at which time she filled out the rental application form for Forest Hills. (Compl. P 29;  [**7] Evans's Rental Application, Defs.' Ex. 2, DE # 30-4.) Evans truthfully completed the section of the rental application form  [*678]  that asked about her criminal history. (Evans's Rental Application, Defs.' Ex. 2.) Evans's criminal history consists, in relevant part, 4 of a 2002 arrest and conviction by way of a guilty plea for misdemeanor simple assault. 5 (Compl. P 30; Report on Evans's Crim. Hist. at 3). Pursuant to defendants' application policy, 6 Evans's application was submitted to a criminal history screening conducted by a third party vendor. (UDR Statement of Rental Policy; Ivey Aff. P 5.) Because of Evans's 2002 arrest and conviction, the third party vendor reported a recommendation of "deny" for Evans's application. (Lynn Aff. P 4.)
By letter dated May 25, 2007, Jane Albers, Executive Director of ECS, contacted Lynn explaining that Evans's conviction was a result of her disabilities and requesting UDR provide Evans a reasonable accommodation "by being flexible in its application of its 'no criminal conviction' policy and allowing Ms. Evans to reside in one of the apartments" rented by ECS. (ECS Letter, DE # 30-7.) On July 17, 2007, defendants denied plaintiffs' request for a reasonable accommodation. (Compl. P 34-35.) On behalf of plaintiffs, the North Carolina Justice Center ("NC Justice Center") sent defendants a letter dated July 20, 2007, seeking an explanation for defendants' refusal of a reasonable accommodation and renewing plaintiffs' request for such accommodation. (NC Justice Center Letter, DE # 30-8.) Defendants responded by letter dated August 6, 2007, asserting that plaintiffs' request did not constitute an "accommodation" as the term  [**10] is used in the FHA because it was Evans's conviction, not her disability, which led to defendants' refusal of her application. 7 (Kitay Letter, DE # 30-10.)
 [*679]  On August 9, 2007, plaintiffs commenced the instant action. With benefit of briefing from all parties and the M&R from the magistrate judge, the issues raised by the instant motion for summary judgment are ripe for decision.

Discussion
Summary judgment is appropriate, under Rule 56(c), "if the pleadings, the discovery and disclosure materials on file, and any affidavits show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the movant is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." FED. R. CIV. P. 56(c). A fact is material if it might affect  [**11] the outcome of the case. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). In deciding a motion for summary judgment, the court construes evidence in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party and draws all reasonable inferences in the nonmovant's favor. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 255.
A party seeking summary judgment "bears the initial responsibility of informing the district court of the basis for its motion, and identifying those portions of the [record] which it believes demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). Once the moving party has met its burden, the non-moving party must then "set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. Ltd. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586-87, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986) (quoting FED. R. CIV. P. 56(e)).
In addressing a party's objection to an M&R, the district court "shall make a de novo determination of those portions of the report or specified proposed findings or recommendations to which objection is made." 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(C). Upon careful review of the record, "the court may accept, reject, or modify, in whole or in part,  [**12] the findings or recommendations made by the magistrate judge." Id.; see Camby v. Davis, 718 F.2d 198, 200 (4th Cir. 1983).
The FHA was "enacted . . . to provide for 'fair housing throughout the United States,'" Bryant Woods Inn v. Howard County, 124 F.3d 597, 602 (4th Cir. 1997). To accomplish this, the FHA "makes it unlawful, inter alia, to discriminate in the sale or rental of housing or otherwise to make housing unavailable to a buyer or renter because of that buyer's or renter's handicap or the handicap of certain persons associated with the buyer or renter." Id. at 602-03 (citing 42 U.S.C. § 3604(f)). Discrimination for FHA purposes includes "a refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling." 42 U.S.C. § 3604(f)(3)(B). 8 A "handicap" is defined in the FHA as
 [*680]  (1) a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities, (2) a record of having such an impairment, or (3) being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to  [**13] a controlled substance (as defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802)).
42 U.S.C. § 3602(h). 9 For purposes of the instant motion, it is undisputed that Evans suffered from mental disabilities that qualify as handicaps under the FHA. 10 (See Defs.' Mem. 8 n. 3, DE # 30.)
In interpreting the FHA, the Supreme Court has held that the FHA has a "'broad and inclusive' compass" and receives a correspondingly "generous construction." City of Edmonds v. Oxford House, Inc., 514 U.S. 725, 731, 115 S. Ct. 1776, 131 L. Ed. 2d 801 (1995) (citing Comm'r v. Clark, 489 U.S. 726, 739, 109 S. Ct. 1455, 103 L. Ed. 2d 753 (1989)). As such, exceptions to the FHA's protections are generally "read narrowly in order to preserve the primary operation of the [statute's  [**15] policy]." Id. at 731-32. However, the FHA does not grant disabled individuals a "blanket waiver" from all facially neutral policies and rules. Bryant Woods Inn, 124 F.3d at 603. Instead, the FHA requires those subject to its requirements to provide "reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling." 42 U.S.C. § 3604.
The Fourth Circuit has developed a three-pronged test for determining whether a reasonable accommodation is required under the FHA. Accommodations are required under the FHA if they are "(1) reasonable and (2) necessary (3) to afford handicapped persons equal opportunity to use and enjoy housing." Bryant Woods Inn, 124 F.3d at 603. Ultimately, the plaintiff bears the burden of proving all three elements by a preponderance of the evidence. Id. (citing Elderhaven, Inc. v. City of Lubbock, 98 F.3d 175, 178 (5th Cir. 1996)). The controversy now before the court on the instant motion involves the determination of whether an accommodation is "necessary" in this case. The magistrate judge found that under Fourth Circuit precedent an accommodation is  [**16] "necessary" only if there is a causal connection between the proposed accommodation and the equal opportunity to be afforded the person with a disability. (M&R 8 (citing Bryant Woods Inn, 124 F.3d at 604).) In other words, there must be a showing that the "desired accommodation will affirmatively enhance a disabled plaintiff's quality of life by ameliorating the effects of the disability." Bronk v. Ineichen, 54 F.3d 425, 429 (7th Cir. 1995).
In briefing for both the instant motion and objection to the M&R, plaintiffs vigorously assert that the requisite causal connection between the proposed accommodation and the opportunity to be afforded her is present. Plaintiffs argue that, for purposes of this motion, it is undisputed that Evans's 2002 arrest and conviction  [*681]  were directly related to her mental disabilities and her substance abuse problems. Further, they argue it is clear that without the proposed accommodation Evans will not have an equal opportunity to use and enjoy the housing she seeks and needs for her treatment. Therefore, plaintiffs contend that they satisfy both the second and third prongs of the Bryant Woods Inn test, and because the question of whether an accommodation  [**17] is reasonable or not is a fact-intensive question not usually suitable for disposition by summary judgment, this court should reject the M&R and deny defendants' motion.
Though plaintiffs present some compelling arguments, after a thorough review of the statute, relevant case law, briefings, and submissions, this court finds that it cannot agree with plaintiffs. As an initial matter, as the magistrate judge correctly noted, the FHA does not prohibit landlords from denying a disabled person's rental application based on his criminal record. (M&R 10-11 (citing Talley v. Lane, 13 F.3d 1031 (7th Cir. 1994)).) Plaintiffs also correctly counter that the facts of Talley are easily distinguished from the instant case. In Talley, the plaintiff, Talley, was disabled as a result of his statutory blindness caused by bilateral cataracts. Talley, 13 F.3d at 1032. After being approved for Supplemental Security Income ("SSI"), the plaintiff was convicted and imprisoned for cocaine possession and the unlawful use of a weapon. Id. Upon his release from prison, Talley was again approved for SSI with a primary diagnosis of alcohol addiction and a secondary diagnosis of drug addiction. Id. Thereafter, he  [**18] applied for disability housing and was rejected on the basis of his lengthy criminal history that dated back 20 years. Id. In arguing that this denial violated the FHA, Talley never alleged that his denial was based on discrimination related to his handicap. Id. at 1034. The Seventh Circuit found that it was within the landlord's discretion to find that individuals with criminal histories involving "property and assaultive crimes would be a direct threat to other tenants and to deny their applications." Id. Talley's criminal history prevented him from being an otherwise qualified individual. Id. As such, the protections against discrimination embodied in the FHA did not apply to him where he was denied occupancy because of his criminal history. Id.
Talley's situation was, in virtually every respect, nothing like Evans's. Where Talley had an extensive criminal history completely unrelated to his disabilities, Evans has a single criminal conviction on her record for which her rental application was denied and the evidence before this court indicates that her conviction was related to her mental disabilities and substance abuse. Moreover, Evans has specifically alleged that she was discriminated  [**19] against because of her disability. Nevertheless, the basic proposition of Talley, that landlords may reject disabled individuals on the basis of their criminal convictions, emerges from these distinctions intact. And that proposition ultimately holds important implications for this case.
Plaintiffs contend that the magistrate erred in a number of ways in his analysis. In particular, they argue that the magistrate judge erred in relying on case law that held that landlords did not have to make any accommodation for disabled individuals who could not satisfy income requirements because of their disabilities. In so doing, they argue that the magistrate judge relied on legal reasoning that was explicitly rejected by the Supreme Court in US Airways, Inc. v. Barnett. 535 U.S. 391, 122 S. Ct. 1516, 152 L. Ed. 2d 589 (2002). In relying on this line of cases the magistrate judge quoted Salute v. Stratford Greens, 136 F.3d 293 (2d Cir.  [*682]  1998), 11 for the proposition that disabled individuals who cannot satisfy income requirements should not receive an accommodation to a landlord's policy of denying Section 8 applicants because they are treated equally as compared to other low-income individuals. (M&R at 14.) The Second Circuit in  [**20] that case found that
what stands between these plaintiffs and the apartments at Stratford Greens is a shortage of money, and nothing else. In this respect, impecunious people with disabilities stand on the same footing as everyone else. Thus, the accommodation sought by plaintiffs is not "necessary" to afford handicapped persons "equal opportunity" to use and enjoy a dwelling.
Salute, 136 F.3d at 302. In other words, the Second Circuit rejected the notion that the FHA's provisions may require that a disabled individual sometimes receive preferential treatment vis-a-vis an otherwise similarly situated individual.
Plaintiffs correctly contend that in Barnett  [**21] the Supreme Court disavowed this type of reasoning in the ADA context. See Barnett, 535 U.S. at 397. There, the Court noted that arguments like that advanced by the Second Circuit in Salute ignore "that preferences will sometimes prove necessary to achieve the Act's basic equal opportunity goal." Id. As such, "reasonable accommodations" are sometimes necessary to permit those with disabilities to receive the same opportunities that those without disabilities "automatically enjoy." Id. "By definition any special 'accommodation' requires the employer to treat an employee with a disability differently, i.e., preferentially. And the fact that the difference in treatment violates an employer's disability-neutral rule cannot by itself place the accommodation beyond the Act's potential reach." Id. As a result, the Court found that the ADA may, in certain circumstances, require exemptions from facially neutral rules and policies, like defendants' policy regarding criminal history, to reasonably accommodate individuals with disabilities. Id. at 398. 12
Plaintiffs contend that the holding in Barnett together with similarly situated cases from the Ninth Circuit and other district courts dictate their desired outcome on this motion. Citing Giebeler v. M&B Associates, 343 F.3d 1143 (9th Cir. 2003), plaintiffs contend that the rationale of Barnett, applied to the FHA requires this court to find that plaintiffs' proposed accommodation was "necessary." Giebeler involved a plaintiff who, like Evans, was denied occupancy in an apartment complex on the basis of a facially neutral policy against cosigners. Id. at 1144. The plaintiff there, Giebeler, was disabled by AIDS and, consequently, did not meet the income requirements of an apartment complex in which he sought to live. Id. at 1145-46. As is the case here, Giebeler had a third party who was willing to cosign on the  [*683]  lease while allowing Giebeler to live there. 13 Id. at 1145. Despite the availability of a ready cosigner, the defendant landlord obdurately refused  [**23] to consider permitting Giebeler an accommodation. Id. at 1145-46.
Based on those facts, the Ninth Circuit phrased the question before it as whether the FHA "required the apartment owners reasonably to accommodate Giebeler's disability by assessing individually the risk of nonpayment created by his specific proposed financial arrangement, rather than inflexibly applying a rental policy that forbids cosigners." Id. at 1144. In addressing this question, the Ninth Circuit found that Barnett provided the most thorough treatment of the reasonable accommodation concept that guided its consideration of the case. The court there found that Barnett stood for two propositions:
First, Barnett holds that an accommodation may indeed result in a preference for disabled individuals over otherwise similarly  [**24] situated nondisabled individuals. And second, Barnett indicates that accommodations may adjust for the practical impact of a disability, not only for the immediate manifestations of the physical or mental impairment giving rise to the disability.
Giebeler, 343 F.3d at 1150 (emphasis added). In rejecting the Salute line of cases, the Ninth Circuit found that Giebeler's disability was the direct cause of his inability to satisfy the defendant landlord's income requirements, and, consequently, defendant landlord was required by the FHA to provide Giebeler with an accommodation to its no-cosigner policy, provided that accommodation was reasonable and necessary to afford him the equal opportunity to enjoy a dwelling. Id. at 1155.
Plaintiffs contend that the Ninth Circuit's application of Barnett in Giebeler dictates a similar result in this case. 14 Indeed, the facts of this case are in many ways similar to the facts of Giebeler, with one crucial distinction: in Giebeler, the policy was one that rejected applicants relying on cosigners; here defendants' policy rejects applicants on the basis of their criminal histories. This court finds this distinction persuasively militates against a finding  [**25] like the one in Giebeler.
Policies against cosigners, such as the one in Giebeler, appear geared primarily at concerns that an individual who could not satisfy the income requirements would potentially default on the lease by failing to make payments, exposing the landlord to monetary losses. A very different rationale underlies defendants' policy against renting to individuals with criminal histories. That policy is based primarily on the concern that individuals with criminal histories are more likely than others to commit crimes on the property than those without such backgrounds. (See Ivey Aff. P 8.) The policy against renting to individuals with criminal histories is thus based concerns for the safety of other residents of the apartment complex and their property.
Most importantly, though, this court concurs with the magistrate judge that accommodating Evans's criminal  [**26] history  [*684]  is not equivalent to accommodating her mental disabilities. Further, to the extent that Evans's criminal history at issue was caused by her mental disabilities and substance abuse problems, this court finds that her criminal history is not the sort of "practical impact" of a disability that the Supreme Court contemplated in Barnett. The focus of the FHA's prohibitions on discrimination against individuals with disabilities was the elimination of stereotypes based on physical and mental disabilities. 15 H.R. Rep. No. 100-711, at 18 (1988), reprinted in 1988 U.S.C.C.A.N. 2173, 2179. Thus, the FHA
is a clear pronouncement of a national commitment to end the unnecessary exclusion of persons with handicaps from the American mainstream. It repudiates the use of stereotypes and ignorance, and mandates that persons with handicaps be considered as individuals. Generalized perceptions about disabilities and unfounded speculations about threats to safety are specifically rejected as grounds to justify exclusion.
Id. (emphasis added). Specifically, Congress cited the following examples of the forms of discrimination with which it was concerned:
people who use wheelchairs have been denied  [**27] the right to build simple ramps to provide access, or have been perceived as posing some threat to property maintenance. People with visual and hearing impairments have been perceived as dangers because of erroneous beliefs about their abilities. People with mental retardation have been excluded because of stereotypes about their capacity to live safely and independently. People with Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) and people who test positive for the AIDS virus have been evicted because of an erroneous belief that they pose a health risk to others.
Id. (footnotes omitted). The types of stereotypes Congress was concerned with, however, do not include concerns related to the criminal actions of people with mental disabilities where such disabilities are an underlying cause of a crime.
The fact of a criminal conviction in someone's background, even one resulting from a mental disability, is too dissimilar from the types of invidious discrimination Congress prohibited through these Acts to form the basis of the relief sought by plaintiffs. 16 Many people who suffer from mental disabilities are subjected to irrational discrimination of the type that Congress  [*685]  sought to reduce through the FHA and ADA. However, not all of these people engage in criminal behavior because of their mental disability. For those that do engage in such criminal behavior, there is no indication from Congress that it sought to prohibit landlords from legitimately considering these convictions when making determinations regarding occupancy. To the contrary, Congress was concerned with "[g]eneralized perceptions about disabilities," not about perceptions about the criminal histories of those with disabilities.
This guidance from Congress places the requirement that an accommodation ameliorate the effects of an individual's disability into proper perspective. The effects of a disability with which Congress was concerned are those effects that a proposed accommodation must ameliorate in order for there to be a causal connection between the proposed accommodation and the equal opportunity to be afforded the person with the disability. Thus, if an individual is discriminated against by an apartment complex because it refuses to install a wheelchair ramp, the causal connection exists. However, criminal conduct caused by a mental disability is not an effect of a disability with  [**31] which Congress was concerned in the FHA. As a result, where an individual suffers from a mental disability that is related to conduct that results in a criminal conviction, the causal connection between the mental disability and the criminal conviction is insufficient for purposes of the FHA to require a landlord to attempt an accommodation from a criminal history rental policy based on that person's disability. Lacking this causal connection, plaintiffs cannot satisfy the "necessary" prong of the Bryant Woods Inn test. Therefore, plaintiffs' arguments fail as a matter of law, and their objections to the M&R are OVERRULED.

Conclusion
For all of the foregoing reasons, plaintiffs' objections to the findings of the magistrate judge in the M&R are OVERRULED. Defendants' motion for summary judgment is accordingly GRANTED. The clerk of court is directed to close the case.
SO ORDERED, this the 24th day of March, 2009.
/s/ Louise W. Flanagan
LOUISE W. FLANAGAN
Chief United States District Judge


End of Document