Ezzell v. City of Plant City
United States District Court for the Middle District of Florida, Tampa Division
October 17, 2017, Decided; October 17, 2017, Filed
Case No. 8:16-cv-1009-T-AEP

Reporter
2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 238732 *; 2017 WL 11741412
JOHN A. EZZELL, Plaintiff, v. CITY OF PLANT CITY, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Cary R. Singletary, Mediator: Cary R. Singletary, LEAD ATTORNEY, Cary R. Singletary PA, Tampa, FL.
For City of Plant City, Defendant: Tristan John Reiniers, Greenberg Traurig P.A., Tampa, FL.
For John A. Ezzell, Plaintiff: Steven Greg Wenzel, Wenzel Fenton Cabassa PA, Tampa, FL.
For City of Plant City, Defendant: Thomas M. Gonzalez, LEAD ATTORNEY, Thompson Sizemore Gonzalez & Hearing PA, Tampa, FL.
For John A. Ezzell, Plaintiff: Matthew K. Fenton, Ashley Marie Powell, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Wenzel Fenton Cabassa PA, Tampa, FL.
Judges: ANTHONY E. PORCELLI, United States Magistrate Judge.
Opinion by: ANTHONY E. PORCELLI
Opinion



ORDER
Plaintiff John Ezzell ("Ezzell") brought this action asserting claims against Defendant City of Plant City (the "City") for violations of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 ("ADA"), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq. (Doc. 1). Ezzell subsequently filed his Amended Complaint (Doc. 5) and Second Amended Complaint (Doc. 27), asserting claims against the City for disability discrimination (Count I), denial of reasonable accommodation (Count II), and ADA retaliation (Count III). Currently before the Court is the City's Motion for Summary Judgment (Doc. 33), in which the City argues that Ezzell was not a qualified individual with a disability, Ezzell did not [*2]  request a reasonable accommodation, and the City did not discriminate or retaliate against Ezzell by not rehiring him. Ezzell responded in opposition (Doc. 38). The Court subsequently requested supplemental briefing on a number of issues and then conducted a hearing, wherein each party presented oral argument. For the reasons that follow, the City's Motion for Summary Judgment (Doc. 33) is granted in part and denied in part.

I. Background
Ezzell worked for the City from November 17, 2008, through November 5, 2012, as a Maintenance Mechanic III (Doc. 38-9, Affidavit of John Ezzell ("Ezzell Aff."), at ¶3). According to Ezzell, the position involved maintaining the equipment, fixing any emergencies, conducting weekly inspections of the equipment, and performing any other tasks that were requested as well as required duties related to both mechanical and electrical issues (Doc. 34, Deposition of John A. Ezzell ("Ezzell Dep."), at 51-53). Ezzell had prior experience in maintenance positions and stated that he could perform most of his maintenance jobs, including the Maintenance Mechanic III position, without reaching overhead, squatting, stooping, or crawling but would need to perform a little [*3]  lifting, bending, twisting, and climbing (Ezzell Dep., at 58-59). Ezzell also noted that the Maintenance Mechanic III position involved lifting an average of ten pounds, with anything heavier requiring the use of mechanical assistance and a helper (Ezzell Dep., at 59).
In its Job Description for the Maintenance Mechanic III position, the City provides a general description of the position, as follows:
Crew leader responsible for maintenance and repair of lift stations, wells, reuse, and the waste water treatment plant. This position requires extensive knowledge of electrical and mechanical trouble shooting and repairs. The knowledge and ability to work safely around high voltage up to 480v. The experience and ability to maintain and repair pumps, motors, electrical controls, starters, breakers, relays and all appendages associated with the collection and distribution system. Ability to follow electrical diagrams and trouble shoot electrical and mechanical failures.
(Ezzell Dep., Ex. 8). According to the City, the essential job functions of a Maintenance Mechanic III include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Supervisor/crew leader over Mechanical Electrical Facility[.]
2. Pulling, [*4]  repairing and trouble shooting of motors, starters, relays, regulators, pumps, soft starts, P.L.O. and many other items related to utilities[.]
3. The ability to work in a responsible manner when dealing with coworkers.
4. Must be in good physical condition working outside in the elements performing extensive electrical and mechanical repairs.
5. Must have a good safety record. Ability to work in or around moving machinery and high voltage safely.
6. Additional training is required after employment[.] Training in M.S.D.S., hand tool safety, driving safety, fire extinguisher use, confined space entry, equipment safety, heat stress, power tool, under ground and many other related fields.
8. Must be dedicated to providing support to other employees in a team atmosphere. Must be willing to work in different areas of the department or City as required.1
9. Must qualify for after hour call duty and be prepared to respond if needed to handle utility related issues.
10. All employees will be cross-trained in water, waste water, and/or reclaimed water for equivalent positions. The employee may be directed to change positions at any time of employment without notice on a permanent or temporary basis. [*5] 
(Ezzell Dep., Ex. 8). Under knowledge, skills, and abilities, the Job Description indicates that an individual must be able to work in confined spaces, underground, and at heights of over 150 feet, and the essential physical skills include heavy lifting of 50 pounds; good vision, with or without correction; good hearing, with or without correction; and reaching, climbing, pushing, walking, standing, kneeling, bending, stooping, driving, and operating equipment (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 8).
While still employed by the City in the Maintenance Mechanic III position, Ezzell injured his back on June 29, 2012, as he worked in his yard (Ezzell Dep., at 13, 35; Ezzell Aff., at ¶4). Prior to that time, Ezzell had not injured his back or lost work because of anything associated with his back (Ezzell Dep., at 33). Ezzell possibly called in sick on Monday, July 2, 2012, but he felt better the following day and, despite pain he experienced as a result of his injury, Ezzell went to work on July 3, 2012 (Ezzell Dep., at 30, 41-42). While at work, Ezzell told his foreman, Paul Cockrell ("Cockrell"), that he needed to go home because he was hurting (Ezzell Dep., at 37). Prior to that conversation, Ezzell did [*6]  not tell anyone at work about the injury he suffered while working in his yard and did not fill out a Notice of Injury form while at work or suggest to anyone that he was injured at work (Ezzell Dep., at 37-38). Ezzell left work that day due to the pain in his back and subsequently went home and to the doctor's office (Ezzell Dep., at 30). On July 3, 2012, Plaintiff received a "Release to Work/School" from Dr. Sheyla N. Hopkins, which stated that Ezzell was unable to work on his current medications and should thus be excused from work for the period from July 3, 2012, through July 6, 2012 (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 3). Following that, Michael Majette, Ezzell's chiropractor, provided Plaintiff with an "Authorization for Absence" on July 9, 2012, which certified that Ezzell was under his care, and, in order to avoid aggravation of Ezzell's condition, Majette recommended that Ezzell be excused from all work activity for the period from July 9, 2012, through July 16, 2012 (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 2). According to Majette, Ezzell would remain under his care during that time and should be able to return to work on July 16, 2012, although Ezzell did not return to work on July 16, 2012, because he still experienced [*7]  pain and could not walk or move very well (Ezzell Dep., at 33 & Ex. 2).
Around the same time, on July 12, 2012, Advanced Spinal Care Chiropractic & Rehab of Lakeland sent a fax to the City regarding Family and Medical Leave Act ("FMLA") documentation for Ezzell and included a copy of a FMLA Certification of Health Care Provider from Majette (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 4). In the certification, Majette concluded that Ezzell's herniated and bulging discs qualified as a serious health condition, and he based such conclusion upon his findings on examination of Ezzell and Ezzell's MRI results (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 4). According to Majette, Ezzell's condition commenced on June 29, 2012; was a chronic condition; currently incapacitated Ezzell and had done so for the prior two to four weeks; and would incapacitate Ezzell for at least two to three weeks, at a minimum, due to future flare ups (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 4). Indeed, Ezzell stated that he was unable to work up until that time because of the pain (Ezzell Dep., at 35). Majette further opined that Ezzell would miss work intermittently or would need to work on a less than full schedule for a period of two to six weeks (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 4). Majette stated [*8]  that Ezzell would require additional treatment two to three times per week for one to two hours per office visit or treatment, but Majette could not estimate Ezzell's future treatment schedule (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 4). Although Ezzell would continue chiropractic care and manual therapy with Majette to treat severe low back pain and other symptoms, Ezzell received a referral to a neurologist and would treat with urgent care for pain and anti-inflammation injections (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 4). Finally, Majette noted that Ezzell could not perform work of any kind at that time (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 4).
Notably, Ezzell previously applied for and was granted FMLA leave in July 2010 (Ezzell Dep., at 34). Ezzell's 2010 FMLA leave related to health issues his wife experienced at that time (Ezzell Dep., at 34). Ezzell's 2012 FMLA leave request constituted the first time Ezzell applied for FMLA leave relating to his back (Ezzell Dep., at 34). The City granted Ezzell's 2012 request for FMLA leave (see Ezzell Dep., at 34).
Ezzell subsequently sought treatment from Dr. James Billys at the Florida Orthopaedic Institute ("FOI"), on August 23, 2012, upon referral from Majette. Ezzell stated that, as of that date, [*9]  his back condition affected his ability to work such that he could not work due to the pain (Ezzell Dep., at 40-42 & Ex. 5). He also stated that he could not bend or lift without pain (Ezzell Dep., at 40). As a result, up until that point, from July 3, 2012, through August 23, 2012, Ezzell had not gone to work and was out on FMLA leave (Ezzell Dep., at 42). During that time period, Ezzell brought in his doctor's note, let the City know that he would be out of the office and under doctor's care, and called in every morning he was scheduled to work during the week to request the day off, per company policy, but did not submit a request for any accommodation that would allow him to work until after he underwent surgery (Ezzell Dep., at 43). Ezzell also did not have an idea of when he would return to work (Ezzell Dep., at 43).
During the August 23, 2012 appointment, Dr. Billys examined Ezzell and noted that Ezzell complained of occasional lower back pain over the years but with the acute onset of pain beginning in the left buttock radiating down the left leg as of June 2012 (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 5). Dr. Billys also noted the Ezzell complained of numbness in his legs and worsening pain with [*10]  activity that improved with sitting and, further, that Ezzell previously received chiropractic care, physical therapy, and various medications, without significant relief (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 5). Upon examination of Ezzell and review of his X-rays and MRI, Dr. Billys noted that Ezzell's symptoms were consistent with an acute L5-S1 disc herniation and therefore prescribed Ezzell medication and discussed treatment options with Ezzell, including observation, epidural steroid injection, or minimally invasive partial hemilaminectomy and discectomy (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 5). Dr. Billys noted that Ezzell asked to contemplate his choices to determine which course of action he wanted to take (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 5).
Ezzell returned to FOI on September 11, 2012, for a pre-operative appointment for a tentatively scheduled minimally invasive L5-S1 hemilaminectomy and discectomy with use of epidural narcotics by Dr. Billys (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 6). Notes from ARNP Melissa Erb indicate that Ezzell treated conservatively with time, chiropractic care, and medications, including anti-inflammatories, muscle relaxants, and narcotics, but decided to proceed with surgical options after failing to find relief from conservative [*11]  modalities (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 6). The notes also indicate that Ezzell was currently unable to work as of September 11, 2012 (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 6). According to Ezzell, he could not work at that time due to the pain, but his expectation was that the scheduled surgery would take care of the pain and he would then return to work (Ezzell Dep., at 45-46). Prior to that time, Ezzell spoke with someone at the City regarding his scheduled surgery, either Cockrell or Wayne Everhart ("Everhart"), the City's Utilities Maintenance Superintendent, but he did not ask for more leave, was not required by the City to ask for more leave, and was not told by the City that he needed to get to work (Ezzell Dep., at 47, 81; see Doc. 38-1).
Ezzell underwent surgery on September 12, 2012. Following surgery, Ezzell returned to FOI for a post-operative appointment on September 20, 2012 (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 7). At that point, Ezzell had not gone to work since early July 2012 (Ezzell Dep., at 30). During the appointment, Ezzell stated that the pain he experienced prior to surgery was gone but that he experienced some numbness radiating down his leg and some soreness around the incision site (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 7). Ezzell [*12]  appeared to be progressing well and was told to return to work full-time on September 24, 2012, with the following restrictions: maximum lifting of 10 pounds; minimize squatting, overhead reaching, stooping, crawling, bending, twisting, and climbing; take frequent breaks; and return in three to four weeks for a follow-up to determine whether such restrictions could be released (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 7). According to Dr. Billys, during the first six to eight weeks after a surgery like Ezzell's, Dr. Billys does not want the patient to perform any heavy lifting because of the chance of recurrent disc herniation, so he places the patient on a light-duty regimen to allow the patient's surgical area to heal (Doc. 35, Deposition of Dr. James Billys ("Billys Dep."), at 9-10). As a result, Dr. Billys provided Ezzell with such restrictions to protect Ezzell's lower back from enduring any excessive load and a potential recurrent problem (Billys Dep., at 9-10).
On the same day, Ezzell received an Excuse from Work or School Form from Dr. Billys (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 1). That form mirrored the treatment note, indicating that Ezzell could return to work as of September 24, 2012, with the following restrictions: [*13]  could lift a maximum of 10 pounds; could perform minimal squatting, stooping, climbing, overhead reaching, crawling, bending, and twisting; could only work for 40 hours per week with frequent breaks (Ezzell Dep. Ex. 1). The form further stated that Ezzell would be reevaluated at his one-week appointment to determine if some of the restrictions could be lifted (Ezzell Dep. Ex. 1). Notwithstanding, although Ezzell was still limited by pain at that time, Ezzell felt like he could have performed his job as of September 20, 2012, and could perform the job functions with minor assistance from his helper, such as with lifting anything weighing more than 10 pounds (Ezzell Dep., at 60, 63-64).
Ezzell took the September 20, 2012 Excuse from Work or School Form, which he often referred to as the "light-duty note," to work and provided it to Cockrell on September 24, 2012 (Ezzell Dep., at 64, 71). According to Ezzell, Cockrell welcomed Ezzell back and told Ezzell what Ezzell would be working on that day, but Cockrell came back a little later and told Ezzell that he could not work under those conditions and, if he did not like it, would need to go to Human Resources ("HR") (Ezzell Dep., at 64, 66). [*14]  Following that exchange with Cockrell, Ezzell told Cockrell "okay," took back the September 20, 2012 Excuse from Work or School Form, and went to HR, as instructed (Ezzell Dep., at 66-67). At that point, Ezzell met with Sanders Bush ("Bush"), the City's Director of HR (Ezzell Dep., at 68; see Doc. 38-1). Ezzell explained to Bush and another individual that Ezzell was told he could not work under those conditions but that he felt like he could work (Ezzell Dep., at 68). Ezzell further stated that he wanted and asked for his job and would do whatever he needed to do, including sweeping floors and filing papers, in order to keep his job (Ezzell Dep., at 69, 71). Ezzell asserts that he handed Bush his September 20, 2012 Excuse from Work or School Form, with the light-duty limitations, and asked for his job (Ezzell Dep., at 71-72). Bush informed Ezzell that, since Ezzell's injury was not job-related, there was no job for him and the City did not need to provide him a job, but, if the injury was job-related, accommodations could be made (Ezzell Dep., at 70, 77). He then asked Bush whether any other positions were available for him (Ezzell Dep., at 77). At the time of the exchange with Bush, [*15]  Ezzell anticipated the "light-duty note" would only be required until his body healed or up until his next appointment at FOI rather than on any permanent basis (Ezzell Dep., at 78-79). According to Ezzell, Bush also told him to go back to his surgeon and have FMLA paperwork filled out from the day of the surgery (Ezzell Dep., at 80). Up until that time, Ezzell had not put in a request for FMLA leave related to his surgery but had requested FMLA leave in July because of his condition (Ezzell Dep., at 80). Ezzell informed Bush that he was aware that his FMLA leave was close to coming to an end pursuant to the government guidelines (Ezzell Dep., at 81-82). After these encounters, Ezzell did not recall speaking to anyone else about his job (Ezzell Dep., at 72, 78-79).
After that, on October 1, 2012, Ezzell faxed to the City a FMLA Certification of Healthcare Provider signed by Dr. Billys (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 11). Ezzell stated that he obtained this paperwork based upon Bush's directive to fill out another FMLA request from the date of the surgery (Ezzell Dep., at 82). In the certification, Dr. Billys noted that Ezzell had surgery on September 12, 2012, and would be out on TTD, or temporary [*16]  total disability, for an indeterminate amount of time as a result (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 11). According to Dr. Billys, Ezzell would need to follow up with Dr. Billys on October 8, 2012, and would require physical therapy two to three times per week for a period of six to eight weeks (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 11). Dr. Billys stated that Ezzell could not perform work of any kind and was unable to perform one or more of the essential functions of Ezzell's job at that time, namely, no lifting, pushing, pulling, overhead reaching, or prolonged sitting, standing, and walking (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 11).
At a post-surgery follow-up appointment at FOI on October 18, 2012, Ezzell complained of transient lower back pain, at a level of four to six on a 10-point scale, and leg pain and left buttock pain (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 12). During the examination, ARNP Laura Pulido noted that Ezzell could bend only to thigh level and that Ezzell's pain worsened with forward flexion, extension, side bending, and rotation (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 12). Ezzell was continued on medication and directed to start physical therapy to the lumbar spine with core muscle strengthening, progressive ambulation, and gentle stretching and to follow up [*17]  with Dr. Billys in three to four weeks (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 12). At that time, Ezzell could return to work at "light duty status only" (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 12). The restrictions upon Ezzell's ability to work were identical to the prior restrictions from September 20, 2012 (Billys Dep., at 11). Indeed, Dr. Billys provided Ezzell with an Excuse from Work or School Form that day, stating that Ezzell could return to light-duty status only, with restrictions to lifting a maximum of 10 pounds and limiting stooping, crawling, bending, twisting, and repetitive use of the lower extremities (Billys Dep., Ex. 3).
As of October 18, 2012, Ezzell felt that his pain did not prevent him from doing anything at his job even though he stated that his pain had worsened and was not helped by the use of narcotic medication (Ezzell Dep., at 86). Ezzell went back to work and provided a "light-duty note" to Everhart, at which point Everhart told Ezzell to go back and only return when Ezzell was cleared to come back (Ezzell Dep., at 90). Ezzell then went home (Ezzell Dep., at 90).
Following that, on October 30, 2012, Everhart sent an interoffice memorandum regarding a recommendation for termination of leave of absence [*18]  relating to Ezzell to Greg Horwedel, the City Manager, and Frank Coughenour ("Coughenour"), the City's Utility Director, and copied Bush as well (Doc. 38-1). In the memorandum, Everhart states:
John Ezzell was hired as a Maintenance Mechanic III on November 17, 2008. He was given a leave of absence under FMLA beginning July 12, 2012 due to low back pain, and on September 12 he had surgery to resolve his "chronic bulging, herniated discs" problem diagnosed by the orthopedic. When he saw his doctor a month after surgery, the doctor said his ability to engage in very physical work would be limited indefinitely. He is scheduled to see the doctor again on November 6. Even if he is released to full duty at that time, we would not rely on that opinion alone as that physician is not familiar with the requirements of our work. We would typically send the employee and his job description to our medical people at Lakeside Occupational for a full "fitness for duty" examination and review of his medical history.
Our belief is that Mr. Ezzell is not likely to be able to return to his regular job without limitations for an extended time. He is now well past the 12 weeks required by FMLA (16 weeks to [*19]  date) and the extra workload on others shows no relief in sight. If Ezzell's work and attendance record were better, an argument could be made for giving him more time, however that is clearly not the case. Since the first months of his employment, Ezzell has used his sick hours as he earned them and his work performance has been marginal. Given these circumstances, we are recommending no further extension of leave. We need to move forward with finding a competent replacement to fill this position.
Thank you for your consideration.
(Doc. 38-1).
Cockrell telephonically notified Ezzell on November 5, 2012, that the City terminated Ezzell's employment, effective as of November 2, 2012 (Ezzell Dep., at 96-101). Ezzell subsequently called Coughenour and Everhart and was told that the decision to terminate Ezzell had been made because the City did not know if or when Ezzell would return to work (Ezzell Dep., at 97). Prior to November 5, 2012, Ezzell had not indicated definitively when he would be coming back to work except to say that he would return once the doctor cleared him (Ezzell Dep., at 97-98). During the conversations with Coughenour and Everhart, Ezzell was told that the City needed [*20]  to hire somebody to fill the position (Ezzell Dep., at 99-100). Everhart also informed Ezzell that Ezzell should come back to see him once Ezzell was released and that he would need to reapply for his position since he had been terminated (Ezzell Dep., at 100, 101).
Ezzell followed up with FOI on November 15, 2012, with complaints of constant lower back pain, constant at a level of two to three on a 10-point scale but as high as a six on the scale (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 13). Ezzell reported that he had just been let go from work and did not feel as though he was getting any better (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 13). Upon physical examination by ARNP Pulido, Ezzell appeared depressed, walked with an antalgic gait, could bend only to thigh level, was tender to palpation in the lower lumbar region, and experienced worsened pain with forward flexion, extension, side bending, and rotation (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 13). Ezzell was directed to follow up with Dr. Billys and Ezzell's medications were adjusted (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 13). Ezzell did not request a release for full-duty work during the November 15, 2012 appointment, even though he stated that he probably could have been released at that time (Ezzell Dep., at [*21]  103 & Ex. 13).
After that, on November 27, 2012, Ezzell received another Excuse from Work or School Form from FOI, indicating that Ezzell could return to full-duty work as of that day (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 14). Ezzell had no explanation for why he could not have obtained clearance to go back to full-duty work prior to November 2, 2012 (Ezzell Dep., at 96). Ezzell contacted Everhart on November 28, 2012, to inform Everhart about the release and provide him with a copy but was told that, because Ezzell was terminated and the job was now posted, Ezzell must reapply for his position (Ezzell Dep., at 100-02). On that day, Ezzell then went to HR and filled out a new application for the Maintenance Mechanic III position he had held for the three years prior (Ezzell Dep., at 102, 103). Ezzell followed up with Everhart twice in December 2012 about his application for the Maintenance Mechanic III position and was initially told that the City was still taking applications and later told that Ezzell's application was on Everhart's desk and that they had not had a chance to review it due to a busy schedule around the holidays (Ezzell Dep., at 103-04, 108). Ezzell did not follow up again about the position [*22]  (Ezzell Dep., at 105).
Subsequently, on June 28, 2013, without the assistance of an attorney, Ezzell filled out an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC") Intake Questionnaire detailing the alleged discrimination he suffered and contemporaneously filed a Charge of Discrimination (the "Charge") with the Florida Commission on Human Relations ("FCHR") (Ezzell Dep., at 69 & Exs. 9 & 10). In the Intake Questionnaire, Ezzell stated that he was disabled due to a back injury and back surgery, even though he had been released to full duty at the time he filled out the Intake Questionnaire (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 10). In the Charge, Ezzell asserted that the City discriminated against him based on disability when it terminated him from his employment (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 9). After consideration, the EEOC issued its Letter of Determination (Doc. 38-7), in which it indicated that Ezzell's claims had merit and reasonable cause existed to believe that a violation of the ADA occurred.
After the conclusion of the administrative proceedings, Ezzell filed his Complaint (Doc. 1) in this action and then received two opportunities to amend his claims (Docs. 4 & 26). In the Second Amended Complaint, Ezzell [*23]  alleges that the City discriminated and retaliated against him in violation of the ADA (Doc. 27). More specifically, Ezzell contends that the City terminated and then refused to rehire him based on his disability, failed to reasonably accommodate his disability, and terminated and refused to rehire him in retaliation for requesting a reasonable accommodation for his disability (Doc. 27, at 4-6). In response, the City filed its Motion to Dismiss (Doc. 28), which Ezzell opposed (Doc. 32), and its Answer and Affirmative Defenses (Doc. 29). Upon consideration, the Motion to Dismiss was denied (Doc. 39). The City then filed its Amended Answer and Defenses to the Second Amended Complaint (Doc. 41).
The City additionally filed its Motion for Summary Judgment (Doc. 33), in which it argues that Ezzell is not a qualified individual with a disability, Ezzell did not request a reasonable accommodation, and the failure to rehire claim fails because it does not constitute a separate act of discrimination or retaliation. Ezzell responds in opposition (Doc. 38), arguing that genuine issues of material fact exist as to his claims, thereby precluding entry of summary judgment. More specifically, Ezzell [*24]  contends that he is a qualified individual with a disability, the City discriminated against him, the City's reasons for terminating Ezzell and refusing to rehire him constitute pretext, and he established a prima facie case of retaliation.
Following the filing of the Motion for Summary Judgment and response in opposition, the Court identified various issues that required further briefing by the parties. Subsequently, each party filed their respective briefs (Docs. 49-52). The Court then conducted a hearing on August 31, 2017, at which the parties presented oral argument on the outstanding issues and the merits of the Motion for Summary Judgment.

II. Standard of Review
Summary judgment is appropriate where the movant demonstrates that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and that the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a); see Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322 (1986); Kernel Records Oy v. Mosley, 694 F.3d 1294, 1300 (11th Cir. 2012). A dispute about a material fact is "genuine" if the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the non-moving party. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248 (1986). The existence of some factual disputes between the litigants will not defeat an otherwise properly supported summary judgment motion; "the requirement is that there be no genuine issue of  [*25] material fact." Id. at 247-48 (emphasis in original). The substantive law applicable to the claims will identify which facts are material. Id. at 248. In reviewing the motion, courts must view the evidence and make all factual inferences in a light most favorable to the non-moving party and resolve all reasonable doubts about the facts in favor of the non-movant. Dadeland Depot, Inc. v. St. Paul Fire and Marine Ins. Co., 483 F.3d 1265, 1268 (11th Cir. 2007) (citation omitted).

III. Discussion

A. Discrimination
At its core, the ADA prevents discrimination based upon disability. Namely, under the ADA, "[n]o covered entity shall discriminate against a qualified individual on the basis of disability in regard to job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). In pursuing a claim for discrimination under the ADA, a plaintiff may proceed on one of three theories of liability — (1) intentional discrimination, (2) disparate treatment, or (3) failure to make reasonable accommodations. Rylee v. Chapman, 316 F. App'x 901, 906 (11th Cir. 2009). Here, Ezzell asserts his claims under theories of intentional discrimination and failure to make a reasonable accommodation (see Doc. 27, at 4-6).2
In considering ADA discrimination claims, courts apply [*26]  the burden-shifting framework of Title VII employment discrimination claims, as established in McDonnell Douglas v. Green, 411 U.S. 792 (1973), where, as here, a plaintiff offers circumstantial evidence to demonstrate discrimination. Smith v. Miami-Dade County, 621 F. App'x 955, 959 (11th Cir. 2015) (citation omitted); Holly v. Clairson Indus., L.L.C., 492 F.3d 1247, 1255-56 (11th Cir. 2007); Earl v. Mervyns, Inc., 207 F.3d 1361, 1365 (11th Cir. 2000) (citations omitted). Under that framework, an ADA plaintiff must first present a prima facie case of discrimination to shift the burden to the defendant to articulate a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for its action, and, if the defendant meets its burden of providing a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason, the burden shifts back to the plaintiff to then demonstrate that the defendant's proffered reason is a pretext for disability discrimination. Smith, 621 F. App'x at 959; see also Ward v. United Parcel Serv., 580 F. App'x 735, 740 (11th Cir. 2014). To establish a prima facie case of discrimination under the ADA, a plaintiff must demonstrate that (1) he or she is disabled; (2) he or she is a qualified individual; and (3) he or she was subjected to unlawful discrimination because of his or her disability. Holly, 492 F.3d at 1255-56; Earl, 207 F.3d at 1365. The plaintiff bears the burden of establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, all elements of the prima facie case. Reed v. Heil Co., 206 F.3d 1055, 1063 (11th Cir. 2000) (citation omitted); cf. Davis v. Fla. Power & Light Co., 205 F.3d 1301, 1305 (11th Cir. 2000) ("The ADA places the burden on the employee to establish a prima facie case of disability discrimination."). . [*27] 

i. Disability

a. Actual Disability
The ADA defines "disability" as (1) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities of such individual; (2) a record of such an impairment; or (3) being regarded as having such an impairment. 42 U.S.C. § 12102(1)(A)-(C); 29 C.F.R. 1630.2(g)(1)(i)-(iii). An individual may establish coverage under one or more of the three prongs of the definition of disability, i.e., the "actual disability" prong, the "record of" prong, and/or the "regarded as" prong. 29 C.F.R. 1630.2(g)(2). In this instance, Ezzell contends that he was disabled under both the first and third definitions, or that he was actually disabled as a result of his impairment and that he was regarded by the City as having such impairment (Doc. 38, at 8). More specifically, Ezzell contends that he suffered from a physical impairment — his disc herniation at L5-S1, which caused pain and required surgery — and, further, that the City regarded him as disabled.3
The City argues that Ezzell did not meet the requirements of the "actual disability" prong. Ezzell in turn contends that he had a physical impairment that substantially limited one or more major life activities. See 42 U.S.C. § 12102(1)(A); 29 C.F.R. 1630.2(g)(1)(i). Ezzell asserts that his physical impairment consists of his [*28]  disc herniation at L5-S1 and associated back pain, subsequently requiring surgery (see, e.g., Ezzell Dep., Ex. 5; Doc. 27, at ¶¶12-15; Doc. 38, at 8; Doc. 52, at 1). "Merely proving the existence of a physical impairment, without addressing any limitation on major life activities, is not sufficient to prove disability under the Act," however. Standard v. A.B.E.L. Servs., Inc., 161 F.3d 1318, 1327 (11th Cir. 1998). Ezzell must establish that his physical impairment substantially limited one or more of his major life activities. See 29 C.F.R. 1630.2(g)-(j).
To do so, Ezzell provides an affidavit, in which he asserts that, due to his back impairment, he was limited in his ability to sleep, sit, walk, and bend (Ezzell Aff., at ¶¶5-9). Namely, Ezzell stated that he experienced difficulty falling asleep after his injury, his back hurt constantly, he found it difficult to find a comfortable position to fall asleep, he would toss and turn throughout the night, he would wake up during the night due to pain in his back upon movement, he could not fall immediately back to sleep after waking up, he only achieved about four hours of sleep per night, he experienced pain while sitting, he needed to reposition himself every 10 to 15 minutes while sitting due to pain, he could not walk for the [*29]  same amount of time as he used to prior to his injury, he needed to stop and take breaks while walking, bending caused him pain, and he needed to think before moving around to do things (Ezzell Aff., at ¶¶5-9). Notwithstanding, in its motion and supplemental brief, the City argues that Ezzell was not disabled under the ADA (Doc. 33; Doc. 49, at 3-7).
Under substantially similar facts, the Eleventh Circuit determined that such a back impairment qualifies as a disability. See Mazzeo v. Color Resolutions Intern., LLC, 746 F.3d 1264, 1267-70 (11th Cir. 2014). In Mazzeo, the Eleventh Circuit found, considering an affidavit of the plaintiff that he was so limited, that the plaintiff's degenerative disc disease and herniated disc impacted the plaintiff's ability to walk, bend, sleep, and lift more than 10 pounds. Id. at 1267-70. Based upon the plaintiff's assertions, the Eleventh Circuit determined that the plaintiff's back impairment satisfied the definition of disability under the ADA Amendments Act of 2008 (the "ADAAA").4 Id. at 1267-70. Accordingly, viewing the facts in the light most favorable to Ezzell, and given the similarity of both the impairment and the effect upon Ezzell of such impairment to the impairment of the plaintiff in Mazzeo, Ezzell established that his back impairment constitutes a disability for purposes of the "actual disability" [*30]  prong.

b. "Regarded As" Disabled
Ezzell also argues that the City discriminated against him and denied him a reasonable accommodation because it regarded him as disabled, while the City asserts it did not regard Ezzell as disabled. An individual meets the requirement of being "regarded as" disabled if the individual establishes that he or she has been subjected to an action prohibited under the ADA because of an actual or perceived physical or mental impairment regardless of whether the impairment limits or is otherwise perceived to limit a major life activity. 42 U.S.C. 12102(3)(A); 29 C.F.R. 1630.2(l)(1). As such, whether an individual's impairment substantially limits a major life activity is not relevant to the "regarded as" analysis. 29 C.F.R. 1630.2(j)(2). "[A] plaintiff need demonstrate only that the employer regarded him as being impaired, not that the employer believed the impairment prevented the plaintiff from performing a major life activity." Wolfe v. Postmaster Gen., 488 F. App'x 465, 468 (11th Cir. 2012). Any time a covered entity takes a prohibited action, such as a refusal to hire, demotion, placement on involuntary leave, or termination, against an individual because of an actual or perceived impairment, even if the entity asserts, or may or does ultimately establish, a defense to such action, [*31]  such individual is "regarded as having such an impairment." 29 C.F.R. 1630.2(l)(1)-(2). The "regarded as" prong does not apply, however, to impairments that are minor and transitory, meaning with an actual or expected duration of six months or less. 42 U.S.C. § 12102(3)(B); 29 C.F.R. § 1630.15(f).
In considering whether a plaintiff was "regarded as" disabled, the relevant inquiry focuses not upon the plaintiff's actual condition but rather upon how the defendant perceived the plaintiff's condition, including the reactions and perceptions of the persons interacting or working with the plaintiff. E.E.O.C. v. Am. Tool & Mold, Inc., 21 F. Supp. 3d 1268, 1275 (M.D. Fla. 2014) (citation omitted). As Ezzell contends, the City's position with respect to the transitory and minor nature of Ezzell's back impairment is at odds with the City's position regarding the indefiniteness of Ezzell's restrictions and leave time at the time he was terminated. Indeed, as the October 30, 2012 interoffice memo indicates, right before the City terminated Ezzell, Everhart indicated that Ezzell was "not likely to be able to return to his regular job without limitations for an extended time" and that Ezzell had exceed his FMLA leave by four weeks with no relief in sight for the extra workload on others (Doc. 38-1). This memorandum circulated three days prior [*32]  to the effective date of Ezzell's termination. Viewing the facts in the light most favorable to Ezzell, therefore, at the time of Ezzell's termination, the City regarded Ezzell as disabled.
Though, following his termination, Ezzell brought the City the November 27, 2012 note from Dr. Billys indicating that Ezzell could return to full-duty work at that time, before Ezzell reapplied for the Maintenance Mechanic III position the next day, the evidence is unclear as to whether the City no longer regarded Ezzell as disabled at the time he reapplied and was not rehired into his prior position. Given the finding that the City regarded Ezzell as disabled at the time of his termination, however, a reasonable inference can be drawn that the City continued to regard him as disabled at the time he reapplied three weeks later and the City failed to rehire him.

ii. Qualified Individual
To establish the second element of an ADA discrimination claim, Ezzell must demonstrate that he was a "qualified individual with a disability," which the ADA defines as:
an individual who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds [*33]  or desires. For the purposes of this subchapter, consideration shall be given to the employer's judgment as to what functions of a job are essential, and if an employer has prepared a written description before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job, this description shall be considered evidence of the essential functions of the job.
42 U.S.C. § 12111(8); Earl, 207 F.3d at 1365 (citations omitted). Determining whether an individual is "qualified" involves a two-step process to determine (1) if the individual satisfies the prerequisites for the position, such as whether the individual has sufficient experience and skills, an adequate educational background, or appropriate licenses for the job; and (2) whether the individual can perform the essential functions of the job, either with or without reasonable accommodations. Reed, 206 F.3d at 1062. In this instance, the City does not dispute that Ezzell met the prerequisites for the position. Instead, the City argues that Ezzell was not a "qualified individual" because he could not perform the essential functions of the job, with or without reasonable accommodation.

a. Essential Functions
An ADA plaintiff must demonstrate that he or she can perform the essential functions of his or her job without [*34]  accommodation or, failing that, demonstrate that he or she can perform the essential functions of the job with a reasonable accommodation. D'Angelo v. ConAgra Foods, Inc., 422 F.3d 1220, 1229 (11th Cir. 2005) (citation omitted). If such individual cannot perform an essential function of his or her job, even with an accommodation, he or she is not a "qualified individual" and thus not covered under the provisions of the ADA, since the ADA does not require an employer to eliminate essential functions of the individual's job. Id.; see Bagwell v. Morgan Cty. Comm'n, 676 F. App'x 863, 865 (11th Cir. 2017). In this context, the "essential functions" mean the fundamental job duties of the position that an individual with a disability holds or performs but does not include marginal functions of the position. See Earl, 207 F.3d at 1365 (citation omitted); see 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(1). As noted, in determining whether a function is essential, "consideration shall be given to the employer's judgment as to what functions of a job are essential, and if an employer has prepared a written description before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job, this description shall be considered evidence of the essential functions of the job." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8); see 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(3)(i). Though the employer's judgment as to which functions are deemed essential receives substantial weight, such factor is not conclusive. [*35]  Holly, 492 F.3d at 1258. If such judgment were conclusive, an employer seeking to avoid the inconvenience of providing a reasonable accommodation could, simply by declaring the function essential, avoid the mandate that employers provide reasonable accommodations. Id. As a result, courts should consider a number of factors, on a case-by-case basis, including but not limited to (1) the employer's judgment as to which functions are essential, (2) written job descriptions prepared before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job, (3) the amount of time spent on the job performing the function, (4) the consequences of not requiring the incumbent to perform the function, (5) the terms of a collective bargaining agreement, (6) the work experience of past incumbents in the job, and (7) the current work experience of incumbents in similar jobs. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(3); see Holly, 492 F.3d at 1258; see D'Angelo, 422 F.3d at 1230; see Earl, 207 F.3d at 1365; see Davis, 205 F.3d at 1305.
Here, the City provided a Job Description of the Maintenance Mechanic III position, detailing the essential job functions and the requisite knowledge, skills, and abilities required for the position (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 8). As noted above, under knowledge, skills, and abilities, the Job Description indicates that an individual must be able to [*36]  work in confined spaces, underground, and at heights of over 150 feet, and the essential physical skills include heavy lifting of 50 pounds; good vision, with or without correction; good hearing, with or without correction; and reaching, climbing, pushing, walking, standing, kneeling, bending, stooping, driving, and operating equipment (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 8). Cockrell echoed that description, stating that Ezzell would be unable to perform his job if he could not lift more than 10 pounds, could not squat, could not engage in overhead reaching, could not stoop, and could not occasionally crawl (Doc. 50, Deposition of Paul Cockrell ("Cockrell Dep."), at 49-50). Additionally, Cockrell stated that the City's Maintenance Mechanic III position required daily bending and twisting and occasional climbing (Cockrell Dep., at 50).
According to Ezzell, the position involved maintaining the equipment, fixing any emergencies, performing weekly inspections of the equipment, and anything else that was requested (Ezzell Dep., at 51-52). Ezzell asserted that he could perform the position without squatting; without crawling; without putting his hands over his heads or stooping, for the most part; and with [*37]  very little bending, twisting, and climbing (Ezzell Dep., at 59). Ezzell further stated that he engaged in very little lifting and, on average, would only lift about 10 pounds, with anything heavier than 50 pounds requiring mechanical assistance or assistance from a helper who was either a Maintenance Mechanic I or Maintenance Mechanic II (Ezzell Dep., at 59-60, 62-63). When asked again, Ezzell reiterated that he could perform maintenance and repair, including emergency repairs, with minimal overhead reaching, stooping, and crawling (Ezzell Dep., at 64). Later, when asked about the restrictions of no lifting, pushing, pulling, overhead reaching, or prolonged sitting, standing, and walking set forth by Dr. Billys in his October 1, 2012 Certification of Healthcare Provider (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 11), Ezzell stated that he would in fact need to perform some of these functions for the Maintenance Mechanic III position (Ezzell Dep., at 83).
Considering the City's written Job Description, the testimony of Cockrell, and the testimony of Ezzell, it appears that the City's classification of the essential functions and required skills of the Maintenance Mechanic III position is appropriate. 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8); 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(3); see [*38]  Bagwell, 676 F. App'x at 867 (finding that a district court did not err in weighing the factors when determining whether the job functions were "essential" as a matter of law and, though the employee asserted that some of the functions were rarely performed, the employer's job description properly identified the "essential functions," especially in light of the fact that the employee "failed to present evidence contradicting the [employer's] expectations for the position beyond her own envisioning of the groundskeeper job"); see D'Angelo, 422 F.3d at 1230; see Earl, 207 F.3d at 1365; see Davis, 205 F.3d at 1305. Accordingly, Ezzell must demonstrate that, with or without reasonable accommodation, he could pull, repair, and troubleshoot motors, starters, relays, regulators, pumps, soft starts, P.L.O., and other items related to utilities; maintain the physical ability to work outside in the elements performing extensive electrical and mechanical repairs; maintain the ability to work in confined spaces, underground, and at heights of over 150 feet; and maintain essential physical skills, including heavy lifting of 50 pounds and reaching, climbing, pushing, walking, standing, kneeling, bending, stooping, driving, and operating equipment (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 8). Such functions and skills [*39]  were essential to the City's Maintenance Mechanic III position, even if required on a minimal basis, as Ezzell asserts.

b. Reasonable Accommodation

1. Actual Disability
Having determined the essential functions required of the Maintenance Mechanic III position, the inquiry then turns to the issue of a reasonable accommodation and whether Ezzell could perform the essential functions with or without a reasonable accommodation. Ezzell contends that the City failed to provide him with a reasonable accommodation. An employer's failure to make a reasonable accommodation constitutes discrimination under the ADA against an otherwise qualified individual with a disability, unless the provision of a reasonable accommodation would impose undue hardship upon the employer. 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A); 29 C.F.R. § 1630.9(a); Lucas v. W.W. Grainger, Inc., 257 F.3d 1249, 1255 (11th Cir. 2001). An accommodation is deemed reasonable only if it permits the employee to perform the essential functions of the job. Lucas, 257 F.3d at 1255; Earl, 207 F.3d at 1365. A "reasonable accommodation" may therefore include (1) making existing facilities used by employees readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities; and, more pertinently, (2) job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, reassignment to a vacant position, acquisition or modification [*40]  of equipment or devices, appropriate adjustment or modifications of examinations, training materials or policies, the provision of qualified readers or interpreters, and other similar accommodations for individuals with disabilities. 42 U.S.C. § 12111(9); see also 29 C.F.R. 1630.2(o)(2)(i)-(ii). "The burden of identifying an accommodation that would allow a qualified employee to perform the essential functions of [his] job rests with that employee, as does the ultimate burden of persuasion with respect to showing that such accommodation is reasonable." Earl, 207 F.3d at 1367 (citation omitted); see Bagwell, 676 F. App'x at 865 (stating that the plaintiff bears the burden of identifying an accommodation and of demonstrating that the accommodation allows the plaintiff to perform the job's essential functions) (citation omitted); see Reid, 206 F.3d at 1062 ("The plaintiff has the burden of proving that reasonable accommodations were available.").
In determining the appropriate reasonable accommodation, it might be necessary for the employer to initiate an informal, interactive process with the individual with a disability in need of the accommodation to identify the particular limitations resulting from the disability and potential reasonable accommodations that could overcome those limitations. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3). If the [*41]  employee fails to identify a reasonable accommodation, however, no affirmative duty exists for the employer to engage in an interactive process or to demonstrate undue hardship. Bagwell, 676 F. App'x at 867 (citing Earl, 207 F.3d at 1367)). Until a plaintiff makes a "specific demand" for an accommodation, the employer's duty to provide a reasonable accommodation is not triggered. Rylee, 316 F. App'x at 906 (citing Gaston v. Bellingrath Gardens & Home, Inc., 167 F.3d 1361, 1363 (11th Cir. 1999)). An employer's lack of investigation into reasonable accommodation is thus unimportant where the employee cannot identify a reasonable accommodation. Earl, 207 F.3d at 1367. Once a qualified individual with a disability requests a reasonable accommodation, however, the employer must then make a reasonable effort to determine the appropriate accommodation. Gaston, 167 F.3d at 1364 (citation omitted).
The City argues that it did not deny Ezzell a reasonable accommodation because Ezzell never requested such accommodation and, even if he did, his requested accommodation was not reasonable.5 The City contends that Ezzell did not request a reasonable accommodation by presenting his September 20, 2012 Excuse from Work or School Form, indicating that Ezzell could return to work as of September 24, 2012, with the noted limitations (see Ezzell Dep., Ex. 1). In his testimony, Ezzell stated that he probably [*42]  did not need light duty because of the way he classified his job description since, according to Ezzell, he did not believe that anything that he would have needed to do to perform his job functions would have been severely affected by his "light-duty status" (Ezzell Dep., at 59, 68). At the same time, Ezzell stated that, since Dr. Billys wrote in the September 20, 2012 Excuse from Work or School Form that Ezzell needed light work, a need existed for light-duty work (Ezzell Dep., at 62 & Ex. 1).
Ezzell contends that he presented the September 20, 2012 Excuse from Work or School Form to Cockrell upon his return to work (Ezzell Dep., at 64). Ezzell began to work but then was told that he could not work under those conditions and should take the issue up with HR (Ezzell Dep., at 66-67). Ezzell met with Bush and explained to Bush that he would do anything that he needed to do to keep his job, including sweeping floors, filing papers, or anything else he needed to do to keep his job (Ezzell Dep., at 68-69). According to Ezzell, he told Bush that he wanted his job, not just a job, when he presented Bush with the September 20, 2012 Excuse from Work or School Form with the light-duty [*43]  restrictions (Ezzell Dep., at 71-72). Ezzell contends that Bush then informed him that he could not work under those restrictions because he was not injured on the job (Ezzell Dep., at 73, 77, 78). After Bush informed him that he could not work with restrictions because he was not injured on the job, Ezzell asked if any other positions or jobs were available for him to do (Ezzell Dep., at 77-78). Ezzell told Bush that his FMLA was coming to an end, so Bush told Ezzell to have FMLA paperwork filled out dating back from the date of the back surgery (Ezzell Dep., at 80-82). Following that, Ezzell contacted Dr. Billys to obtain FMLA paperwork (Ezzell Dep., at 80-82). It was at that point that Ezzell obtained the Certification of Healthcare Provider, which he faxed to the City on October 1, 2012, in which Dr. Billys concluded that Ezzell could not engage in any lifting, pushing, pulling, overhead reaching, prolonged sitting, standing, or walking (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 11).
Ezzell argues that this interchange established that he requested a reasonable accommodation and thus triggered the City's obligation to engage in an interactive process. Essentially, Ezzell contends that allowing him to perform [*44]  his position with light-duty restrictions, constituted a reasonable accommodation, especially given the assistance of the helper already designated to regularly assist the Maintenance Mechanic III position (Doc. 38, at 12). Some courts have concluded that merely presenting a note with restrictions from a doctor does not suffice as a request for an accommodation under the ADA. See, e.g., Holton v. First Coast Serv. Options, Inc., No. 16-15289, 2017 WL 3446880, at *3 (11th Cir. Aug. 11, 2017) (finding that "a communication from an employee's treating physician can demonstrate that employee's disability," but concluding that the employee's letter from a chiropractor did not suffice in that action where the letter did nothing to link the employee's back impairment to limitations on her major life activities that she alleged); see Hickmon v. TECO Energy, No. 8:10-cv-1147-T-30MAP, 2012 WL 39582, at *5 (M.D. Fla. Jan. 9, 2012) (concluding that a physician's note regarding light duty or part-time work, without something more, is insufficient to constitute a request for an accommodation under the ADA where the plaintiff vaguely referred to a physician's note, dated March 10, 2009, in which the physician concluded that the plaintiff could return to full-time work but the plaintiff did not return to work until April 6, 2009); see Jenks v. Naples Cmty. Hosp., Inc., 829 F. Supp. 2d 1235, 1253 (M.D. Fla. 2011) (finding that the employee did not make a specific request [*45]  for an accommodation where the employer approved the employee's FMLA paperwork, which indicated that fatigue was a side effect of cancer and the employee would experience episodic flare-ups, but where nothing in the evidence indicated that the employee asked for additional breaks or for long absences from her desk nor any evidence that the employer denied such requests, and where the FMLA documentation did not request additional breaks or additional time away from the workstation). This case is distinguishable, however, in the fact that Ezzell returned to work with his September 20, 2012 Excuse from Work or School Form with the specific restrictions for minimal lifting, squatting, overhead reaching, stooping, crawling, climbing, bending, and twisting (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 1). He presented the note to Cockrell, his immediate supervisor, and was informed by Cockrell that he could not work with those specific restrictions. He then presented the same note with the same restrictions to Bush, the City's HR Director, and was informed that he could not work under those restrictions because it was not a work-related injury. Viewing the facts in the light most favorable to Ezzell, therefore, a reasonable [*46]  inference can be drawn that Ezzell specifically requested an accommodation to perform his position with light-duty restrictions.
Though, viewing the facts in the light most favorable to Ezzell, a conclusion could be drawn that he requested the accommodation to perform his position with light-duty restrictions, such accommodation was not reasonable. Although an employer may be required to restructure a particular job by altering or eliminating marginal functions, nothing requires an employer to transform a position into a new one by eliminating essential functions, reallocating job duties to change the essential functions of the job, or removing another employee from a position in order to accommodate a disabled employee. Bagwell, 676 F. App'x at 866 (citations omitted). Nor is an employer required to create a light-duty position as a reasonable accommodation. Howell v. Michelin Tire Corp., 860 F. Supp. 1488, 1492 (M.D. Ala. 1994); see Severson v. Heartland Woodcraft, Inc., No. 15-3754, 2017 WL 4160849, at *4 (7th Cir. Sept. 20, 2017) (quoting EEOC Enforcement Guidance: Workers' Compensation & the ADA, 2 EEOC Compliance Manual (CCH) ¶ 6905, at 5394 (Sept. 3, 1996), 196 WL 2216142, at *12) ("Under EEOC guidance, '[a]n employer need not create a light duty position for a non-occupationally injured employee with a disability as a reasonable accommodation.'"). In this instance, permitting Ezzell to work with the light-duty restrictions identified by Dr. Billys would eliminate the essential functions of Ezzell's job, including [*47]  the need to engage in heavy lifting, reaching, climbing, bending, and stooping. The City was not required to eliminate those essential functions, even if they were minimally performed by Ezzell, nor was the City required to create a light-duty position to accommodate Ezzell's restrictions. As a result, the light-duty restrictions were not a reasonable accommodation.
Ezzell further contends that assistance and additional medical leave were reasonable accommodations available at the time he requested an accommodation from the City. Ezzell claimed that he could have performed his job as of September 20, 2012, after the surgery, with assistance from his helper (Ezzell Dep., at 59-60, 62-63). According to Ezzell, such helper would assist with anything requiring heavy lifting, even with lifting something weighing around 10 pounds (Ezzell Dep., at 63-64). Given Ezzell's limitations in the September 20, 2012 Excuse from Work or School Form, however, the helper would have performed the majority of the essential functions required of Ezzell as the Maintenance Mechanic III, which, again, would require the City to reallocate job duties to the helper, thereby changing the essential functions of [*48]  the Maintenance Mechanic III position. The City therefore did not need to entertain a request by Ezzell to utilize his helper to reallocate the essential functions of the job as such accommodation was not reasonable.
With respect to the availability of additional leave, such accommodation was likewise not reasonable. Though a leave of absence may be a reasonable accommodation in some cases, an indefinite leave of absence, which would allow the employee to work at some point in the future rather than in the present, is not reasonable. Wood v. Green, 323 F.3d 1309, 1312-14 (11th Cir. 2003); cf. Frazier-White v. Gee, 818 F.3d 1249, 1256 (11th Cir. 2016) (concluding that a request for an accommodation for an indefinite extension of a light-duty status was unreasonable as a matter of law where the employee could not suggest a time frame for when she would be able to resume her full-duty position). Indeed, "[t]he ADA covers people who can perform the essential functions of their jobs presently or in the immediate future." Wood, 323 F.3d at 1314. If employees were "entitled to extended time off as a reasonable accommodation, the ADA is transformed into a medical-leave statute—in effect, an open-ended extension of the FMLA," which presents "an untenable interpretation of the term 'reasonable accommodation.'" Severson, No. 15-3754, 2017 WL 4160849, at *4.
In this instance, [*49]  on September 24, 2012, Ezzell brought to the City the September 20, 2012 Excuse from Work or School Form with the light-duty restrictions and the notation that some restrictions might be lifted at the next appointment scheduled for three weeks from that date (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 1). The next documentation that the City received from Ezzell was the October 1, 2012 fax of Dr. Billys Certification of Healthcare Provider, in which Dr. Billys stated that the duration for the amount of time Ezzell would be out of work was undetermined at that time, that Ezzell was temporarily totally disabled, and Ezzell could engage in no lifting, pushing, pulling, overhead reaching, prolonged sitting, standing, and walking (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 11). As of October 18, 2012, Dr. Billys' records indicate that he continued to direct that Ezzell remain on light-duty status only and was scheduled for a follow-up appointment in a few weeks, which was also presented to the City in the October 18, 2012 Excuse from Work or School Form (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 12; Billys Dep., Ex. 3). At the time of the October 20, 2012 interoffice memo and of Ezzell's termination, therefore, the City had already provided Ezzell four extra weeks [*50]  of leave beyond that required by the FMLA (Bush Dep., at 58) and had no clear indication of when Ezzell would be returned to full duty. Ezzell was scheduled to see his physician on November 6, 2012, but, given the prior assessment that the City received of Ezzell's condition, and the additional leave granted to Ezzell beyond that required by the FMLA, the City chose to terminate Ezzell prior to the scheduled appointment rather than wait for another assessment (Doc. 38-1). Though the City provided Ezzell with additional leave before terminating him, "prior accommodations do not make an accommodation reasonable." Wood, 323 F.3d at 1314 (citation omitted). Indeed, Bush stated that it was certainly within the City's discretion to provide Ezzell with another extension beyond the extra four weeks provided following the expiration of his FMLA leave, but the City did not because it believed that it met its obligations by extending Ezzell's leave and did not see a good reason for extending the leave again (Bush Dep., at 27-28, 58). With no indication from Ezzell as to when he would return to full duty, however, the City was not required to provide Ezzell with an indefinite leave of absence, as he suggests.
Even viewing [*51]  the facts in the light most favorable to Ezzell, the record does not establish that any of the purported accommodations were reasonable. Namely, imposing light-duty restrictions, utilizing the helper to perform the essential functions of the position, and granting indefinite leave were not reasonable accommodations. Given Ezzell's failure to identify an accommodation that was reasonable, the City was under no obligation to engage in an interactive process or to demonstrate undue hardship. Earl, 207 F.3d at 1367. Based on the foregoing, therefore, Ezzell's claim for discrimination premised upon the City's failure to provide a reasonable accommodation and claim for termination based upon discrimination under the "actual disability" prong fail on this record. The motion is therefore granted with respect to those claims.
The discriminatory failure to rehire claim based upon an actual disability survives, however. The City argues that Ezzell failed to demonstrate that he was actually disabled at the time he reapplied for his position on November 28, 2012, and was not rehired by the City. The record indicates that, in July 2012, prior to his surgery, Majette classified Ezzell's back condition as chronic and stated [*52]  that future flare-ups could cause incapacity (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 4). Ezzell subsequently underwent surgery for his back impairment and pain. Following the surgery, Ezzell stated that he expected to need restrictions only until his body healed, which may have been the next appointment following his September 24, 2012 attempt to return to work (Ezzell, Dep., at 78). According to Ezzell, the conversations regarding his need for restrictions or for any job were solely in the context about him returning from work once he healed from his operation rather than with regard to any kind of permanent issue (Ezzell Dep., at 78). As of October 18, 2012, Dr. Billys had not yet released Ezzell to full-duty work (Billys Dep., Ex. 3). Indeed, at his October 18, 2012 appointment, and at the subsequent appointment on November 15, 2012, Ezzell continued to express complaints of pain (Ezzell Dep., Exs. 12 & 13).
Following his termination, however, Ezzell presented the City with the November 27, 2012 Excuse from Work or School Form from Dr. Billys indicating that Ezzell could return to full-duty work with no limitations (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 14). When Ezzell submitted his application to be rehired in the Maintenance [*53]  Mechanic III position November 28, 2012, therefore, a reasonable inference can be drawn that the disability remained but that Ezzell was now able to perform the essential functions of the position without reasonable accommodation. The situation therefore changed after the City terminated Ezzell from one where Ezzell could not perform the essential functions of the position with or without a reasonable accommodation to one where Ezzell could perform the essential functions of the position without reasonable accommodation, and in fact sought to do so. Accordingly, viewing the facts in the light most favorable to Ezzell, at the time he applied for his prior position and was not rehired, Ezzell was actually disabled and could perform the essential functions of the Maintenance Mechanic III position without reasonable accommodation. Although he was not a qualified individual at the time of his termination, a reasonable inference can be drawn that Ezzell was a qualified individual at the time that he applied for his position and was not rehired.6

2. "Regarded As" Disabled
Ezzell also seeks to also establish that he was a qualified individual under the "regarded as" prong. Though an employer [*54]  is required, absent undue hardship, to provide a reasonable accommodation to an otherwise qualified individual who meets the definition of disability under the "actual disability" prong and the "record of" prong, an employer is not required to provide a reasonable accommodation to an individual who meets the definition of disability solely under the "regarded as" prong. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(4). Accordingly, a plaintiff who proceeds solely under the "regarded as" prong must show that he or she is a qualified individual based on the ability to perform the essential functions of his or her job without reasonable accommodation. Sierra v. Port Consol. Jacksonville, L.L.C., No. 3:14-CV-1496-HES-JBT, 2016 WL 927189, at *7 (M.D. Fla. Mar. 4, 2016) (emphasis in original), appeal dismissed sub nom. Mario Sierra v. Port Consol. Jacksonville (Apr. 5, 2016).
With respect to the claim for discriminatory termination under the "regarded as" prong, the City did not need to provide Ezzell with a reasonable accommodation, which is significant because, as discussed above, Ezzell did not demonstrate that he could perform the essential functions of the Maintenance Mechanic III position without reasonable accommodation prior to his termination. As such, he was not a qualified individual under the "regarded as" prong. Accordingly, since Ezzell [*55]  cannot establish that he was a qualified individual prior to his termination, Ezzell's claim for discrimination as to his termination under the "regarded as" prong likewise fails on this record, and summary judgment therefore is granted on that claim.
As to his claim for discriminatory failure to rehire under the "regarded as" prong, the claim survives. Namely, when Ezzell returned in November 2012 to reapply for his job, he provided the City with the note from Dr. Billys indicating that Ezzell was released to full-duty work and was not otherwise limited. Again, the situation changed after the City terminated Ezzell from one where Ezzell could not perform the essential functions of the position with or without a reasonable accommodation to one where Ezzell could perform the essential functions of the position without reasonable accommodation, and in fact sought to do so. Although he was not a qualified individual at the time of his termination, a reasonable inference could be drawn that Ezzell was a qualified individual at the time that he applied for his position and was not rehired because the City regarded him as disabled and he could perform the essential functions of the Maintenance [*56]  Mechanic III position without reasonable accommodation. Accordingly, viewing the facts in the light most favorable to Ezzell, a reasonable inference can be drawn that he was a qualified individual under the "regarded as" prong for purposes of the discriminatory failure to rehire claim.

iii. Discriminatory Act
Given the foregoing, the only discriminatory action Ezzell may move forward on is the refusal to rehire. The City contends that the refusal to rehire was not a new or discrete employment action from the termination and thus should not be allowed to proceed. Had the circumstances remained the same following Ezzell's termination, the City's argument may have merit. As it stands, however, the situation changed. Notably, within a few weeks of his termination, Ezzell presented the City with documentation indicating that he could return to full-duty work without the need for an accommodation and he then applied for the identical position he had held for the three prior years and for which the City had listed an opening. These facts distinguish the instant case from cases such as Hargett v. Valley Fed. Sav. Bank, 60 F.3d 754 (11th Cir. 1995), and Burnam v. Amoco Container Co., 755 F.2d 893 (11th Cir. 1985), wherein the Eleventh Circuit concluded that the claims for discrimination in rehiring could not stand [*57]  since the rehire claims were not derived from a new and separate act of discrimination and thus could not resurrect an old discriminatory act that was time-barred. Accordingly, viewing the facts in the light most favorable to Ezzell, he established his prima facie case for a claim of discrimination for the refusal to rehire.

iv. Legitimate Non-Discriminatory Reason
The inquiry now turns to the City's purported legitimate non-discriminatory reason for failing to rehire Ezzell. With respect to the failure to rehire, the City cites to Ezzell's poor work performance as the legitimate non-discriminatory reason for failing to rehire him into the open Maintenance Mechanic III position. As the City contends, a performance review conducted by Cockrell confirmed performance issues Ezzell displayed while working for the City as early as December 2009 (Cockrell Dep., Ex. 1). In the performance review, Cockrell noted that Ezzell was either in a job he could not do or did not want to do, Cockrell thought Ezzell was only there for a paycheck, Ezzell usually needed to do the job over, Ezzell needed to start taking independent action, Ezzell worked on all crews but did not act as someone in charge and [*58]  rather more like a helper, and Ezzell's helper was more like the boss on his crew rather than Ezzell (Cockrell Dep., Ex. 1). Cockrell also stated that Ezzell was a "complainer" and that Cockrell did not want to bring Ezzell back in his department (Cockrell Dep., at 16, 31). Such performance issues were later highlighted in the October 30, 2012 interoffice memorandum regarding Ezzell's recommended termination (Doc. 38-1). In the memorandum, Everhart stated that, "[i]f Ezzell's work and attendance record were better, an argument could made for giving him more time, however that is clearly not the case" (Doc. 38-1). Indeed, Bush testified that Ezzell was not offered the position he previously held because Ezzell "had a very poor performance record with the city, and so the feeling was that the city would be better served by waiting, trying to find someone more competent than Mr. Ezzell had demonstrated" (Doc. 51, Deposition of Sanders Bush ("Bush Dep."), at 56). Accordingly, the City provided a legitimate non-discriminatory reason for failing to rehire Ezzell in the Maintenance Mechanic III position.

v. Pretext
Given the City's legitimate non-discriminatory reason for termination, Ezzell [*59]  must now demonstrate that the City's proffered reason is a pretext for disability discrimination. Ezzell argues that the City's statement regarding failing to rehire Ezzell due to poor work performance constituted pretext. As Ezzell contends, the City could have terminated Ezzell's employment due to poor performance at any time during his three years of employment but did not do so until he was injured, required surgery, and requested accommodation. The record does not indicate that such action was suggested or taken prior to Ezzell's back injury or request for leave or accommodation. Most notably, despite the documented performance issues, Bush explicitly testified that the City did not consider terminating Ezzell's employment prior to his request to take medical leave under the FMLA and that the issue had not been recommended or discussed at all prior to such request (Bush Dep., at 56). Furthermore, the October 30, 2012 interoffice memo also points to Ezzell's inability to return to his regular job without limitations for an extended time as the concern, but that, if Ezzell's work performance and attendance had been better, a consideration could have been made to extend his leave [*60]  (Doc. 38-1). At the very least, an inference could be drawn that Ezzell's request for accommodation and extended leave were primary considerations in the decision to terminate and then not rehire Ezzell. A reasonable factfinder therefore could conclude that the City's proffered reason for failing to rehire Ezzell constituted pretext. Accordingly, summary judgment is not warranted on Ezzell's claim for discriminatory failure to rehire.

B. Retaliation
The ADA additionally prevents retaliation for engaging in protected activity. See 42 U.S.C. § 12203(a); see Stewart v. Happy Herman's Cheshire Bridge, Inc., 117 F.3d 1278, 1287 (11th Cir. 1997). Similar to ADA discrimination claims, courts assess ADA retaliation claims under the same McDonnell Douglas framework employed for retaliation claims under Title VII. Stewart, 117 F.3d at 1287 (citation omitted). Under that framework, to establish a prima facie case of ADA retaliation, a plaintiff must demonstrate that (1) the plaintiff engaged in statutorily protected expression, (2) the plaintiff suffered an adverse employment action, and (3) a causal link exists between the protected expression and the adverse employment action. Id. (citation omitted); see Frazier-White, 818 F.3d at 1258. Once a plaintiff establishes a prima facie case, the burden shifts to the defendant to provide a legitimate non-discriminatory reason [*61]  for its actions that negate the inference of retaliation. Stewart, 117 F.3d at 1287. If the defendant employer comes forward with legitimate non-discriminatory reasons, the plaintiff must then show that the defendant's proffered reasons are a pretextual. Id. (citation omitted). A plaintiff may demonstrate "pretext 'either directly by persuading the court that a discriminatory reason more likely motivated the employer or indirectly by showing that the employer's proffered explanation is unworthy of credence.'" Wofsy v. Palmshores Retirement Cmty., 285 F. App'x 631, 634 (11th Cir. 2008) (quoting Texas Dep't of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 256 (1981)). A plaintiff may do so by pointing to "'weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, incoherencies, or contradictions' in the employer's proffered reason." Wofsy, 285 F. App'x at 634 (quoting Brooks v. County Comm'n of Jefferson Cty., 446 F.3d 1160, 1163 (11th Cir. 2006)). Essentially, the evidence must allow a reasonable factfinder to conclude that the defendant's proffered legitimate reasons were not the actual motivation for its conduct. Banim v. Fla. Dep't of Bus. and Prof'l Regulation, 689 F. App'x 633, 636 (11th Cir. 2017) (citing Silvera v. Orange Cty. Sch. Bd., 244 F.3d 1253, 1258 (11th Cir. 2001)).

i. Protected Activity
A plaintiff may establish the first element of the prima facie case by making a request for a reasonable accommodation, "which is a statutorily protected activity as long as the plaintiff has a good faith, objectively reasonable belief that he was entitled to those accommodations." Palmer v. McDonald, 624 F. App'x 699, 702 (11th Cir. 2015) (per curiam) (citation omitted); Frazier-White, 818 F.3d at 1258 (citation [*62]  omitted) ("The first element may be met by a request for a reasonable accommodation."); Standard, 161 F.3d at 1328 ("Therefore, to satisfy the first element of the prima facie case, it is sufficient that an employee have a good faith, objectively reasonable belief that his activity is protected by the statute."). As discussed more fully above, viewing the facts in the light most favorable to Ezzell, the facts demonstrate that Ezzell engaged in protected activity. Namely, Ezzell presented his light-duty restrictions to Cockrell and Bush, with a good faith, objectively reasonable belief that he could work within those restrictions and thus was entitled to such accommodation. Though, for the reasons articulated above, the light-duty restrictions for the Maintenance Mechanic III position were not in fact reasonable, Ezzell expressed that he believed he could perform the position of Maintenance Mechanic III with those restrictions, and his good faith, objectively reasonable belief was based on his experience in the position and the September 20, 2012 Excuse from Work or School Form from Dr. Billys (Ezzell Dep., at 59, 62, 68 & Ex. 1). Viewing the facts in the light most favorable to Ezzell, therefore, Ezzell engaged [*63]  in protected activity when he requested an accommodation to work with light-duty restrictions.

ii. Adverse Employment Action
With respect to the adverse employment actions, Ezzell contends that the City both terminated him and refused to rehire him. In this context, an employment action is considered "adverse" only where it results in a tangible, negative effect on the plaintiff's employment. Lucas, 257 F.3d at 1261. An employee therefore must demonstrate a serious and material change in the terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, as viewed by a reasonable person in the same circumstances. Shotz v. City of Plantation, Fla., 344 F.3d 1161, 1181-82 (11th Cir. 2003). In this instance, the City both terminated Ezzell's employment and failed to rehire him subsequent to his termination. Both employment actions are inherently adverse, and, thus, Ezzell established the second element of his prima facie case. See Palermo v. Grunau Co., Inc., 220 F. Supp. 3d 1300, 1310 (M.D. Fla. 2016) (stating that "a refusal to rehire is 'undoubtedly an adverse employment action' where an employee reapplied for the position post termination") (citation omitted).

iii. Causal Connection
To establish the third element of a prima facie case, a plaintiff need only demonstrate that the protected activity and the adverse action were not wholly unrelated. Farley v. Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co., 197 F.3d 1322, 1337 (11th Cir. 1999) (citations omitted). [*64]  A plaintiff satisfies this causal-connection requirement if he or she provides sufficient evidence of knowledge by the defendant of the protected activity and that a close temporal proximity exists between the awareness and the adverse action. Higdon v. Jackson, 393 F.3d 1211, 1220 (11th Cir. 2004). Such close temporal proximity provides circumstantial evidence of a causal connection, and even a period of as much as one month between the protected activity and the adverse action is not considered too protracted. Id. Mere temporal proximity must be close, however, so a "three to four month disparity between the statutorily protected expression and the adverse employment action is not enough." Thomas v. Cooper Lighting, 506 F.3d 1361, 1364 (11th Cir. 2007) (citations omitted). Where a substantial delay exists between the protected expression and the adverse action, in the absence of any other evidence tending to show causation, a retaliation claim fails as a matter of law. See Thomas, 506 F.3d at 1364 (citations omitted); see Higdon, 393 F.3d at 1220-21.
Here, Ezzell points to the close temporal proximity between the protected activity and the adverse actions. Namely, Ezzell requested light-duty restrictions on September 24, 2012. Just over one month later, on October 30, 2012, Everhart submitted his memorandum suggesting that the City terminate Ezzell. [*65]  Within a week of the memo, Cockrell telephonically notified Ezzell on November 5, 2012, that the City terminated Ezzell's employment, effective as of November 2, 2012 (Ezzell Dep., at 96-99, 100-01). Then, within three weeks of Ezzell's termination, the City informed Ezzell that he could reapply for his position. Indeed, Ezzell contacted Everhart on November 28, 2012, to inform Everhart about the November 27, 2012 Excuse from Work or School Form from Dr. Billys (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 14), releasing Ezzell to return to full duty, and to provide him with a copy, but Ezzell was told that, because he was terminated and the job was now posted, Ezzell must reapply for his position (Ezzell Dep., at 100-02). On that same day, Ezzell went to HR and filled out a new application for the Maintenance Mechanic III position he had held for the three years prior (Ezzell Dep., at 102, 103). The City did not rehire him at that time.7 Viewing the facts in the light most favorable to Ezzell, therefore, Ezzell established that he engaged in protected activity and, within just over two months, Ezzell was terminated and the City did not rehire him after he submitted his application for his prior position. Accordingly, [*66]  drawing all reasonable inferences in favor of Ezzell, he established close temporal proximity as circumstantial evidence of a causal connection between protected activity and adverse employment actions.

iv. Legitimate Non-Discriminatory Reason
Though the City does not address the legitimate non-discriminatory reason for Ezzell's termination, the October 30, 2012 interoffice memorandum indicates that the extra workload on others as a result of Ezzell's continuous absence was one of the reasons for his termination. Following a conversation with Cockrell regarding his termination, Ezzell called Coughenour and Everhart and was told that the decision to terminate Ezzell had been made because the City did not know if or when Ezzell would return to work (Ezzell Dep., at 97). As Ezzell acknowledged, prior to November 5, 2012, Ezzell had not indicated definitively when he would be coming back to work except to say that he would return once the doctor cleared him (Ezzell Dep., at 97-98). As stated in the October 30, 2012 interoffice memorandum from Everhart to Horwedel, Coughenour, and Bush recommending that Ezzell be terminated, Everhart was concerned that, one month after his surgery, the [*67]  doctor stated that Ezzell's ability to engage in very physical work would be limited indefinitely (Doc. 38-1). The understanding, at that time, was that Ezzell was "not likely to be able to return to his regular job without limitations for an extended time" (Doc. 38-1). As discussed, the last information the City received from Ezzell indicated that he could perform no lifting, pushing, pulling, overhead reaching, prolonged sitting, standing, and walking and that he would be out for an indefinite amount of time due to total temporary disability and then again that he could only return to light-duty status (Ezzell Dep., Ex. 11; Billys Dep., Ex. 3). Everhart stated that the extra workload on others due to Ezzell's continued absence "showed no relief in sight" and, as a result, Everhart recommended no further extension of leave and for the City to move forward with finding a competent replacement to fill the Maintenance Mechanic III position (Doc. 38-1). Bush also stated that the extra workload on others was part of the reason that the City terminated Ezzell's employment and that it was important to hire someone as quickly as possible to relieve the extra workload on others (Bush Dep., [*68]  at 47, 52-53). The City therefore provided a legitimate non-discriminatory reason for terminating Ezzell.
With respect to the failure to rehire, the City points to Ezzell's poor work performance as the legitimate non-discriminatory reason for failing to rehire him into the open Maintenance Mechanic III. For the same reasons discussed above, the City's proffered reason establishes a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for failing to rehire Ezzell in the Maintenance Mechanic III position.

v. Pretext
Ezzell must now demonstrate that the City's proffered reasons constitute pretext for retaliation. Initially, Ezzell asserts that the City's failure to hire someone to fill Ezzell's position for approximately nine months demonstrates that the City's statement regarding the extra workload on others and the need to find a competent replacement to fill the position as a basis for terminating Ezzell constitutes pretext. As Ezzell argues, as of November 28, 2012, Ezzell had worked in the Maintenance Mechanic III position for the City for the three prior years with no suggestion that he was unqualified or subject to termination proceedings; Ezzell had provided documentation to the City that Dr. Billys [*69]  released Ezzell to full-duty work; and Ezzell had applied for the open Maintenance Mechanic III position (see Bush Dep., at 47-53). Despite the "extra workload on others show[ing] no relief in sight" (Doc. 38-1), the City did not rehire Ezzell to fill the position as of November 28, 2012, or any time thereafter. Rather, the position remained open, and thus the extra workload on others remained, for approximately nine months before another individual was hired to fill the position (see Docs. 38-1 & 38-4; Bush Dep., at 53). Though the City attributes the delay in filling the Maintenance Mechanic III position to other factors, such as cutbacks in staffing, a freeze on pay increases, and a non-competitive pay structure (Bush Dep., at 59-60), a reasonable factfinder could conclude that the City's proffered reason for terminating Ezzell constituted pretext for retaliation for requesting an accommodation.
Furthermore, the October 30, 2012 interoffice memorandum cites to Ezzell's inability to return to his regular job duties without limitations for an extended time and the exhaustion of his FMLA leave as factors considered in making the termination determination (Doc. 38-1). The consideration [*70]  of such factors, in this instance, could lead a reasonable factfinder to conclude that the City's reason for terminating Ezzell was based primarily upon his need for accommodation. As such, summary judgment is unwarranted on Ezzell's claim for retaliatory termination.
With regard to the retaliatory failure to rehire claim, Ezzell argues that the City's statement regarding failing to rehire Ezzell due to poor work performance constituted pretext. Again, as explained more fully above, viewing the facts in the light most favorable to Ezzell, a reasonable factfinder could conclude that the City's citation to Ezzell's work performance as the reason it failed to rehire Ezzell into his prior position, which was open at the time he applied, was not the actual motivation for its conduct. Accordingly, summary judgment is likewise not warranted on Ezzell's claim for retaliatory failure to rehire.

IV. Conclusion
For the foregoing reasons, it is hereby
ORDERED:
1. The City's Motion for Summary Judgment (Doc. 33) is granted in part and denied in part, as stated herein.
DONE AND ORDERED in Tampa, Florida, on this 17th day of October, 2017.
/s/ Anthony E. Porcelli
ANTHONY E. PORCELLI
United States Magistrate [*71]  Judge


End of Document

