Fragada v. United Airlines, Inc.
United States District Court for the Central District of California
June 13, 2017, Decided; June 13, 2017, Filed
Case No. CV-16-3914-MWF (JPRx)

Reporter
2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 209568 *
Michael Fragada v. United Airlines, Inc.
Subsequent History: Affirmed by Fragada v. United Airlines, Inc., 2019 U.S. App. LEXIS 912 (9th Cir. Cal., Jan. 10, 2019)
Counsel:  [*1] For Michael Fragada, an individual, Plaintiff: Giacomo Gallai, Nicholas Thomas Hua, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Hua Gallai LLP, Beverly Hills, CA.
For United Airlines, Inc., a Delaware corporation, Defendant: Jarryd M Cooper, LEAD ATTORNEY, Julia Yenha Trankiem, Reed Smith LLP, Los Angeles, CA; Tiffany Renee Thomas, Reed Smith LLP, San Francisco, CA.
For Christine Page, Mediator (ADR Panel): Christine A Page, Gilchrist & Rutter, Santa Monica, CA.
Judges: Honorable MICHAEL W. FITZGERALD, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: MICHAEL W. FITZGERALD
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES—GENERAL

Proceedings (In Chambers): ORDER RE PLAINTIFF'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT [28]; DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT [30]
Before the Court are two dueling Motions for Summary Judgment. Plaintiff filed his Motion for Summary Judgment on May 8, 2017. (Docket No. 28). Defendant filed an Opposition and Plaintiff filed a Reply. (Docket Nos. 37, 51). Defendant filed its competing Motion for Summary Judgment May 15, 2017. (Docket No. 30). Plaintiff filed an Opposition and Defendant filed a Reply. (Docket Nos. 49, 52).
The Court held a hearing on June 12, 2017. For the reasons stated below, the Court GRANTS Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment in its entirety [*2]  and DENIES Plaintiff's Motion. The evidence conclusively shows that Plaintiff was not physically disabled within the definition of FEHA. In addition, no rational juror could conclude that Defendant's justification for firing Plaintiff was a mere pretext for discrimination. Plaintiff's other claims are all derivative of or related to his discrimination claim, and similarly fail.

I. BACKGROUND
Plaintiff has worked for Defendant since August 1993, first as a food service employee and most recently as a Lead Ramp Serviceman. (Plaintiff's Statement of Uncontroverted Facts ("PSUF"), Docket No. 28-2, ¶¶ 1-3). Over ten years ago, Plaintiff was diagnosed with a brain tumor, for which he had to undergo numerous surgeries. (Id. ¶ 6). Plaintiff was ultimately diagnosed with "venous malformation," which caused the tumors in his brain to return and required periodic surgeries. (Id. ¶¶ 8, 10, 29). In addition, Plaintiff was prescribed various medications as a part of this condition. (Id. ¶ 6).
The evidence shows that Plaintiff requested medical leave several times during his employment, which requests were always granted by Defendant. (Defendant's Statement of Uncontroverted Material Facts ("DSUF"), [*3]  Docket No. 30-1, ¶ 17). Some of these requests, including the final request in January 2015, were for Plaintiff's gout, not for his brain condition. (Id. ¶ 18). Plaintiff testified that at no point during his employment as the Lead Ramp Serviceman did he require any accommodation beyond the occasional medical leave. (Id. ¶ 15). In addition, each time Plaintiff returned from medical leave he resumed the same position he held prior to the leave. (Id. ¶ 1).
On July 24, 2015, Plaintiff drove a tractor that collided with a parked cart, which then hit a fellow employee. (Id. ¶ 21). Defendant maintains a Corporate Anti-Drug and Alcohol Prevention Policy, which mandates drug tests when an employee's performance contributed to a "mishap." (Id. ¶ 9, Declaration of Louis Smilanich, Ex. A, Docket No. 33-1). The policy stated that any employee receiving one verified positive drug and/or alcohol test would be immediately fired. (Id.). Plaintiff understood that this policy applied to his employment. (Id. ¶ 12). In addition, Defendant had terminated employees since 2012 for violating the drug policy. (Id. ¶ 13).
In accordance with the drug policy, Plaintiff was directed to submit to a drug test by his [*4]  supervisor, Daryl Foster. (Id. ¶ 21). Plaintiff took the drug test at Concentra Medical Facility, which forwarded the sample to eScreen, Inc., an independent facility. (Id. ¶¶ 22-31). eScreen contracts with a group of licensed physicians, referred to as the Medical Review Officers ("MROs"), who review the drug test results and verify their accuracy and integrity. (Id.). Part of the verification process involves asking the employee about the use of prescription medication. (Id. ¶¶ 10-11). The MRO is independent from Defendant and the process is not controlled by Defendant. (Id. ¶¶ 24-25).
The test came back positive for amphetamine, methamphetamine, and D methamphetamine. (Id. ¶ 31). Plaintiff was given the opportunity to discuss his results with the MRO, and Plaintiff stated he was taking various medications including amphetamine salts. (Id. ¶¶ 26-28). The MRO concluded that the amphetamine medication described by Plaintiff would not result in a positive test for methamphetamine, and verified the positive results. (Id. ¶ 30). On July 30, 2015, the MRO notified United of the positive, verified result, and United immediately suspended Plaintiff's employment. (Id. ¶¶ 31-33).
On August 14, [*5]  2015, Plaintiff's doctor, Darren Neal, sent a letter to United explaining that Plaintiff's positive test was due to medication Dr. Neal has prescribed him, including amphetamine medication to treat Plaintiff's Attention Deficit Disorder ("ADD"). (PSUF ¶ 30).
On August 21, 2015, Defendant conducted an Investigatory Review Meeting with Plaintiff to discuss his termination. (DSUF ¶¶ 34-36). Plaintiff argued at the meeting that the test result was a false positive caused by his prescription medications, a list of which he provided to those in attendance. (Id. ¶ 38). The list confirmed that Plaintiff had been prescribed a 30-pill trial of amphetamine salts by Dr. Neal in November 2014 to treat ADD. (Id.). Dr. Neal had discontinued the prescription for amphetamine salts in December 2014. (Declaration of Julia Trankiem, Docket No. 32-5). In response to Plaintiff's list of prescribed medication, Defendant conducted an investigation into whether Plaintiff had been given ample opportunity to discuss this information with the MRO. (DSUF ¶ 39). The investigation confirmed that Plaintiff had spoken with the MRO prior to the results being verified by the MRO. (Id. ¶ 39).
Plaintiff states that he was [*6]  taking a medication known as Didrex at the time, which could have caused the results of the test. (PSUF ¶¶ 8-10). While Plaintiff told the MRO he was taking this drug, he failed to provide a prescription or other medical documentation for the drug to Defendant or the MRO. (DSUF ¶¶ 40-41). Even with the information that Plaintiff was on Didrex, the MRO did not alter the verified, positive result. (Id. ¶ 40).
Defendant terminated Plaintiff on September 4, 2015, for violating Defendant's drug policy. (Id. ¶ 42). On September 17, Plaintiff filed a grievance regarding the termination decision, which resulted in a grievance hearing on October 16. (Declaration of Carolyn White ("White Decl.") (Docket No. 34) ¶ 18). At the end of the hearing, Defendant gave Plaintiff two more weeks to submit documentation proving the test result was a false positive. (Id.). A month later the MRO notified Defendant that Plaintiff had not submitted any new documentation. (DSUF ¶¶ 46-47). Defendant then denied Plaintiff's grievance. (White Decl. ¶¶ 19-20).
Plaintiff never requested an accommodation or submitted any complaint concerning discrimination during his employment with Defendant. (DSUF ¶ 8). Over a month [*7]  after his termination he requested a desk job. (Id. ¶ 45). But Plaintiff admitted this request had nothing to do with any work restrictions tied to his physical condition. (Id. ¶¶ 43-46).
On August 25, 2016, Plaintiff filed the operative First Amended Complaint ("FAC"), which alleges disability discrimination under California's Fair Employment and Housing Act ("FEHA"), wrongful termination, failure to engage in the interactive process, failure to accommodate, intentional infliction of emotional distress, negligent infliction of emotional distress, and violation of California's Unfair Competition Law ("UCL"). (Docket No. 21).

II. LEGAL STANDARD
"In deciding motions under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56, the Court applies Anderson, Celotex, and their Ninth Circuit progeny. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986); Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). "The court shall grant summary judgment if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). "The moving party initially bears the burden of proving the absence of a genuine issue of material fact. Where the non-moving party bears the burden of proof at trial, the moving party need only prove that there is an absence of evidence to support the non-moving party's [*8]  case. Where the moving party meets that burden, the burden then shifts to the non-moving party to designate specific facts demonstrating the existence of genuine issues for trial." Coomes v. Edmonds Sch. Dist. No. 15, 816 F.3d 1255, 1259 n.2 (9th Cir. 2016) (citing In re Oracle Corp. Sec. Litig., 627 F.3d 376, 387 (9th Cir. 2010)).
"When the party moving for summary judgment would bear the burden of proof at trial, 'it must come forward with evidence which would entitle it to a directed verdict if the evidence went uncontroverted at trial.'" Miller v. Glenn Miller Productions, Inc., 454 F.3d 975, 987 (9th Cir. 2006) (quoting C.A.R. Transp. Brokerage Co. v. Darden Restaurants, Inc., 213 F.3d 474, 480 (9th Cir. 2000)). Once the moving party comes forward with sufficient evidence, "the burden then moves to the opposing party, who must present significant probative evidence tending to support its claim or defense." C.A.R. Transp. Brokerage Co., 213 F.3d at 480 (quoting Intel Corp. v. Hartford Accident & Indem. Co., 952 F.2d 1551, 1558 (9th Cir. 1991)). "A motion for summary judgment may not be defeated, however, by evidence that is 'merely colorable' or 'is not significantly probative.'" Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249-50.
The Court has a duty to evaluate the evidence independently when it decides a dispositive pre-trial motion. Credit Managers Ass'n of S. California v. Kennesaw Life & Acc. Ins. Co., 25 F.3d 743, 749 (9th Cir. 1994). The Court must grant summary judgment if it ultimately determines that no rational or reasonable jury might return a verdict in the nonmoving party's favor based on all the evidence. James River Ins. Co. v. Hebert Schenk, P.C., 523 F.3d 915, 920 (9th Cir. 2008).

III. ANALYSIS
Both parties have filed Motions for Summary Judgment arguing that no genuine issues of fact remain and that judgment should be [*9]  granted in their favor.

A. Exhaustion of Plaintiff's Second Claim
Defendant first argues that Plaintiff has failed to exhaust one of his claims, requiring judgment be entered in Defendant's favor. To bring a civil action for a violation under FEHA, a plaintiff first must exhaust his administrative remedies by filing a complaint with the Department of Fair Employment and Housing ("DFEH"). Cal. Gov't Code §§ 12960, 12965(b); Williams v. Genentech, Inc., 139 Cal. App. 4th 357, 373, 42 Cal. Rptr. 3d 585 (2006) ("In order to bring a civil action under the FEHA, the plaintiff must exhaust his or her administrative remedies by filing a written charge with the DFEH within one year of the alleged employment discrimination and obtaining a right to sue letter."). In determining whether the exhaustion requirement has been met, California law dictates that FEHA provisions are to be liberally construed. See Richards v. CH2M Hill, Inc., 26 Cal. 4th 798, 819, 111 Cal. Rptr. 2d 87, 29 P.3d 175 (2001); 2 Cal. Code Regs. § 10003 ("The department shall liberally construe all complaints to effectuate the purpose of the laws the department enforces to safeguard the civil right of all persons to seek, obtain and hold employment without discrimination."). California courts have held that when submitting allegations to the DFEH, "claimants are not held to specify the charges with literary exactitude." Baker v. Children's Hosp. Med. Ctr., 209 Cal. App. 3d 1057, 1064, 257 Cal. Rptr. 768 (1989). California courts [*10]  may adjudicate claims not specifically made in DFEH complaints so long as the new claims are "like or reasonably related" to the allegations of the original administrative charge. See Okoli v. Lockheed Technical Operations Co., 36 Cal. App. 4th 1607, 1614, 43 Cal. Rptr. 2d 57 (1995). "[A]s to a particular act made unlawful by the Fair Employment and Housing Act, the claimant must specify that act in the administrative complaint, even if the complaint does specify other cognizable wrongful acts." Id. (emphasis in original).
Plaintiff's Second Claim for Relief alleges discrimination based on disability because Defendant "regarded Plaintiff as suffering from 'drug and alcohol problems.'" (FAC ¶ 25). The complaint Plaintiff filed with the DFEH stated that Plaintiff had been fired "because of his medical condition and disability." (Docket No. 21-1). The FAC specifically alleges that Defendant included Plaintiff's supposed "drug and alcohol problems" in the termination report given to Plaintiff. (FAC ¶ 26). But this act is distinct from the acts alleged in the DFEH complaint, which states only that he was fired because of his medical condition and disability. The DFEH complaint makes mention of Plaintiff's "cancer or cancer related medical condition." (Docket No. 21-1). Plaintiff did not include [*11]  anything in the DFEH complaint concerning an allegation that he was fired by Defendant because it regarded him as having drug and alcohol problems. Even construed liberally, firing Plaintiff because he was disabled due to brain tumors is conceptually and factually distinct from an allegation that Defendant fired Plaintiff because it believed he was an alcoholic or drug addict, or that it regarded him as disabled for these reasons. The Court agrees with Defendant that Plaintiff's DFEH complaint did not cover this specific alleged conduct, and that he has failed to administratively exhaust this single claim as a result.
Accordingly, the Court GRANTS Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment as to Plaintiff's Second Claim for Relief.

B. Plaintiff's Discrimination Claims Under FEHA
In a disability discrimination claim under FEHA, "the prima facie case requires the plaintiff to show he or she (1) suffered from a disability, or was regarded as suffering from a disability; (2) could perform the essential duties of the job with or without reasonable accommodations, and (3) was subjected to an adverse employment action because of the disability or perceived disability." Wills v. Super. Ct., 195 Cal. App. 4th 143, 159-60, 125 Cal. Rptr. 3d 1 (2011). The plaintiff "must at [*12]  least show actions taken by the employer from which one can infer, if such actions remained unexplained, that it is more likely than not that such actions were based on a [prohibited] discriminatory criterion[.]" Guz, 24 Cal. 4th 317, 355, 100 Cal. Rptr. 2d 352, 8 P.3d 1089 (2000). "In evaluating FEHA discrimination and retaliation claims, California courts look to federal precedent governing analogous federal laws." Guyton v. Novo Nordisk, Inc., 151 F. Supp. 3d 1057, 1067 (C.D. Cal. 2015).
Under FEHA, a "physical disability" must "limit" a "major life activity." Arteaga v. Brink's, Inc., 163 Cal. App. 4th 327, 345, 77 Cal. Rptr. 3d 654 (2008). "'Limits' is synonymous with making the achievement of a major life activity 'difficult,'" and "Major life activity" includes working. Id. The "limitation" requirement in FEHA is less onerous than the "substantial limitation" requirement in the federal Americans with Disabilities Act. See Cal. Gov't Code § 12926.1(c).
Defendant first argues that Plaintiff was not disabled within the definition of FEHA, and thus his claim must fail as a result. The evidence shows Plaintiff suffered from three physical conditions that might qualify as disabilities: gout, brain tumors, and ADD. (DSUF ¶ 14). Plaintiff does not seem to anywhere assert that his claims are related in any way to his gout. In his deposition, Plaintiff stated that he was "not quite sure" if Defendant had discriminated against him due [*13]  to his tumors, but that it was possible. (Deposition of Michael Fragada ("Fragada Depo.") (Docket No. 32-1) at 233).
On the other hand, the FAC specifically alleges discrimination based on a condition of "venous malformation of the brain resulting in attention deficit disorder." (FAC at 6) (emphasis added). While Plaintiff attempts to argue otherwise in his briefing, the gist of his claim is that Defendant should have taken his ADD, and the medication prescribed to treat it, into account before it fired him. It is the ADD medication that Plaintiff claims caused him to fail the drug test. As will be discussed in more detail below, Plaintiff's arguments fail because the drug test provided Defendant with a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for terminating him. For the time being, it suffices to say that Plaintiff's claims revolve around his ADD diagnosis and the drugs that he took as a result. The tumor condition is relevant only insofar as it may have caused the ADD. Accordingly, the Court agrees with Defendant that Plaintiff's FEHA claims should be understood to allege discrimination on the basis of his ADD diagnosis.
Defendant argues that Plaintiff's ADD does not qualify as a disability [*14]  under FEHA, and the Court agrees. "It is insufficient for [a plaintiff] simply to allege a disability or to identify an injury or physical condition. To proceed as a physically disabled person under the first prong of the statutory definition, [a plaintiff] must demonstrate his injury or physical condition . . . makes 'difficult' the achievement of work or some other major life activity." Gelfo v. Lockheed Martin Corp., 140 Cal. App. 4th 34, 47, 43 Cal. Rptr. 3d 874 (2006). Plaintiff fails to make such a showing.
Plaintiff stated that his doctor told him the tumors gave him a "slight case of ADD." (Fragada Depo. at 131). Dr. Neal's August 2015 letter also stated that his ADD was "slight." (Smilanich Decl, Ex. I (Docket No. 33-9)). Plaintiff also stated that at no time did he require an accommodation while performing his duties at work. (DSUF ¶ 15). Plaintiff freely admits that he could perform the essential duties of his jobs, without any accommodation whatsoever, throughout his two-decade tenure with Defendant. (PSUF ¶ 65).
Defendant also notes that it had no knowledge of Plaintiff's ADD condition at any point prior to the return of the positive result from the MRO. Plaintiff would occasionally request medical leave and return to work with no restrictions whatsoever. [*15]  A FEHA plaintiff must "show that the employees who decided to discharge him knew of his disability." Soria v. Univision Radio Los Angeles, Inc., 5 Cal. App. 5th 570, 592, 210 Cal. Rptr. 3d 59 (2016). And after the positive result, Defendant was told only that Plaintiff suffered from a "slight case" of ADD, which could hardly put it on notice that Plaintiff suffered from a disability within the definition of FEHA.
Plaintiff's arguments in response focus primarily on the tumor condition. At the hearing, Plaintiff emphasized the tumors as well. Even assuming that his claims concern that condition, which they do not, the Court would still conclude that Plaintiff fails to show he suffered from a qualifying disability. The Court in no way means to belittle Plaintiff's condition or trivialize the burden of having several surgeries. But the fact remains that the evidence proves that at no point did the tumors "limit" Plaintiff's ability to work, a requirement under FEHA. Plaintiff took short medical leaves, but always returned without any restrictions. There is no evidence that Plaintiff's tumor condition made "achievement unusually difficult" or ever would. Am. Nat'l Ins. Co. v. Fair Employment & Hous. Com., 32 Cal. 3d 603, 610, 186 Cal. Rptr. 345, 651 P.2d 1151 (1982). Thus, even considering the tumor condition does not save Plaintiff's claims. At the hearing, Plaintiff again emphasized the short [*16]  leaves taken, but the Court reiterates that these leaves did not affect Plaintiff's ability to work. At the hearing, Plaintiff also raised the Soria case. But as Defendant notes, that case involved a plaintiff who was late to work at least nine times within a single year, and was terminated that year. Soria, 5 Cal. App. 5th at 586-88. The plaintiff was thus unable to work due to her condition.
Here, the same cannot be said for Plaintiff, who missed only a few days every few years. In addition, the Court reiterates that Plaintiff's claims are best understood as focusing on the ADD that may have resulted from the tumors, and not the tumors themselves (or the surgeries to remove them). Plaintiff's claims must involve the ADD because it is the medication he took to treat the ADD that he alleges caused the positive drug test. The "accommodation" Plaintiff seeks is that Defendant waive the results of the test, or not discipline him for them. This claim is centered entirely on the ADD, and not the tumors standing alone.
The Court concludes that Plaintiff's physical conditions were not disabilities within the definition of FEHA, and thus his disability discrimination claims must fail. Simply put, Plaintiff's conditions never [*17]  affected his ability to work. He never requested any accommodations, his doctor never placed any restriction on his physical abilities, and he never failed to perform any duty required of his job. Moreover, there is no evidence in the record that the conditions ever could affect his ability. Logically, Plaintiff could not have been fired on account of a disability that never presented itself at work in any way. Focusing especially on Plaintiff's "slight" case of ADD, no reasonable jury could possibly conclude that Plaintiff's ability to work was limited at all. Cf. Gelfo, 140 Cal. App. 4th at 47-48 ("In short, Gelfo conceded he felt he could do anything. The trial court properly precluded him from claiming he had a qualifying actual physical disability, based on his 'clear, unequivocal, uncontroverted testimony . . . that he does not have a disability.' Gelfo's testimony has the conclusive effect of a judicial admission that his physical condition did not render difficult the achievement of any major life activity." (emphasis added)).
Plaintiff also alleges, as discussed, that he was "regarded as" having a disability: drug and alcohol problems. The Court has already concluded that Plaintiff failed to administratively [*18]  exhaust this claim. Even assuming he had exhausted it, however, the Court would still conclude that Plaintiff has not shown he was regarded as disabled. As Defendant notes, current drug use is excluded from FEHA's definition of disability. See Cal. Gov't Code § 12926(m)(6). Inasmuch as Plaintiff's claims are challenging Defendant's drug-testing procedures, "nothing in the FEHA, or any other California statute, purports to prohibit, or place general limitations upon, employer-mandated drug testing." Loder v. City of Glendale, 14 Cal. 4th 846, 865, 59 Cal. Rptr. 2d 696, 927 P.2d 1200 (1997). In addition, Plaintiff testified that he never told anyone at work he had a drug problem; he is not aware of anyone who he believed perceived him as having a drug problem; and he does not have a drug problem. (DSUF ¶ 49). Accordingly, no rational juror could possibly conclude that Defendant "regarded" Plaintiff as having a drug problem.
Accordingly, the Court concludes that no genuine issue of disputed fact remains as to whether Plaintiff was physically disabled within the definition of FEHA. The evidence establishes conclusively that he was not, and his discrimination claims under FEHA must all fail as a result.
Plaintiff's FEHA claims also fail for other reasons, independent of his inability to show a qualifying disability. [*19]  Most crucially, Plaintiff cannot show that Defendant's legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for terminating his employment was pretextual. "California has adopted the three-stage burden-shifting test established by the United States Supreme Court for trying claims of discrimination" under Title VII. Parks v. Bd. of Trustees of California State Univ., 813 F. Supp. 2d 1182, 1193-94 (E.D. Cal. 2011) (citing Guz v. Bechtel National, Inc., 24 Cal. 4th 317, 354, 100 Cal. Rptr. 2d 352, 8 P.3d 1089 (2000); Metoyer v. Chassman, 504 F.3d 919, 941 (9th Cir. 2007)).
Under the burden-shifting framework of McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973), claims of employment discrimination must be evaluated as follows:
To establish a prima facie case, plaintiffs "must offer evidence that 'give[s] rise to an inference of unlawful discrimination.'" Godwin v. Hunt Wesson, Inc., 150 F.3d 1217, 1220 (9th Cir.1998) (alteration in original). Plaintiffs may establish a prima facie case based on circumstantial evidence by showing: (1) that they are members of a protected class; (2) that they were qualified for their positions and performing their jobs satisfactorily; (3) that they experienced adverse employment actions; and (4) that "similarly situated individuals outside [their] protected class were treated more favorably, or other circumstances surrounding the adverse employment action give rise to an inference of discrimination." Peterson v. Hewlett—Packard Co., 358 F.3d 599, 603 (9th Cir. 2004); see also Wallis v. J.R. Simplot Co., 26 F.3d 885, 889 (9th Cir. 1994).
Hawn v. Exec. Jet Mgmt., Inc., 615 F.3d 1151, 1156 (9th Cir. 2010). Once a plaintiff meets his initial burden to establish a prima facie case, the defendant must articulate [*20]  a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the challenged action. After this showing, the plaintiff must prove that the proffered reason is merely a pretext for discrimination.
Here, even assuming that Plaintiff had met his prima facie burden, Defendant has put forth a legitimate reason for firing him: the verified, positive drug test result. Plaintiff thus has the burden of showing that this reason is pretextual. This he entirely fails to do. Giving Plaintiff every benefit of the doubt, it appears he believes he failed the drug test solely as a result of drugs prescribed to treat his ADD. In other words, he thinks the test was a "false positive," or that the MRO should have modified the results after he provided them with a prescription list. In either case, Plaintiff alleges nothing more than a wrong or mistaken decision by United (and the MRO). But an employee cannot "simply show the employer's decision was wrong, mistaken, or unwise. Rather, the employee must demonstrate such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, incoherencies, or contradictions in the employer's proffered legitimate reasons for its action that a reason able factfinder could rationally find them 'unworthy [*21]  of credence.'" Horn v. Cushman & Wakefield W., Inc., 72 Cal. App. 4th 798, 807, 85 Cal. Rptr. 2d 459 (1999).
Far from revealing any pretext, the evidence confirms that Defendant's decision to terminate Plaintiff was made only after Defendant made every effort to verify the MRO's positive finding. Defendant ensured Plaintiff discussed his prescribed drugs with the MRO, allowed Plaintiff to provide additional documentation to the MRO, and waited weeks to hear back from the MRO regarding any additional evidence Plaintiff provided. Only after the MRO—an independent group not controlled by Defendant in any way—confirmed the positive result did Defendant fire Plaintiff. At the hearing, Plaintiff again argued that Defendant should have cancelled the test results. First, Plaintiff argued that he had not had the chance to give the MRO information regarding his prescriptions. But the evidence establishes conclusively that Plaintiff was given ample time to do so. Plaintiff also raised the claim that the "chain of custody" was improper for the test. But this argument goes only to, as previously discussed, whether the decision to fire Plaintiff was "wrong" as a technical matter. It does nothing to show that he was discriminated against for his disability. In addition, Defendant's official [*22]  stated that only the MRO can cancel a test, and that the MRO is the entity that determines whether the chain of custody was correct. (LeBlanc Depo., Docket No. 41-8, at 31). As stated above, Defendant was entitled to rely on the independent drug test that returned with a verified, positive result, even after Plaintiff submitted information regarding his prescription drugs to the MRO.
At the hearing, Plaintiff also raised the issue of Defendant's decision to take away Plaintiff's healthcare after the initial positive result. The Court is not entirely sure why this fact is relevant. To the extent Plaintiff is arguing this lack of insurance disabled his ability to present evidence to the MRO, the evidence shows that Plaintiff was able to do so. Thus, this argument is also rejected.
At the hearing, Plaintiff also emphasized that Defendant knew about Plaintiff's prescription drug use. Plaintiff fails to take account of the fact that the MRO knew of the drug use and concluded that the result would not have been caused by the drugs Plaintiff was taking at the time. That Plaintiff was taking certain drugs does not entitle him to an exemption from Defendant's general drug policy when those prescription [*23]  drugs had no connection to the positive test result.
Accordingly, no rational juror could possibly conclude that Defendant's legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for firing Plaintiff was, in fact, mere pretext for discrimination. Thus, even if Plaintiff were able to establish his prima facie case, summary judgment would still be granted to Defendant.
Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment is GRANTED with respect to Plaintiff's First and Second Claims for Relief.

C. Plaintiff's Claims for Failure to Accommodate and Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process
Plaintiff's Fourth and Fifth Claims for Relief allege failure to accommodate Plaintiff's disability and failure to engage in the interactive process concerning Plaintiff's disability. (Docket No. 21). Because the Court concludes that Plaintiff has failed to show any physical disability under FEHA, these claims naturally must fail. Because Plaintiff was not physically disabled, "logically, the obligation to work with an applicant to find a reasonable accommodation never came into play." Mankaruse v. Raytheon Co., 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 172826 , 2016 WL 7324154, at *7 (C.D. Cal. Dec. 8, 2016). Defendant also points out that Plaintiff never requested any special accommodation during his employment. (DSUF ¶¶ 17, 43-45); see also Wells v. Mutual of Enumclaw, 2005 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 48463, 2005 WL 2035066, at *7 (D. Idaho Aug. 22, 2005) ("Having [*24]  found Plaintiff failed to request accommodation until after his termination, the employer could not have terminated Wells to avoid participating in the interactive process of accommodation.").
Defendant need not accommodate a disability that does not exist, nor engage in an interactive process when Plaintiff never requested one in the first place. The Court GRANTS Defendant's Motion on Plaintiff's Fourth and Fifth Claim for Relief.

D. Plaintiff's Wrongful Termination and Unfair Competition Claims
Plaintiff's Third and Eighth Claims for Relief are for termination in violation of public policy and violation of California's Unfair Competition Law ("UCL"). A prerequisite to Plaintiff's public policy claim is a qualifying disability, which he cannot show. See Madrigal v. Senior Aerospace SSP, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 105836, 2016 WL 4251573, at *2 (C.D. Cal. Aug. 9, 2016) (dismissing public policy claim along with disability discrimination claim for failure to show a physical disability). In addition, Plaintiff's UCL claim is inextricably tied to his statutory claims under FEHA. See Asencio v. Miller Brewing Co., 283 F. App'x 559, 561 (9th Cir. 2008) ("Because Asencio's UCL cause of action was based solely on the alleged FEHA violations, and contained no separate allegations that Miller's conduct was unfair, her cause of action was one for unlawful, rather than unfair, [*25]  business practices. The district court therefore properly entered judgment on the pleadings in favor of Miller on Asencio's claim based on UCL's 'unfair' prong."); Simms v. DNC Parks & Resorts at Tenaya, Inc., 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 82838, 2015 WL 3912150, at *14 (E.D. Cal. June 25, 2015) ("Plaintiff's UCL claim is brought on the bases of the alleged FEHA violations and CFRA retaliation. The alleged FEHA and CFRA violations are the only unlawful business practices alleged by Plaintiff. Summary judgment will be granted on all of Plaintiff's FEHA claims and his CRFA claim. Therefore, there is no triable issue as to whether Defendants are liable for unlawful business practices based on FEHA or the CFRA. Hence, summary judgment will be granted on this claim.").
Accordingly, the Court GRANTS Defendant's Motion as to Plaintiff's Third and Eighth Claims for Relief.

E. Plaintiff's Claim for Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress
Plaintiff's Sixth Claim for Relief is for intentional infliction of emotional distress ("IIED"). (Docket No. 21). To prove his IIED claim, Plaintiff must show "(1) extreme and outrageous conduct by the defendant with the intention of causing, or reckless disregard of the probability of causing, emotional distress; (2) the plaintiff's suffering severe or extreme emotional distress; and [*26]  (3) actual and proximate causation of the emotional distress by the defendant's outrageous conduct." Hughes v. Pair, 46 Cal. 4th 1035, 1050, 95 Cal. Rptr. 3d 636, 209 P.3d 963 (2009). The Court agrees with Defendant that Plaintiff has failed entirely to do so here. No rational juror could conclude that Plaintiff's termination—based on a positive, verified drug test conducted by an independent group of medical professionals—was "extreme" or "outrageous." Cf. Janken v. GM Hughes Elecs., 46 Cal. App. 4th 55, 80, 53 Cal. Rptr. 2d 741 (1996) ("Managing personnel is not outrageous conduct beyond the bounds of human decency, but rather conduct essential to the welfare and prosperity of society."). Neither is there any evidence showing Defendant's actions were undertaken with the intent of causing emotional distress to Plaintiff.
The Court GRANTS Defendant's Motion as to Plaintiff's Sixth Claim for Relief.

F. Negligent Infliction of Emotional Distress
Plaintiff's Seventh Claim for Relief is for negligent infliction of emotional distress ("NIED"). (Docket No. 21). Intentional conduct, such as a termination decision, cannot logically support a claim for negligence. See Semore v. Pool, 217 Cal. App. 3d 1087, 1105, 266 Cal. Rptr. 280 (1990) ("Plaintiff has also failed to state a cause of action for negligent infliction of emotional distress. . . . It is clear, however, that there was no duty not to discharge defendants and [*27]  that any actions by the employer were intentional, not negligent."); see also Edwards v. U.S. Fid. & Guar. Co., 848 F. Supp. 1460, 1466 (N.D. Cal. 1994) ("[W]here the conduct alleged is intentional, it cannot be used as a basis for a negligent infliction of emotional distress claim.").
Accordingly, the Court GRANTS Defendant's Motion as to Plaintiff's Seventh Claim for Relief.

G. Punitive Damages
Plaintiff's FAC requests punitive damages. Because the Court has determined that judgment is appropriate in favor of Defendant's on each claim for relief, the Court also GRANTS Defendant's Motion as to Plaintiff's request for punitive damages.

IV. CONCLUSION
The Court GRANTS Defendant's Motion in its entirety and grants judgment in Defendant's favor on each of Plaintiff's claims for relief. The Court DENIES Plaintiff's Motion.
This Order shall constitute notice of entry of judgment pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 58. Pursuant to Local Rule 58-6, the Court ORDERS the Clerk to treat this order, and its entry on the docket, as an entry of judgment.
IT IS SO ORDERED.


End of Document

