Fults v. Nissan N. Am. Inc.
United States District Court for the Eastern District of Tennessee
September 16, 2020, Filed
No.: 4:18-CV-73-TAV-CHS

Reporter
2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 261431 *
DENA FULTS, Plaintiff, v. NISSAN NORTH AMERICA INC., Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Nissan North America Inc., Defendant: Kenneth A Weber, LEAD ATTORNEY, Baker Donelson Bearman Caldwell & Berkowitz PC, Nashville, TN; Megan M Sutton, Baker Donelson Bearman Caldwell & Berkowitz (Nashville), Nashville, TN.
For Dena Fults, Plaintiff: Douglas S Hamill, Donna J Mikel, Mikel & Hamill PLLC, Chattanooga, TN; James Moss Johnson, LEAD ATTORNEY, Law Offices of James M. Johnson, Chattanooga, TN.
Judges: Thomas A. Varlan, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: Thomas A. Varlan
Opinion



MEMORANDUM OPINION AND ORDER
This case concerns alleged discrimination in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq. Plaintiff Dena Fults ("Fults"), was formerly employed by Defendant Nissan North America, Inc. ("Nissan"), and claims that her position was terminated because of Nissan's failure to provide reasonable accommodations for her asthma. Now before the Court is Defendant Nissan's Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. 21] and Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment [Doc. 25]. These issues have been thoroughly briefed and are ripe for decision [Docs. 22, 26, 31, 32, 35, 36, 38, 41, 46, 47, 49, 50, 51, 52].
For the reasons that follow, Defendant's motion is DENIED, and Plaintiff's motion is GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART.

I. STANDARD OF [*2]  REVIEW
Rule 56(a) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure provides that "[t]he court shall grant summary judgment if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." In ruling on a motion for summary judgment, the court must draw all reasonable inferences in favor of the nonmoving party. McLean v. 988011 Ontario Ltd., 224 F.3d 797, 800 (6th Cir. 2000). As such, the moving party has the burden of conclusively showing the lack of any genuine issue of material fact. Smith v. Hudson, 600 F.2d 60, 63 (6th Cir. 1979). To successfully oppose a motion for summary judgment, "the non-moving party . . . must present sufficient evidence from which a jury could reasonably find for him." Jones v. Muskegon Cty., 625 F.3d 935, 940 (6th Cir. 2010) (citing Anderson v. Liberty Lobbying, Inc., 447 U.S. 242, 252 (1986)).

II. BACKGROUND
On April 15, 2014, Fults began working as a machining technician at Nissan's Decherd, Tennessee, plant [Doc. 22 p. 2]. In 2015, Fults was diagnosed with asthma by her treating pulmonologist, Dr. Oscar Hernandez ("Dr. Hernandez") [Doc. 22 p. 4; Doc. 26 p. 2]. On July 31, 2016, Fults visited Nissan's on-site medical clinic and subsequently failed a breathalyzer test [Doc. 22 p. 3; Doc. 26 p. 5]. As a result, a representative from human resources, Darby Johnson ("Johnson"), informed Fults that she was temporarily suspended and subject to an alcohol treatment program [*3]  [Doc. 22 pp. 4-5]. When Fults returned to work shortly after on August 5, 2016, she again failed a breathalyzer test [Doc. 22 p. 6]. As a result, Fults's employment was suspended until further notice [Doc. 22. p. 6].
During both the July 31 and August 5 testing incidents, Fults maintained that her prescription inhaler, Ventolin, caused a false-positive on her breathalyzer test [Doc. 22 pp. 4, 6]. On August 9, 2016, Fults provided Nissan with a note from Dr. Hernandez stating: "Patient is on Ventolin per my prescription for asthma that can interfere [with] breathalyzer test. Please contact the office for any further questions." [Doc. 22 p. 7; Doc. 1-3 p. 1; Doc. 26 p. 6]. In response, Nissan contacted Medical Review Officer Dr. Charles Tessier ("Dr. Tessier") who stated that although some inhalers may interfere with a breathalyzer test, the company's standard practice of performing a second test fifteen minutes later removed the risk of a false-positive result [Doc. 22 p. 7; Doc. 23-1 p. 117]. In other words, it was Dr. Tessier's medical opinion that Fults failed the tests because of alcohol, not because of the Ventolin inhaler [Doc. 22 p. 7].
On August 12, 2016, Johnson contacted Fults, [*4]  informed her of Dr. Tessier's conclusion, and agreed that Fults could return to work so long as she consented to random breathalyzer testing moving forward [Doc. 22 p. 8]. Fults agreed and continued her employment without incident for a one-year period—during which she passed all breathalyzer tests [Doc. 22 p. 8; Doc. 26 p. 7]. During this time, Fults informed Nissan representatives that she was unable to use her inhaler for fear of triggering another false-positive [Doc. 26 p. 6; Doc. 26-2 p. 33]. On September 1, 2017, however, Fults failed her breathalyzer test for the third and final time [Doc. 22 p. 9]. Fults again claimed that she used her Ventolin inhaler shortly before taking the test and requested that she be tested in another way—e.g., by blood, urine sample, or hair follicle [Doc. 22 p. 9]. Nissan denied this request, and Johnson informed Fults that Nissan was terminating her employment based on the three failed breathalyzer tests [Doc. 22 pp. 9-10].
Fults initiated the present action on December 6, 2018, asserting ADA claims for failure to accommodate, failure to engage in the interactive process, and retaliation. [Doc. 1 pp. 1, 6-7]. The parties stipulated to the dismissal [*5]  of the ADA retaliation claim [Doc. 20 p. 1]. Both parties have now moved for summary judgment [Docs. 23, 25], and the relevant issues have been thoroughly briefed [Docs. 22, 26, 31, 32, 35, 36, 38, 41, 46, 47, 49, 50, 51, 52].1

III. ANALYSIS

A. Nissan's Motion for Summary Judgment
Nissan contends that Fults's claims for Nissan's alleged failure to provide a reasonable accommodation and to engage in the interactive process must both be dismissed as a matter of law [Doc. 22 p. 10]. The Court will consider these issues in turn.

1. Reasonable Accommodation
Nissan first contends that Fults's claim for failure to provide a reasonable accommodation fails as a matter of law [Doc. 22 p. 10]. The ADA provides that "[n]o covered entity shall discriminate against a qualified individual on the basis of disability in regard to job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). Relevant here, "discrimination" is defined to include "not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability . . . ." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A).
 [*6] The Sixth Circuit recently outlined the relevant test under the direct evidence framework:2
(1) The plaintiff bears the burden of establishing that he or she is disabled. (2) The plaintiff bears the burden of establishing that he or she is "otherwise qualified" for the position despite his or her disability: (a) without accommodation from the employer; (b) with an alleged "essential" job requirement eliminated; or (c) with a proposed reasonable accommodation. (3) The employer will bear the burden of proving that a challenged job criterion is essential, and therefore a business necessity, or that a proposed accommodation will impose an undue hardship upon the employer.
Tchankpa, 951 F.3d at 811 (quoting Kleiber v. Honda of Am. Mfg., Inc., 485 F.3d 862, 869 (6th Cir. 2007)).3 Implicit in this test is the notion that a plaintiff's proposed accommodation must be both "necessary" and "reasonable." Id. at 813; see also Tri-Cities Holdings LLC v. Tenn. Health Servs. & Dev. Agency, No. 2:13-CV-305, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 136536, 2017 WL 3687846, at *18 (E.D. Tenn. Aug. 25, 2017) ("Three inquiries are made with respect to a requested accommodation: (1) Whether the modification requested was reasonable, (2) whether it was necessary for the disabled individual, and (3) whether it would fundamentally alter the nature of the program or activity." (citation omitted)).
The source of debate in the present case is whether the proposed accommodation of using an alternative method of alcohol testing was necessary and reasonable. Nissan does not contest, for the purposes of its own motion, that Fults satisfies most of the elements of this test [Doc. 22 p. 10]. For instance, the parties agree that: Fults suffers from asthma which qualifies as a disability under the ADA; Fults was otherwise qualified for her position as a machining technician, at least in the sense that her asthma did not prevent her from doing her job; Nissan was aware of her asthma; and Fults requested an accommodation [Doc. 22 p. 10; Doc. 26 pp. 2-3, 5]. Nissan disputes, however, whether the requested accommodation was necessary and reasonable [Doc. 22 p. 10].
While Nissan discusses the "necessary" and "reasonableness" elements separately, they are inextricably linked. For instance, a proposed accommodation cannot be said to be "reasonable" if it is not also "necessary." See, e.g., Tchankpa, 951 F.3d at 812 ("So a disabled [*8]  employee cannot ask to work from home for convenience and then sue under the ADA if that request is denied."). In Nance v. Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co., 527 F.3d 539 (6th Cir. 2008), the Sixth Circuit highlighted that the proposed changes must be "necessary accommodations in light of [a plaintiff's] physical limitations." Id. at 557. In the present case, the proposed accommodation and the rationale for it are simple. Fults requested that she be subject to a different form of alcohol testing than her co-workers because her use of asthma medication was resulting in a false-positive breathalyzer result.
Admittedly, this case is odd for several reasons. Nissan does not make the traditional arguments that alternative alcohol testing would have eliminated an essential part of Fults's job or would have imposed an undue burden on the company. See Gleed v. AT & T Mobility Servs., LLC, 613 F. App'x 535, 538 (6th Cir. 2015) ("In response, [the employer] offers none of the arguments one typically sees in ADA cases. [The employer] does not contend that prolonged standing was an essential part of [the employee's] job; it does not contend that allowing him to sit would have imposed an undue hardship on [the employer] . . . ."). Additionally, passing a breathalyzer test is a requirement for all of Nissan's employees, while a proposed accommodation [*9]  generally goes to the employee's specific work function—e.g.: a request to transfer to a less physically demanding job, a request for extra breaks from an assembly line, or a request for occasional sitting during the work shift. See, e.g., Kleiber, 485 F.3d at 869; Fisher, 951 F.3d at 419; Gleed, 613 F. App'x at 538. In the present case, Fults's asthma did not prevent her from completing her work as a machining technician; it allegedly prevented her from passing a breathalyzer test. Regardless, if this Court credits the testimony of Fults, her treating doctor, and her expert witness, as it must at the summary judgment stage, Fults's requested accommodation was "necessary" in the literal sense. Fults suffers from asthma. She was prescribed Ventolin to treat her asthma. Her use of the Ventolin resulted in a false-positive breathalyzer result. If she had been tested differently to accommodate for her asthma-related inhaler use, she would have presumably not have failed her alcohol screening and would not have been terminated. In other words, but for Nissan's failure to accommodate her asthma, Fults would not have been terminated.4
Moreover, Nissan's argument misses the mark because it does not actually argue that Fults's proposed [*10]  accommodation was not necessary in either the medical or literal sense. Rather, Nissan appears to contend that Nissan cannot be liable because it had determined at the time that the proposed accommodation was not "necessary." An employer's unilateral determination about what is or is not a necessary accommodation, however, is not dispositive on this issue. Fults informed Johnson that she believed her inhaler was causing the failed alcohol tests. Fults then promptly followed up by providing Nissan with a note from Dr. Hernandez confirming that the inhaler could in fact cause a false-positive. Nissan responded by seeking a second opinion from Dr. Tessier, who stated that the 15-minute break between the initial test and the confirmation test would prevent an inhaler from causing a false-positive on the second test [Doc. 23-1 p. 117]. Dr. Tessier had no contact with Fults or Dr. Hernandez prior to making this determination. At trial, Fults intends to offer the testimony of her medical expert Dr. Jimmie Valentine ("Dr. Valentine"), who will agree with Dr. Hernandez that Fults's use of the Ventolin inhaler could have caused a false-positive breathalyzer test [Doc. 26 p. 5; Doc. 27-7 p. 5]. [*11] 
A sister court dealt with a similar false-positive situation in Ozee v. Henderson County, No. 4:08-CV-5-JHM, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 37114, 2009 WL 1208182 (W.D. Ky. May 1, 2009). The court granted summary judgment in favor of the employer in large part because of "the absence of anything in the record to show that [the medication] could cause a false positive . . ." Id. at *3 (emphasis in original). In the present case by contrast, a jury could choose to credit the expertise of Dr. Hernandez and Dr. Valentine over that of Dr. Tessier, and thereby conclude that Fults's proposed accommodation was "necessary." As such, given the conflicting medical evidence, there remains a genuine dispute of material fact as to whether or not Fults's requested accommodation was necessary.
This case is readily distinguishable from others in which courts have concluded as a matter of law that a proposed accommodation was not necessary. Most recently, the Sixth Circuit in Tchankpa considered the claim of a plaintiff who requested to work from home several days a week on account of his injured shoulder. Tchankpa, 951 F.3d at 813. When dismissing the ADA claim, the Court emphasized two dispositive facts: (1) the employee failed to provide documentation justifying his proposed accommodation even when his employer requested [*12]  more information; and (2) the employee only fully explained his need for accommodation once the litigation began, not when requesting the accommodation from his employer. Id. at 813. The present case has no comparable facts. Fults provided Johnson with a note from Dr. Hernandez about Fults's asthma and use of Ventolin. This note explicitly encouraged Nissan to reach out to Dr. Hernandez for more information: "Please contact the office for any further questions." [Doc. 1-3 p. 1]. No representative from Nissan ever attempted to contact Dr. Hernandez. Nissan cannot now fault Fults for not providing additional information about her medical necessity when it never requested additional information from her. Further, unlike the plaintiff in Tchankpa, Fults fully explained her need for an accommodation at the time she requested it.
Turning now to the related concept of reasonableness, a reasonable accommodation "may include . . . acquisition or modification of equipment or devices, appropriate adjustment or modifications of examinations, training materials or policies, the provision of qualified readers or interpreters, and other similar accommodations for individuals with disabilities." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(9). The reasonableness [*13]  of a proposed accommodation is generally a question of fact. Fisher, 951 F.3d at 419 (citing Cassidy v. Detroit Edison Co., 138 F.3d 629, 634 (6th Cir. 1998)). A plaintiff need only show that the requested accommodation "seems reasonable on its face." Gleed, 613 F. App'x at 538 (quoting U.S. Airways v. Barnett, 535 U.S. 391, 401 (2002), 122 S. Ct. 1516, 152 L. Ed. 2d 589). First, accommodations are reasonable if they "address a key obstacle preventing [the employee] from performing a necessary function of [the job] . . . ." Jakubowski v. Christ Hosp., Inc., 627 F.3d 195, 202 (6th Cir. 2010) (citation omitted). Nissan has admitted that Fults was required to "remain unimpaired, which is an essential function of her job" [Doc. 31 p. 3]. Insofar as affording Fults an alternate testing method would have allowed Fults to perform this essential function by passing her alcohol screenings, the requested accommodation is reasonable. Next, the Sixth Circuit has held that "an accommodation is likely unreasonable if it frustrates attendance or creates 'an unlimited ability to leave work[.]'" Tchankpa, 951 F.3d at 812 (alteration in original) (quoting Banks v. Bosch Rexroth Corp., 610 F. App'x 519, 528 (6th Cir. 2015)). There is no indication that Fults's proposed accommodation of alternate alcohol testing would have resulted in her missing substantial amounts of work, nor, for that matter, any work whatsoever. Finally, the Sixth Circuit has also stated that "employers need not immediately implement or accept accommodations proposed by an employee. [*14]  So a delay in providing a reasonable accommodation is not always actionable." Id. at 812-13 (internal citation omitted) (citing Gerton v. Verizon S. Inc., 145 F. App'x 159, 168 (6th Cir. 2005)). The timing here, however, does not support Nissan. More than one year elapsed between Fults's first request for accommodation and her eventual termination.
The only specific argument that Nissan proffers for why Fults's requested accommodation is not reasonable is that other methods of alcohol testing, such as from urine or blood samples, do not provide immediate results [Doc. 22 p. 13]. Admittedly, it is important to workplace safety to determine in real-time if an employee is intoxicated. This argument, however, does not explain why Nissan could not have used one of the alternative methods before deciding to fire Fults, a decision that was not made on the spot in real-time. In fact, following Fults's failed breathalyzer tests, she was repeatedly placed on several-day suspensions during which time alternative testing presumably could have been completed assuming appropriate samples were taken after a positive breathalyzer test [Doc. 22 pp. 4-8].
In sum, Nissan has failed to direct this Court to any caselaw that would justify resolution of this question of fact as a matter [*15]  of law. To the contrary, if Fults's medication resulted in false-positive breathalyzer results, using a different method of testing seems reasonable on its face, especially when taking the facts in the light most favorable to Fults. As such, Nissan has failed to carry its burden to show for summary judgment purposes that Fults's requested accommodation was unnecessary or unreasonable.5

2. Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process
Nissan next contends that Fults's claim for failure to engage in the interactive process must fail as a matter of law [Doc. 22 p. 10]. Regulations promulgated pursuant to the ADA provide that "[t]o determine the appropriate reasonable accommodation it may be necessary for the covered entity to initiate an informal, interactive process with the individual with a disability in need of the accommodation." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3). "This process should identify the precise limitations resulting from the disability and potential reasonable accommodations that could overcome those limitations." Id. "Even though the interactive process is not described in the statute's text, the interactive process is mandatory, and both parties have a duty to participate in good faith." Kleiber, 485 F.3d at 871 (internal [*16]  footnote omitted) (citations omitted). "When a party obstructs the process or otherwise fails to participate in good faith, 'courts should attempt to isolate the cause of the breakdown and then assign responsibility.'" Id. (quoting Bultemeyer v. Fort Wayne Cmty. Sch., 100 F.3d 1281, 1285 (7th Cir. 1996)). Finally, the Sixth Circuit has identified several circumstances that may indicate a failure on the part of the employer to engage in the interactive process:
Failing to discuss a reasonable accommodation in a meeting in which the employer takes an adverse employment action against an injured employee . . . failing to assist an employee in seeking an accommodation . . . [or] a cursory medical examination and summary conclusion that a disabled individual is not fit for employment.
Rorrer v. City of Stow, 743 F.3d 1025, 1040-41 (6th Cir. 2014) (internal citations omitted) (citation omitted).
In the present case, a reasonable jury could conclude that Nissan failed to meaningfully engage in the interactive process with Fults. Fults provided a note from Dr. Hernandez, her treating pulmonologist, about the risk that Ventolin would case a false-positive, and Fults thereafter repeatedly requested that she be subject to an alternative method of alcohol testing. Nissan responded by contacting Dr. Tessier, who never contacted [*17]  Fults or Dr. Hernandez to gather additional information. Even so, Dr. Tessier concluded in a one-page opinion that the 15-minute break and retest should prevent a false-positive from occurring [Doc. 23-1 p. 117]. Once Nissan had this opinion in hand, Fults and Nissan did not discuss the feasibility of using an alternative means of alcohol testing. Put simply, there was no interaction between the parties during what should have been an interactive process. Johnson never spoke with Fults at length to better understand her inhaler use, and no Nissan employee ever contacted Dr. Hernandez to better understand how Fults's disability could best be accommodated. Rather, Dr. Tessier's one-page memo on this issue is akin to Keith v. County of Oakland, 703 F.3d 918 (6th Cir. 2013), where the Sixth Circuit criticized the employer for basing its employment decision on a "cursory medical examination" by a doctor with "no education, training, or experience in assessing the ability" of the disabled individual. Id. at 924.
Moreover, there is no evidence that Nissan ever meaningfully explored whether its on-site clinic could perform the alternative methods of testing. As the Sixth Circuit has noted, "[o]nce [the employee] requested this reasonable accommodation, the [*18]  employer had a duty to explore . . . what types of accommodations could be made." Dolgencorp, 899 F.3d at 434 (citations omitted). If Nissan had explored its options in good faith as required by the ADA, it may have found that the staff of medical professionals already employed at its onsite clinic—including two full-time nurse practitioners and four full-time nurses—could have easily performed an alternative test on Fults [Doc. 26 p. 7; Doc. 27-3 pp. 20-22]. If Nissan had performed an alternative alcohol test, this entire case would have been unnecessary regardless of the results. If the alternative test had been positive, then Nissan could have fired Fults while still accommodating for her asthma. Alternatively, if the test result had been negative, then Nissan would not have fired Fults in the first place-thereby obviating the entire basis for this case.6
Also relevant to the interactive process, a nurse practitioner working at Nissan's onsite clinic, Beth Elliott ("Elliott"), conducted an experiment on the potential of inhalers to cause a false-positive breathalyzer result. Elliott used her son's inhaler multiple times and received a false-positive when she first administered the breathalyzer test [Doc. 35-2 [*19]  p. 2]. After waiting the standard 15 minutes, however, she received a negative breathalyzer result. This test lends support to Fults's theory that her use of her inhaler was causing false-positive test result, but it also supports Nissan's theory that a 15-minute break would prevent a false-positive. Rather than discussing these findings with Fults, Johnson said in an email that "this isn't anything that [Fults] should have been told about as it is something that she could twist and use against us." [Doc. 35-2 p. 2]. As such, this evidence could suggest that Johnson was not interested in engaging Fults in a good faith conversation about her disability and its relation to false-positive breathalyzer tests.
Based on the evidence presented, it does not appear that Nissan seriously considered granting Fults's proposed accommodation or otherwise considered ways to accommodate for her asthma-related inhaler use. Serious consideration and a collaborative process is all that the "interactive process" requirement demands. Because Nissan has failed to demonstrate that it engaged in this process in good faith as a matter of law, it is not entitled to summary judgment on this issue.7

B. Fults's [*20]  Motion for Summary Judgment
Fults moves for summary judgment on the first three elements of her ADA claim and on Nissan's undue hardship defense [Doc. 25; Doc 26 p. 1]. The federal rules permit partial summary judgment, so long as the movant "identif[ies] each claim or defense—or the part of each claim or defense—on which summary judgment is sought . . . ." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). The Court will therefore consider these issues in turn.8

1. Three Elements of Fults's ADA Claim
Fults contends that she is entitled to summary judgment on three elements of her ADA claim—i.e., she wants this Court to conclusively find that she is disabled under the ADA, that she was otherwise qualified for her job, and that Nissan knew she was disabled [Doc. 26 p. 1].
Beginning with the first element—whether plaintiff was disabled—Fults offers testimony from her treating pulmonologist, Dr. Hernandez, who stated that Fults suffered from asthma and diminished breathing capacity [Doc. 26 pp. 2-3]. Nissan carefully reviewed Fults's medical records regarding her asthma and does not dispute that she is disabled as defined by the ADA [Doc. 31 p. 2]. As such, Fults is entitled to summary judgment on this element. Nissan disputes, however, [*21]  whether Fults was otherwise qualified for her position and whether Nissan was aware that her asthma rose to the level of a disability [Doc. 31 pp. 3-5].
Turning to the second element—whether the plaintiff was otherwise qualified for the position—Fults highlights her recent positive performance evaluations and the fact that she was only fired for the failed breathalyzer tests, not for any performance deficiency [Doc. 26 p. 3]. On this point, Nissan pursues an interesting strategy. Nissan concedes that Fults's asthma did not prevent her from performing the essential functions of her job as a machining technician, but Nissan counters that the real issue here is that Fults was unable to remain unimpaired by alcohol while at work [Doc. 31 p. 3]. This argument is a red herring. Passing a breathalyzer test is simply not an essential part of Fults's job as a machining technician. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(1) ("The term essential functions means the fundamental job duties of the employment position the individual with a disability holds or desires. The term 'essential functions' does not include the marginal functions of the position."). While Fults's alleged intoxication may be a valid basis for termination by Nissan, [*22]  it has no bearing on the question of whether Fults's disability rendered her unable to perform her job as a machining technician—a fact that Nissan concedes. As such, Fults was otherwise qualified for her position as a machining technician and is entitled to summary judgment on this issue.
Finally, with regard to Nissan's knowledge of Fults's disability, she notes that Johnson and others were aware of her asthma as early as July 31, 2016—the date of Fults's first failed breathalyzer test and request for an accommodation—and certainly by August 11, 2016, the date that Dr. Hernandez submitted the note to Nissan explicitly noting Fults's ongoing treatment for asthma [Doc. 26 pp. 5-6, 12]. For its part, Nissan does not dispute that it knew Fults suffered from asthma; rather, Nissan disputes whether it knew that Fults's asthma rose to the level of a disability [Doc. 31 p. 5]. Nissan has thereby chosen to walk a very fine line—it agrees that Fults's asthma constitutes a disability and that Nissan knew about her asthma. The crux of Nissan's argument then is that "Nissan's current knowledge does not go to Nissan's state of mind at material times." [Doc. 31 pp. 6-7]. In support of this proposition, [*23]  Nissan relies on Nilles v. Givaudan Flavors Corp., 521 F. App'x 364 (6th Cir. 2013), and Brown v. BKW Drywall Supply, Inc., 305 F. Supp. 2d 814 (S.D. Ohio 2004). These cases are inapposite, however, because in both circumstances the employer did not know that the employee was suffering from a disability at all. In Nilles, the employee took two leaves of absence, but there was no indication that the employer knew specifically about his Multiple Sclerosis diagnosis. Nilles, 521 F. App'x at 369. Similarly in Brown, an employee's report to his supervisor about swelling feet did not indicate the employer knew this issue was caused by the employee's loin pain hematuria syndrome. Brown, 305 F. Supp. 2d at 829.
Even so, there remains a genuine dispute of material fact as to whether Nissan knew that Fults's asthma rose to the level of a disability. Fults says that she discussed her asthma with Johnson and provided a note to Nissan from Dr. Hernandez that confirmed her asthma diagnosis [Doc. 26 p. 12; Doc. 35 p. 6]. Fults also points to an email from Johnson in which Johnson acknowledged that Elliott said Fults was "coughing really bad . . . because she can't use inhalers . . . ." [Doc. 35-2 p. 2]. In this same email, Johnson said "she does have a breathing problem evidently and needs her inhalers . . . ." [Doc. 35-2 p. 2]. While this evidence supports Fults's contention that Johnson knew about [*24]  her asthma, it is not dispositive on this issue. Dr. Hernandez's note does not in any way indicate the severity of Fults's asthma or otherwise explain how her asthma would interfere with her work. Similarly, Nissan representatives were aware that Fults used an inhaler, but they had no information about the extent of her inhaler use or whether it alleviated her breathing issues. As such, there is conflicting evidence in the record upon which reasonable jurors could draw different conclusions about what Nissan knew about Fults's disability at material times. As such, Fults's motion for summary judgment on this point will be denied.

2. Undue Hardship
Nissan's answer to Fults's complaint raises "undue hardship" as an affirmative defense [Doc. 9 ¶ 12]. Fults moved for summary judgment on this defense, contending that Nissan could not prove undue hardship [Doc. 26 p. 13]. After an employee establishes that he proposed a reasonable accommodation, an employer can defend itself by "demonstrate[ing] that any particular accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the employer." Mosby-Meachem v. Memphis Light, Gas & Water Div., 883 F.3d 595, 603 (6th Cir. 2018) (quoting Johnson 443 F. App'x at 983). As such, under the reasonable accommodation framework, the burden is on the employer to show an undue [*25]  hardship only once the employee has established the reasonableness of the requested accommodation. Given that there is a genuine dispute of material fact as to the reasonableness of Fults's requested accommodation, it would be improvident to opine about Nissan's undue hardship defense at this time. See Bower v. Fed. Express Corp., 473 F. Supp. 2d 814, 822 (W.D. Tenn. 2006) ("Because a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether Plaintiffs' proposed accommodation is reasonable, i.e., Plaintiffs have not yet satisfied their initial burden, the Court need not address whether the implementation of Plaintiffs' proposed accommodation would constitute an undue hardship on Defendant. Accordingly, undue hardship remains an issue for the factfinder to determine.").9

IV. CONCLUSION
For the reasons set forth above, Nissan's motion for summary judgment [Doc. 21] is DENIED, and Fults's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment [Doc. 25] is GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART.
The Court is of the opinion that mediation will facilitate a possible resolution in this action. Accordingly, pursuant to Local Rule 16.4, the Court hereby ORDERS the parties to mediate this action in good faith within sixty (60) days. See E.D.TN. LR 16.4(a) ("With or without the agreement of the parties in any civil action, except [*26]  those exempted pursuant to Local Rule 16.3, the Court may refer all or part of the underlying dispute to Mediation pursuant to this Local Rule.").
It is FURTHER ORDERED that the parties, their representatives and/or actual decisionmakers for the parties, including persons with actual settlement authority on behalf of the parties, shall participate in the mediation.
Within seven (7) days following the conclusion of the mediation, the mediator shall FILE a report with the court stating the outcome of the mediation, as contemplated by Local Rule 16.4(m). If the parties are unable to resolve this case pursuant to mediation, they shall so REPORT to the court within seven (7) days following the conclusion of mediation.
This action is STAYED pending further order of the Court. ENTER:
s/ Thomas A. Varlan
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

