Garcia v. L.A. County Sheriff's Dep't
United States District Court for the Central District of California
September 14, 2015, Decided; September 14, 2015, Filed
CASE NO. CV 09-8943 MMM (SHx)

Reporter
2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 192443 *
MICHAEL GARCIA, individually, and on behalf of all others similarly situated, Plaintiffs, vs. LOS ANGELES COUNTY SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENT, a public entity, et al., Defendants.
Prior History: Garcia v. L. A. Cty. Sheriff's Dep't, 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 152589 (C.D. Cal., Aug. 18, 2010)
Counsel:  [*1] For Michael Garcia, on behalf of himself and others similarly situated, Plaintiff: Daniel Mumford Perry, LEAD ATTORNEY, Milbank Tweed Hadley and McCloy LLP, New York, NY USA; Delilah G Vinzon, Linda S Dakin-Grimm, Samir Lalit Vora, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Milbank Tweed Hadley And McCloy LLP, Los Angeles, CA USA; Anna Mercedes Rivera, Maronel Barajas, Disability Rights Legal Center, Los Angeles, CA USA.
For Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department, a public entity, Defendant: Justin W Clark, Paul B Beach, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Lawrence Beach Allen and Choi PC, Glendale, CA USA; Laurie N Adamson, CAAG - Office of Attorney General, Sacramento, CA USA.
For Leroy Baca, in his official capacity as Sheriff of the County of Los Angeles, The County of Los Angeles, Defendants: Justin W Clark, Paul B Beach, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Lawrence Beach Allen and Choi PC, Glendale, CA USA.
For Los Angeles County Office of Education, Defendant: Adam Jason Newman, Carlos M Gonzalez, Marlon C Wadlington, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Atkinson Andelson Loya Ruud & Romo, Cerritos, CA USA; Karen Elaine Gilyard, LEAD ATTORNEY, Atkinson Andelson Loya Ruud & Romo PC, Cerritos, CA USA; Vibiana Andrade, LEAD ATTORNEY, Jennifer Anne Williams, Los Angeles [*2]  County Office of Education, Downey, CA USA; Karli Eisenberg, CAAG - Office of Attorney General, Sacramento, CA USA.
For Darlene P. Robles, in her official capacity as Superintendent of Los Angeles County Office of Education, Defendant: Adam Jason Newman, Carlos M Gonzalez, Marlon C Wadlington, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Atkinson Andelson Loya Ruud & Romo, Cerritos, CA USA; Karen Elaine Gilyard, LEAD ATTORNEY, Atkinson Andelson Loya Ruud & Romo PC, Cerritos, CA USA; Vibiana Andrade, LEAD ATTORNEY, Los Angeles County Office of Education, Downey, CA USA.
For Los Angeles Unified School District, Defendant, Cross Claimant: Barrett K Green, Daniel L Gonzalez, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Littler Mendelson, Los Angeles, CA USA; Diane H Pappas, Donald A Erwin, Mampre R Pomakian, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Los Angeles Unified School District, Office Of The General Counsel 333 South Beaudry, Los Angeles, CA USA.
For Ramon C. Cortines, in his official capacity as Superintendent of Los Angeles Unified School District, Defendant, Cross Claimant: Barrett K Green, Daniel L Gonzalez, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Littler Mendelson, Los Angeles, CA USA; Diane H Pappas, Donald A Erwin, Mampre R Pomakian, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Los Angeles Unified School District, [*3]  Office Of The General Counsel 333 South Beaudry, Los Angeles, CA USA.
For Hacienda LA Puente Unified School District, Defendant: Jack Byron Clarke, Jr, LEAD ATTORNEY, Best Best and Krieger, Riverside, CA USA.
For Barbara Nakaoka, in her official capacity as Superintendent of Hacienda La Puente Unified School District, Defendant: Jack Byron Clarke, Jr, LEAD ATTORNEY, Best Best and Krieger, Riverside, CA USA.
For The California Department of Education a public entity, Defendant, Cross Defendant: Ismael A Castro, Kathleen A Lynch, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Glenda N Reager, Julie Weng-Gutierrez, Laurie N Adamson, CAAG - Office of Attorney General, Sacramento, CA USA; R Matthew Wise, Office of Attorney General, Sacramento, CA USA.
For Jack O'Connell, in his official capacity as Superintendent of Public Instruction for the State of California, Defendant, Cross Defendant: Ismael A Castro, LEAD ATTORNEY, Glenda N Reager, Julie Weng-Gutierrez, Laurie N Adamson, CAAG - Office of Attorney General California Department Of Justice 1300 I Street Sacramento, CA USA.
For Phyllis W Cheng, Mediator (Adr Panel): Phyllis Wei-Erh Cheng, Phyllis Cheng, Attorney At Law, Valley Village, CA USA.
For Ramon C. Cortines, in [*4]  his official capacity as Superintendent of Los Angeles Unified School District, Los Angeles Unified School District, Ramon C. Cortines, in his official capacity as Superintendent of Los Angeles Unified School District, Los Angeles Unified School District, Cross Claimants: Barrett K Green, Daniel L Gonzalez, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Littler Mendelson, Los Angeles, CA USA; Diane H Pappas, Donald A Erwin, Mampre R Pomakian, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Los Angeles Unified School District, Office Of The General Counsel 333 South Beaudry, Los Angeles, CA USA.
For Jack O'Connell, in his official capacity as Superintendent of Public Instruction for the State of California, Jack O'Connell, in his official capacity as Superintendent of Public Instruction for the State of California, Cross Defendants: Ismael A Castro, LEAD ATTORNEY, Julie Weng-Gutierrez, Laurie N Adamson, CAAG - Office of Attorney General, California Department Of Justice, Sacramento, CA USA.
For The California Department of Education a public entity, The California Department of Education a public entity, Cross Defendants: Ismael A Castro, LEAD ATTORNEY, Glenda N Reager, Julie Weng-Gutierrez, Laurie N Adamson, CAAG - Office of Attorney General, California [*5]  Department Of Justice, Sacramento, CA USA.
Judges: MARGARET M. MORROW, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: MARGARET M. MORROW
Opinion


ORDER GRANTING PLAINTIFFS' MOTION FOR FINAL APPROVAL OF CLASS ACTION SETTLEMENT AND MOTION FOR ATTORNEYS FEES
On December 4, 2009, Michael Garcia filed this action on his own behalf and on behalf of other similarly situated individuals against the County of Los Angeles ("County"), the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department ("LASD"), then Los Angeles County Sheriff Leroy Baca, the Los Angeles County Office of Education ("LACOE"), Darlene P. Robles, the Los Angeles Unified School District ("LAUSD"), Ramon C. Cortines, the Hacienda La Puente Unified School District, Barbara Nakaoka, the California Department of Education ("CDE"), and Jack O'Connell.1 On December 12, 2009, the case was transferred from the calendar of Judge Christina A. Snyder to that of Judge Valerie Baker Fairbank because it was related to an earlier action.2 Defendants filed separate motions to dismiss the complaint on January 11, 2010.3 Three days later, CDE filed a motion to stay the case.4 On February 8, 2010, Judge Fairbank denied the motions to dismiss and to stay.5
On February 22, 2010, Garcia filed a motion [*6]  for class certification,6 which Judge Fairbank granted on April 29, 2010.7 On July 27, 2010, the Ninth Circuit denied the petition of defendants CDE and O'Connell seeking leave to file an interlocutory appeal of the class certification order.8 Defendants filed motions for summary judgment and decertification of the class on November 22, 2010.9 Judge Fairbank denied the motion for decertification and granted in part and denied in part defendants' motions for summary judgment on January 19, 2011.10 Judge Fairbank also granted Garcia's motion for summary judgment on LAUSD's and the Los Angeles County Office of Education's liability under the IDEA, but denied his motion for summary judgment on the remainder of his claims.11
On October 12, 2011, the case was transferred to this court's calendar.12 On October 29, 2012, the parties filed a joint stipulation to stay the action pending the California Supreme Court's decision of a certified question of California law: "Does California Education Code § 56041 - which provides generally that for qualifying children ages eighteen to twenty-two, the school district where the child's parent resides is responsible for providing special education services - apply to children who are incarcerated [*7]  in county jails?"13 Concluding that the certified question was a controlling issue of law that would affect the outcome of the case, the court entered an order on the stipulation and stayed the action.14 On December 12, 2013, the California Supreme Court held that Education Code § 56041 applies to minors incarcerated in county jails.15 Thereafter, on January 28, 2014, the Ninth Circuit issued a per curiam opinion adopting the California Supreme Court's decision; the mandate issued on February 20, 2014.16 After litigation in the Ninth Circuit concerning attorneys' fees, the court lifted the stay on August 8, 2014.17
On February 27, 2015, Garcia filed a motion for preliminary approval of a class action settlement with Los Angeles County Office of Education and Robles, in her official capacity as Superintendent (collectively, "LACOE defendants").18 On April 13, 2015, the CDE filed objections to preliminary approval of the settlement,19 which the court overruled on May 15, 2015. The same day, it issued an order (1) preliminarily approving the settlement, (2) approving the class notice and proposed method for distribution of notice, and (3) setting a briefing schedule and hearing on a motion for final approval. [*8] 20
On June 15, 2015, plaintiffs filed a motion for attorneys' fees and costs,21 and on August 10, 2015, they filed a motion for final approval of the LACOE settlement.22

I. FACTUAL BACKGROUND

A. Facts Alleged in the Complaint
At the time the complaint in this action was filed, plaintiff Michael Garcia was nineteen years old, detained in Los Angeles County Jail ("LACJ") facilities, and eligible to receive special education and related services.23 Garcia had received no schooling since being incarcerated in LACJ facilities and had not graduated from high school.24 He filed the suit on his own behalf and on behalf of a class similarly situated students who are or will be detained at any LACJ facility.25
Garcia alleges that defendants do not offer special education and related services to eligible students in any LACJ facility, in violation of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act ("IDEA"), Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), the United States Constitution, an the California Constitution.26 He asserts that he requested special education services, but they were not provided during his detention in LACJ facilities.27 He contends that defendants' failure to [*9]  provide such services is pervasive, and that eligible students are therefore denied meaningful access to the high school education program offered at LACJ.28 Defendants not only purportedly fail to identify individuals eligible for special education services, but also do not request, obtain, or transfer Individualized Education Programs ("IEPs") for those students who are identified from the programs who were educating them prior to their incarceration.29 Garcia asserts that defendants have a duty to ensure they provide special education and related services and make reasonable accommodations in their general education programs for persons in need of such services in accordance with state and federal laws and regulations.30 His complaint sought an order requiring that "[d]efendants . . . adopt a system to provide a [free and appropriate public education] consistent with the requirements of the IDEA and California Education Code" and "adopt a mechanism to, upon a class member's admission to an LACJ facility, timely determine his or her eligibility to receive special education services."31
Garcia sued O'Connell in his official capacity as California's State Superintendent of Public [*10]  Instruction.32 As State Superintendent, O'Connell is purportedly responsible for "ensuring [the] provision of, and supervising, education and related services to individuals with exceptional needs" as required by the IDEA. He thus allegedly has a duty to ensure that all eligible students, including those incarcerated in facilities like LACJ, are afforded the opportunity to receive services under the IDEA.33 O'Connell has purportedly failed to fulfill his duty in this regard.34
The CDE is the state agency responsible for ensuring that all education agencies in the state provide special education services as required by state and federal law.35 Garcia alleges that CDE is responsible for ensuring that state agencies that receive federal IDEA funds comply with state and federal law, and provide a free and appropriate public education ("FAPE") to all eligible youth, including those incarcerated in LACJ facilities.36
The County is the entity charged with providing education services to detainees in LACJ facilities.37 It has contracted with the Hacienda La Puente Unified School District ("Hacienda") to provide inmate education programs in the LACJ facilities.38
Garcia sued Leroy Baca [*11]  in his official capacity as Sheriff of Los Angeles County.39 He asserts that under California law, when officials do not make an inmate education program available, the Sheriff is required to develop and implement such a program himself.40 Baca allegedly did not do so.
Garcia sued Ramon C. Cortines in his official capacity as the then Superintendent of LAUSD.41 Under a November 16, 2009 ruling by the California Office of Administrative Hearings, which was affirmed by the California Supreme Court on December 12, 2013, LAUSD is responsible for providing special education and related services to Garcia and those inmates for whom it is the "last district of residence . . . prior to the pupil's attaining the age of majority," as well as for eligible students whose parents currently reside within its boundaries.42 Garcia alleges that Cortines has failed to ensure that class members have meaningful access to LAUSD's district-wide general education program and that they are afforded special education and related services.43
Garcia sued Darline P. Robles in her official capacity as LACOE's Superintendent.44 LACOE is allegedly responsible for providing special education programs administered in [*12]  compliance with federal and state laws and regulations to all school-eligible persons with disabilities who reside in the County.45 Because LACOE administers the education programs at each of the juvenile halls within the County, it is purportedly responsible for the transfer of special-education-eligible students from the juvenile hall facilities to the adult correctional facilities of the LACJ.46 LACOE also allegedly has an independent duty to ensure that all individuals who qualify for special education services have access to appropriate special education programs and related services.47 Garcia alleges that the LACOE defendants have failed to fulfill these duties.48

B. The Provisionally Certified Class
On April 29, 2010, Judge Fairbank certified a class of "all students who are or were eligible for special education and related services under 20 U.S.C. § 1400 et seq. while detained in any Los Angeles County Jail ("LACJ") facility, and who: (a) are currently detained at any LACJ facility; [or] (b) are detained at any LACJ facility in the future."49

C. The Settlement Agreement

1. Settlement Negotiations
On April 9, 2010, June 7, 2010, and April 6, 2011, Judge Terry J. Hatter, Jr. conducted settlement conferences [*13]  with the parties, but they were unable successfully to resolve the case.50 Garcia and the LACOE defendants continued to negotiate and ultimately reached agreement on August 14, 2012.51 They amended the settlement agreement on February 26, 2015, after the California Supreme Court issued its decision concerning the applicability of Education Code § 56041.52

2. The Terms of the Settlement Agreement
The settlement agreement provides LACOE will take several steps to assist in the identification of students eligible for special education services and will give notice to school districts responsible for providing such services to the students. First, LACOE will implement a plan to notify students transferred from juvenile halls or camps to the LACJ of their right to receive special education services, and to alert the districts responsible for serving those students that they have been transferred.53 Specifically, when an eligible student reaches eighteen years of age and LACOE learns that he or she will be transferred to the LACJ, LACOE will advise the student of his or her right to receive special education services, give the student the name of his or her last district of residence, and provide the [*14]  student with a copy of his or her most recent IEP.54 LACOE will also send copies of the student's education records to his or her last district of residence and inform that district of its obligation to provide special education services.55 Finally, an LACOE representative will participate telephonically in the eligible student's first IEP at the LACJ.56
Second, LACOE will work with class counsel to develop, within thirty days of final approval of the settlement, a modified notice of procedural safeguards that will inform students of their right to receive special education services while incarcerated at the LACJ; it will also advise all school districts in Los Angeles County that it has developed a model notice of procedural safeguards and invite them to use it.57
Third, LACOE has already fulfilled its obligation to adopt a countywide plan for review of the plans of all Los Angeles County Special Education Local Plan Areas ("SELPA") that will include confirming that each SELPA's plan ensures that special education and related services will be provided to eligible individuals incarcerated at the LACJ, and denying approval of any plan that does not so provide.58 To the extent a SELPA fails [*15]  to comply following notice, LACOE will file a compliance complaint with the CDE.59
Fourth, LACOE will add a training module concerning the provision of special education and related services to students in the LACJ to its SELPA director and educational personnel training curriculum.60 It will also meet with the Los Angeles County Public Defenders' Office to discuss LACOE's obligations under the agreement and explain the special education and related services that will be provided to students in the LACJ.61
In exchange for these actions by LACOE, settlement class members will release all claims for equitable relief that "are the subject of, included with, and/or arise from the Lawsuit."62 The release encompasses all class claims seeking declaratory and/or injunctive relief under the IDEA, the equal protection and due process clauses of the U.S. Constitution, California Government Code § 11135, the California Constitution, and California Education Code §§ 56000 et seq. for three years after the court issues an order granting final approval of the settlement ("the Settlement Period").63 Class members do not release damages claims, claims for compensatory education, or claims concerning the prospective provision of special education services.64
The settlement agreement establishes a mechanism for [*16]  monitoring compliance with its terms. LACOE has agreed to provide periodic reports to class counsel for this purpose.65 The parties have also agreed to meet on a regular basis to discuss implementation of the settlement and resolve any problems.66 They request that the court retain jurisdiction for three years to oversee any compliance problems that arise.67
The agreement also contains an attorneys' fees provision pursuant to which LACOE agrees to pay class counsel $256,000 in attorneys' fees and costs, as well as reasonable attorneys' fees and costs for time spent monitoring compliance during the Settlement Period.68 These are capped at $10,000 for the first year of the Settlement Period, and $5,000 for each of the two succeeding years.69 Consistent with this provision, Garcia has filed a motion seeking attorneys' fees and costs of $256,000.70

3. Notice to the Class of the Proposed Settlement
On May 15, 2015, the court preliminarily approved the parties' proposed form of class notice and the method by which notice was to be distributed.71 The proposed notice describes the relief provided by the settlement agreement, informs class members of the scope of the release, states the amount [*17]  of attorneys' fees and costs LACOE has agreed to pay, provides information as to how class members can access the full settlement agreement, sets forth contact information for class counsel in the event class members have questions, indicates the date, time and place of the final approval hearing, and provides information concerning the filing of objections to the settlement.72
A variety of mechanisms were used to distribute the notice. Copies were sent to the Los Angeles County Public Defender's Office and seven community organizations in Los Angeles County that provide services to young adults who are or have been incarcerated; these groups were asked to disseminate the materials to staff and clients.73 The notice was also posted on LACOE's website and the website of the Disability Rights Legal Center ("DRLC"), and sent to an email list DRLC maintains.74 Finally, the notice was mailed to the last known address of individual class members identified by class counsel who were transferred from a Los Angeles County juvenile hall or camp to LACJ.75
Neither Garcia's nor LACOE's attorneys received any inquiries, comments or objections to the settlement agreement.76

II. DISCUSSION

A. Final Approval [*18]  of the Proposed Class Action Settlement
Rule 23(e)(1)(A) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure requires that the court "approve any settlement, voluntary dismissal, or compromise of the claims, issues, or defenses of a certified class." Approval under Rule 23(e) is a two-step process "in which the [c]ourt first determines whether a proposed class action settlement deserves preliminary approval and then, after notice is given to class members, whether final approval is warranted." National Rural Telecommunications Cooperative v. DIRECTV, Inc. ("NRTC"), 221 F.R.D. 523, 525 (C.D. Cal. 2004) (citing MANUAL FOR COMPLEX LITIGATION, THIRD, § 30.14, at 236-37 (1995)). The Ninth Circuit has noted that, in considering whether finally to approve a class settlement, "there is a strong judicial policy that favors settlements, particularly where complex class action litigation is concerned." In re Synocor ERISA Litigation, 516 F.3d 1095, 1101 (9th Cir. 2008); see id. ("This policy is also evident in the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and the Local Rules of the United States District Court, Central District of California, which encourage facilitating the settlement of cases"); Officers for Justice v. Civil Service Commission, 688 F.2d 615, 625 (9th Cir. 1982) ("[I]t must not be overlooked that voluntary conciliation and settlement are the preferred means of dispute resolution. This is especially true in complex class action litigation"), cert. denied, 459 U.S. 1217, 103 S. Ct. 1219, 75 L. Ed. 2d 456 (1983).

1. Notice Requirements
Rule 23(e) requires [*19]  that "notice of the proposed dismissal or compromise [of a class action] shall be given to all members of the class in such manner as the court directs." Fed.R.Civ.Proc. 23(e). The notice must be "reasonably calculated, under all the circumstances, to apprise interested parties of the pendency of the action and afford them an opportunity to present their objections." Mullane v. Central Hanover Bank & Trust Co., 339 U.S. 306, 314, 70 S. Ct. 652, 94 L. Ed. 865 (1950); see also Mandujano v. Basic Vegetable Products, Inc., 541 F.2d 832, 835 (9th Cir. 1976) ("To comply with the spirit of [Rule 23(e)], it is necessary that the notice be given in a form and manner that does not systemically leave an identifiable group without notice").
The court's role in reviewing a proposed settlement is to represent those class members who were not parties to the settlement negotiations and agreement. See San Francisco NAACP v. San Francisco Unified School District, 59 F.Supp.2d 1021, 1027 (N.D. Cal. 1999) ("The purpose of Rule 23(e) is to protect 'unnamed class members from unjust or unfair settlements affecting their rights when the representatives become fainthearted before the action is adjudicated or are unable to secure satisfaction of the individual claims by compromise,'" quoting Amchem Products, Inc. v. Windsor, 521 U.S. 591, 623, 117 S. Ct. 2231, 138 L. Ed. 2d 689 (1997)). One aspect of the court's role is to ensure that all class members receive adequate notice of the proposed settlement.
In this case, the court certified a Rule 23(b)(2) settlement class; consequently, class members do not have the right to opt out [*20]  of the settlement. Where the court certifies a Rule 23(b)(3) class, individualized notice must be given "to all members who can be identified through reasonable effort," so that they can exercise their right to opt out. "For any class certified under Rule 23(b)(1) or Rule 23(b)(2), [however,] the court may direct [simply that] appropriate notice [be given] to the class." Fed.R.Civ.Proc. 23(c)(2)(A)-(B). The court thus has discretion in determining whether notice to a Rule 23(b)(2) class is required, and to what extent. Molski v. Gleich, 318 F.3d 937, 952, (9th Cir. 2003) ("Notice for a Rule 23(b)(2) class is discretionary under Rule 23(d)(2). In contrast, notice for a Rule 23(b)(3) class must fulfill the stringent requirements of Rule 23(c)(2), i.e., best notice practicable"), overruled on other grounds in Dukes v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 603 F.3d 571 (9th Cir. 2010), rev'd, 564 U.S. 338, 131 S. Ct. 2541, 180 L. Ed. 2d 374 (2011)). "Because of the common interests of all its members, a Rule 23(b)(2) class seeking declaratory and injunctive relief is cohesive by nature, and notice to a representative class membership may be considered sufficient." Handschu v. Special Servs. Div., 787 F.2d 828, 833 (2d Cir. 1986).
Here, a number of methods were used to give class members notice. These included (1) posting information on DRLC's website, which receives more than 15,000 hits per year; (2) posting information on LACOE's website; (3) sending notice to seven community organizations that provide services to young adults who are or were recently detained or incarcerated; [*21]  (4) distributing notice to the Los Angeles County Public Defender's Office, which presumably represents many class members; (5) mailing notice to the last known address of individual class members identified by Garcia's counsel; (6) and electronically disseminating notice to DRLC's email list, which includes individuals in the legal and disability communities and the public at large.77 The parties directed class members who objected to the settlement to send a written objection to DRLC or call it to voice an oral objection.78
The court is satisfied that these efforts were appropriate to provide notice of the settlement to potential class members. Although notice was not mailed to a comprehensive list of class members, this would have been difficult given the nature of the class in question, and was not required by Rule 23(b)(2). Rather, the parties selected an efficient and effective way of reaching potential class members by distributing notice to institutional contacts and those involved in outreach to incarcerated young adults.79
The notice clearly apprised class members of the action and their legal options. Consequently, the court finds that class members had adequate notice of the settlement and [*22]  adequate opportunity to object. The notice requirement of Rule 23(e) has thus been satisfied.

2. Fairness of the Proposed Settlement
"The role of a court . . . reviewing the proposed settlement of a class action under Fed.R.Civ.P. 23(e) is to assure that the procedures followed meet the requirements of the rule and comport with due process and to examine the settlement for fairness and adequacy." Vaughns v. Board of Education of Prince George's County, 18 F.Supp.2d 569, 578 (D. Md. 1998). The district court's role, in reviewing "what is otherwise a private consensual agreement negotiated between the parties to a lawsuit, must be limited to the extent necessary to reach a reasoned judgment that the agreement is not the product of fraud or overreaching by, or collusion between, the negotiating parties, and that the settlement, taken as a whole, is fair, reasonable and adequate to all concerned." Officers for Justice, 688 F.2d at 625.
The parties contend the settlement is presumptively fair because it is the result of an arms-length negotiation.80 See Rodriguez v. West Publishing Corp., 563 F.3d 948, 965 (9th Cir. 2009) ("We put a good deal of stock in the product of an arms-length, non-collusive, negotiated resolution"); NRTC, 221 F.R.D. at 528 ("A settlement following sufficient discovery and genuine arms-length negotiations is presumed fair," citing City Partnership Co. v. Atlantic Acquisition Ltd. Partnership, 100 F.3d 1041, 1043 (1st Cir. 1996)).
The parties attended multiple settlement conferences conducted by Judge Hatter. While [*23]  they were not able to resolve their differences during those conferences, they continued to negotiate, and ultimately reached agreement in August 2012.81 After the California Supreme Courts determined that Education Code § 56041 applies to minors incarcerated in county jails, the parties reopened their negotiations and amended the agreement in light of that decision.82 Their negotiations, moreover, took place during or after extensive discovery,83 motion practice and appellate proceedings. It appears, therefore, that the agreement was reached in good faith after a well-informed, arms-length negotiation, and that it is entitled to a presumption of fairness.
Nonetheless, the court must examine the terms of the settlement, considering relevant factors, to determine whether the settlement is indeed fair. In making this assessment, the court balances:
"(1) the strength of the plaintiffs' case; (2) the risk, expense, complexity, and likely duration of further litigation; (3) the risk of maintaining class action status throughout the trial; (4) the amount offered in settlement; (5) the extent of discovery completed and the stage of the proceedings; (6) the experience and views of counsel; (7) the presence [*24]  of a governmental participant; and (8) the reaction of the class members to the proposed settlement." Churchill Village, L.L.C. v. General Electric, 361 F.3d 566, 575 (9th Cir. 2004) (citing Hanlon v. Chrysler Corp., 150 F.3d 1011, 1026 (9th Cir. 1998)).
This list of factors is not exclusive, "and different factors may predominate in different factual contexts." Torrisi v. Tucson Electric Power Co., 8 F.3d 1370, 1376 (9th Cir. 1993). See also Young v. Polo Retail, LLC, No. C-02-4546 VRW, 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 27269, 2007 WL 951821, *3 (N.D. Cal. Mar. 28, 2007) (adding as relevant factors "(9) the procedure by which the settlements were arrived at, see Manual for Complex Litigation (Fourth) § 21.6 (2004), and (10) the role taken by the plaintiff in that process"); Churchill Village, 361 F.3d at 576 n. 7 ("Because the settlement evaluation factors are non-exclusive, discussion of those factors not relevant to this case has been omitted"). The court considers the relevant factors in turn.

a. Strength of Plaintiffs' Case
Garcia asserts he would likely have prevailed at trial given established law mandating the provision of special education services and Judge Fairbank's January 19, 2011 order granting in part his motion for summary judgment concerning LACOE's liability under the IDEA.84 Judge Fairbank held that LACOE was liable for violating the IDEA because it had failed to initiate a countywide plan ensuring that individuals with exceptional needs residing within the county had or in the future would have access to a FAPE.85 Judge Fairbank, by contrast, denied Garcia's [*25]  motion for summary judgment on his due process and equal protection claims against LACOE.86 Judge Fairbank's summary judgment rulings did not address the scope of the declaration or injunction to which Garcia and members of the class were entitled based on the liability found.
This would likely have been the subject of dispute and further proceedings had a settlement not been reached; based on the records of the action, it is uncertain what the outcome of those disputes might have been.87 A settlement, moreover, allowed the parties to craft relief responsive to both Garcia's and LACOE's concerns, and closer to their ideal resolution than the relief the court would have granted might have been. "In evaluating the likelihood of success, the [c]ourt must compare the terms of the settlement with the rewards the class would have been likely to receive following a successful trial." DeHoyos v. Allstate Corp., 240 F.R.D. 269, 287 (W.D. Tex. 2007) (citing Reed v. General Motors Corp., 703 F.2d 170, 172 (5th Cir.1983) ("A district court faced with a proposed settlement must compare its terms with the likely rewards the class would have received following a successful trial of the case.")). See also In re Mfrs. Life Ins., No 1109, 96-CV-230 BTM(AJB), 1998 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 23217, 1998 WL 1993385, *5 (S.D. Cal. Dec. 21, 1998) (noting that "even if it is assumed that a successful outcome for plaintiffs at summary [*26]  judgment or at trial would yield a greater recovery than the Settlement . . . there is easily enough uncertainty in the mix to support settling the dispute rather than risking no recovery in future proceedings"). After reviewing the scope of the LACOE's obligations under the settlement agreement - which appear to remedy the precise violations Judge Fairbank identified in her summary judgment order - the court concludes that the settlement achieves much, if not all, of the relief that Garcia would have been able to obtain had he taken his claims against LACOE to trial. Consequently, the court concludes that this factor weighs in favor of approving the settlement.

b. The Risk, Expense, Complexity, and Likely Duration of Further Litigation
The parties agree that it would be expensive and time-consuming to litigate this case through trial, and that it would require the marshaling and presentation of substantial documentary evidence and expert testimony.88 Any trial would, moreover, likely have been followed by appellate proceedings. See Glass v. UBS Financial Services, Inc., No. C-06-4068 MMC, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 192443, 2007 WL 221862, *4 (N.D. Cal. Jan. 26, 2007) ("In light of the above-referenced uncertainty in the law, the risk, expense, complexity, and likely duration [*27]  of further litigation likewise favors the settlement. Regardless of how this Court might have ruled on the merits of the legal issues, the losing party likely would have appealed, and the parties would have faced the expense and uncertainty of litigating an appeal. 'The expense and possible duration of the litigation should be considered in evaluating the reasonableness of [a] settlement,'" quoting In re Mego Financial Corp. Securities Litigation, 213 F.3d 454, 458 (9th Cir. 2000)).
The parties contend it was unnecessary to expend the additional cost and time attendant to a trial and appeal as LACOE agreed to the relief Garcia sought.89 Given the number of defendants, the complexity of their interactions and relative responsibilities, further discovery, trial and appeals would likely consume significant time. The court therefore concludes that this factor too weighs in favor of approval of the settlement. See Vasquez v. Coast Valley Roofing, Inc., 266 F.R.D. 482, 489 (E.D. Cal. 2010) (in weighing the risk of future litigation, "a court may consider the vagaries of litigation and compare the significance of immediate recovery by way of the compromise to the mere possibility of relief in the future, after protracted and expensive litigation" (internal quotation marks omitted)); Young, 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 27269, 2007 WL 951821 at *3 ("Because this litigation has terminated before the commencement [*28]  of trial preparation, factor (2) also militates in favor of the settlement"). See also Officers for Justice, 688 F.2d at 626; Milstein v. Huck, 600 F.Supp. 254, 267 (E.D.N.Y. 1984) ("The expense and possible duration of the litigation are major factors to be considered in evaluating the reasonableness of this settlement").90

c. The Risk of Maintaining Class Action Status Throughout Trial
Whether or not the action would have been tried as a class action is also relevant in assessing the fairness of the settlement. Judge Fairbank certified an injunctive and declaratory relief claim entitled to assert all claims pled in the complaint.91 The class had already survived a decertification motion.92 Because there is little risk Garcia would not have been able to maintain class action status through trial, this factor weighs somewhat against approval of the settlement. The court finds it relatively insignificant, however, when balanced against those factors that strongly favor approval.

d. The Amount Offered in Settlement
As the Ninth Circuit has noted, "it is the very uncertainty of outcome in litigation and avoidance of wasteful and expensive litigation that induce consensual settlements. The proposed settlement is [thus] not to be judged against a hypothetical or speculative measure of [*29]  what might have been achieved by the negotiators." Officers for Justice, 688 F.2d at 625 (emphasis original). Rather, "the very essence of a settlement is compromise, 'a yielding of absolutes and an abandoning of highest hopes.'" Id. at 624 (quoting Cotton v. Hinton, 559 F.2d 1326, 1330 (5th Cir. 1977)).
Assessing the fairness of the value obtained through settlement is particularly difficult in cases where the class receives no monetary relief. See Staton v. Boeing Co., 327 F.3d 938, 959 (9th Cir. 2003) ("Nor can courts judge with confidence the value of the terms of a settlement agreement, especially one in which, as here, the settlement provides for injunctive relief"). However, the court believes the parties have, through their negotiations, achieved a form of relief that is fair to the class.
As noted, LACOE has agreed (1) adopt a countywide plan for review of the plans of all SELPAs that will confirm that each SELPA's plan ensures that special education and related services will be provided to eligible individuals incarcerated at the LACJ, deny approval if it does not, and file a compliance complaint with the CDE if the SELPA does not thereafter comply; (2) notify students transferred from juvenile halls or camps to the LACJ of their right to receive special education services, alert the districts responsible for serving those students [*30]  that they have been transferred, inform the districts that they are obligated to provide special education services for the students, provide the students with a copy of their most recent IEP, send copies of the students' education records to their last district of residence, and participate telephonically in eligible students' first IEP at the LACJ; (3) develop a modified notice of procedural safeguards that will inform students of their right to receive special education services while incarcerated at the LACJ, advise all school districts in Los Angeles County of the model notice of procedural safeguards, and invite them to use it; and (4) add a training module concerning the provision of special education and related services to students in the LACJ to the curriculum for SELPA personnel. Garcia's counsel characterize these items as the relief Garcia sought.93 Rather than proceeding to trial, where the court would have determined the type of injunctive and declaratory relief to be awarded, Garcia's decision to settle the case "allowed [him] to have considerable input into the nature and substance of the relief."94
The court therefore finds that this factor weighs in favor of approving [*31]  the settlement.

e. The Stage of the Proceedings and Extent of Discovery Completed
"'The extent of discovery may be relevant in determining the adequacy of the parties' knowledge of the case.'" NRTC, 221 F.R.D. at 527 (quoting Manual for Complex Litigation, Third, § 30.42 (1995)). "'A court is more likely to approve a settlement if most of the discovery is completed because it suggests that the parties arrived at a compromise based on a full understanding of the legal and factual issues surrounding the case.'" Id. (quoting 5 W. Moore, Moore'S Federal Practice, § 23.85[2][e] (Matthew Bender 3d ed.)). The more the discovery completed, the more likely it is that the parties have "'a clear view of the strengths and weaknesses of their cases.'" Young, 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 27269, 2007 WL 951821 at *4 (quoting In re Warner Communications Securities Litigation, 618 F.Supp. 735, 745 (S.D.N.Y. 1985)).
The parties actively litigated this case for several years, They conducted extensive discovery before briefing Garcia's class action certification motion and defendants' motions for summary judgment.95 The court therefore concludes that counsel had sufficient information to make an informed decision about the adequacy of the settlement. This factor, therefore, also weighs in favor of approval of the parties' agreement.

f. The Presence of a Governmental Participant
LACOE is a government participant. This factor therefore weighs in favor of settlement. [*32]  See San Francisco NAACP v. San Francisco Unified School District, 59 F.Supp.2d 1021, 1031-32 (holding that the fact that the State Superintendent and State Board of Education were defendants and agreed to the settlement weighed in favor of approval).

g. The Experience and Views of Counsel
"The recommendations of plaintiffs' counsel should be given a presumption of reasonableness." Boyd v. Bechtel Corp., 485 F.Supp. 610, 622 (N.D. Cal. 1979) (citations omitted). "Parties represented by competent counsel are better positioned than courts to produce a settlement that fairly reflects each party's expected outcome in litigation." In re Pacific Enterprises Securities Litigation, 47 F.3d 373, 378 (9th Cir. 1995).
The class is represented by DRLC, an experienced disability rights legal organization, and Milbank, a large international law firm with extensive experience in complex litigation.96 DRLC regularly files class action and other impact litigation on behalf of disabled individuals; it also advocates for individual students with disabilities who are or may be eligible for special education and related services and who have been denied a FAPE.97
Counsel concluded, after weighing the risks and benefits of proceeding to trial, that "the injunctive relief in the settlement is in the best interests of the class, particularly given the scope and detail of relief. Negotiation of a settlement in this manner allowed Plaintiff [*33]  to have considerable input into the nature and substance of the relief. The parties thus recognized that there was much more to be gained through reasonable settlement discussions than through continued litigation and trial in this matter.""98
The recommendation of experienced class counsel weighs in favor of approval. See In re Omnivision Technologies, Inc., 559 F.Supp.2d 1036, 1043 (N.D. Cal. 2008). Counsel's recommendation, however, must be evaluated in light of "their obvious pecuniary interest in seeing the settlement approved." Young, 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 27269, 2007 WL 951821 at *5. Consequently, while this factor favors approval, the court accords it only some weight.

h. Class Members' Reaction to the Proposed Settlement
Garcia supports the settlement.99 To gauge the reaction of other class members, it is appropriate to evaluate the number of objections submitted. See In re General Motors Corp. Pick-Up Truck Fuel Tank Prods. Liability Litig., 55 F.3d 768, 812 (3d Cir. 1995) ("In an effort to measure the class's own reaction to the settlement's terms directly, courts look to the number and vociferousness of the objectors," quoting Pallas v. Pacific Bell, No. C-89-2373 DLJ, 1999 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 23880, 1999 WL 1209495, *6 (N.D. Cal. July 13, 1999) ("The greater the number of objectors, the heavier the burden on the proponents of settlement to prove fairness")). "It is established that the absence of a large number of objections to a proposed class action settlement raises a strong presumption that the [*34]  terms of a proposed class settlement action are favorable to the class members." Nat'l Rural Telecomms. Coop. v. DIRECTV, Inc., 221 F.R.D. 523, 529 (C.D. Cal. 2004).
No class members have objected to the settlement. This reaction may, to some extent, be a product of the manner in which notice of the settlement was given, and the circumstances of individual members of the class, many of whom are likely incarcerated. Thus, while this factor weighs in favor of approving the settlement, the court will not "lose sight of its responsibility to analyze independently and intelligently the settlement." Safeco Ins. Co. of America v. American Intern. Group, Inc., 710 F.3d 754, 761 (7th Cir. 2013) (Posner, J dissenting).

i. Other Factors
As noted, the Young court considered two additional factors: the process by which settlement was achieved and the involvement of the named plaintiffs in that process. Here, the parties reached agreement after intensive arms-length negotiations that were initially facilitated by Judge Hatter. The process by which settlement was achieved therefore weighs in favor of approval.
Class counsel do not provide information regarding Garcia's involvement in the settlement process; they merely state that he reviewed the proposed settlement, discussed it with them, and agreed to its terms.100 Because it lacks sufficient information concerning Garcia's [*35]  involvement in the settlement process to determine whether this factor weighs in favor of approving the settlement, the court finds it neutral.

j. Signs of Collusion
The Ninth Circuit has explained that, in addition to evaluating the fairness of the settlement terms, the district court should be watchful for "subtle signs" that class counsel and the class representative permitted self-interest to trump their obligation to ensure a fair settlement for the class as a whole. In re Bluetooth Headset Products Liability Litigation, 654 F.3d 935, 947 (9th Cir. 2011). In Bluetooth, the Ninth Circuit identified three possible signs of collusion:
"(1) when the settlement terms result in class counsel receiving a disproportionate share of the settlement, or when the class receives no monetary compensation but counsel receive an ample award of attorneys' fees;
(2) the presence of a clear sailing agreement that carries the potential of enabling a defendant to pay class counsel excessive fees and costs in exchange for . . . accepting an unfair settlement; and
(3) when the parties arrange for fees not awarded to revert to defendants, rather than being paid into the class fund." Id. (citations and quotation marks omitted).
The Ninth Circuit noted that this list is not exclusive, but felt [*36]  it offered some guidance to lower courts regarding the type of provisions that require "greater scrutiny than ordinarily demanded" in assessing the overall fairness of the settlement. Id. at 949.
In some instances, the fact that the class members receive no monetary relief, while counsel are awarded attorneys' fees, raises a red flag. Here, however, Garcia sought declaratory and injunctive relief only; consequently, the fact that LACOE will not pay class members any damages pursuant to the settlement is not surprising and is not evidence of collusion. The settlement agreement, in fact, does not require class members to release damages claims, claims for compensatory education,101 or claims regarding the prospective provision of special education services.102 Moreover, as discussed infra, the amount of attorneys' fees counsel seek is not unreasonable and is significantly below the lodestar. Compare Richardson v. L'Oreal USA, Inc., 991 F.Supp.2d 181, 203-04 (D.D.C. 2013) (holding that a settlement was not fair, reasonable, and adequate where "Class members receive[d] injunctive relief, and in return they surrender[ed] any class-wide claims for damages; meanwhile, plaintiffs' counsel receive[d] almost a million dollars in attorney's fees and class representatives receive[d] [*37]  $1,000 each"). For all of these reasons, the absence of monetary relief for the class does not raise concerns about collusion.
The settlement does, however, contain a "clear sailing provision." "In general, a clear sailing agreement is one where the party paying the fee agrees not to contest the amount to be awarded by the fee-setting court so long as the award falls beneath a negotiated ceiling." Weinberger v. Great Northern Nekoosa Corp., 925 F.2d 518, 520 n. 1 (1st Cir. 1991). The Amendment to the Settlement Agreement states: "Defendants shall pay Class Counsel $256,000.00 in attorney's fees no later than thirty (30) days following the Effective Date."103 Although the agreement does not explicitly state that defendants will not contest a request by plaintiffs that the court award that amount of fees, the provision has the same practical effect and must be considered a "clear sailing provision."
Clear sailing provisions are troubling on several levels. "[T]he very existence of a clear sailing provision increases the likelihood that class counsel will have bargained away something of value to the class." In re Bluetooth, 654 F.3d at 948 (citation omitted); see also Malchman v. Davis, 761 F.2d 893, 908 (2d Cir. 1985) (Newman, J., concurring) ("It is unlikely that a defendant will gratuitously accede to the plaintiffs' request for a 'clear sailing' clause without obtaining something [*38]  in return. That something will normally be at the expense of the plaintiff class"), abrogated on other grounds in Amchem Products, 521 U.S. at 619. "Such a clause deprives the court of the advantages of the adversary process. The source of the proposed payment renders it improbable that class members will come forward to challenge the reasonableness of the requested fee. Meanwhile, the payor is bound by contract not to contest the application." Weinberger, 925 F.2d at 525.
The inference of collusion to be drawn from a clear sailing provision is exacerbated when the agreement contains a reversionary or "kicker provision." In re Bluetooth, 654 F.3d at 949 ("For this same reason, a kicker arrangement reverting unpaid attorneys' fees to the defendant rather than to the class amplifies the danger of collusion already suggested by a clear sailing provision. . . . The clear sailing provision reveals the defendant's willingness to pay, but the kicker deprives the class of that full potential benefit if class counsel negotiates too much for its fees"). Here, there is no "kicker provision"; the only real issue, therefore, is the negotiated fee provision in the settlement agreement, and whether it suggests that counsel obtained an agreement to pay their fees at the expense of further [*39]  relief for the class.
A review of all of the terms of the agreement, however, assuages any such concerns. First, the settlement achieves much, if not all, of the injunctive relief that Garcia sought in his complaint.104 Unlike a monetary settlement — the amount of which is typically less than the full amount of the prayer — the court has difficulty discerning what further injunctive relief plaintiffs might have been able to achieve in the settlement. Second, the negotiated amount of attorneys' fees is 24.45% below counsel's lodestar.105 Had there been collusion, fees would more likely have been at or above the lodestar through application of a multiplier.
As a result, while clear sailing agreements must be scrutinized to ensure that they do not result in unfair awards of attorneys' fees, see Weinberger, 925 F.2d at 523 ("[T]he approval function has routinely been extended to embrace fees, whether or not pre-negotiated, in those cases where the plaintiffs' attorneys are to be paid out of a common fund (and where, consequently, there is an inherent tension between the interests of the class and the interests of the lawyers)"), the court concludes that the clear sailing provision in the parties' agreement does not give [*40]  rise to an inference of collusion that warrants invalidation of the settlement as a whole.

k. Balancing the Factors
"Ultimately, the district court's determination [concerning the fairness and adequacy of a proposed settlement] is nothing more than an amalgam of delicate balancing, gross approximations, and rough justice." Officers for Justice, 688 F.2d at 625 (citation omitted). "[I]t must not be overlooked that voluntary conciliation and settlement are the preferred means of dispute resolution. This is especially true in complex class action litigation." Id. Having considered the relevant factors, the court concludes that the circumstances surrounding the settlement weigh in favor of a finding that it is fair and adequate. Accordingly, the court approves the settlement.

B. Motion for Attorneys' Fees and Costs
The court turns next to class counsel's motion for attorneys' fees and costs. The procedure for requesting attorneys' fees is set forth in Rule 54(d)(2) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. While the rule specifies that requests shall be made by motion "unless the substantive law governing the action provides for the recovery of . . . fees as an element of damages to be proved at trial," the rule does not itself authorize the awarding of fees. "Rather, [Rule 54(d)(2)] and the [*41]  accompanying advisory committee comment recognize that there must be another source of authority for such an award . . . [in order to] give[ ] effect to the 'American Rule' that each party must bear its own attorneys' fees in the absence of a rule, statute or contract authorizing such an award." MRO Communications, Inc. v. AT & T, 197 F.3d 1276, 1281 (9th Cir. 1999).
In class actions, statutory provisions and the common fund exception to the "American Rule" provide the authority for awarding attorneys' fees.106 See Alba Conte and Herbert B. Newberg, NEWBERG ON CLASS ACTIONS, § 14.1 (4th ed. 2005) ("Two significant exceptions [to the "American Rule"] are statutory fee-shifting provisions and the equitable common-fund doctrine"). Rule 23(h) authorizes a court to award "reasonable attorney's fees and nontaxable costs that are authorized by law or by the parties' agreement."107 Fed.R.Civ.Proc. 23(h). Under normal circumstances, once it is established that a party is entitled to attorneys' fees, "[i]t remains for the district court to determine what fee is 'reasonable.'" Hensley v. Eckerhart, 461 U.S. 424, 433, 103 S. Ct. 1933, 76 L. Ed. 2d 40 (1983).
The parties' settlement agreement provides that defendants will pay, and will not oppose an application for, attorneys' fees and costs of $256,000 for all work performed in the case to date.108 LACOE has also agreed to pay class counsel reasonable attorneys' fees for time [*42]  spent monitoring performance of the agreement, with a cap of $10,000 for the first year of the Settlement Period, and $5,000 for the next two years. For any monitoring work, class counsel will bill at a blended rate of $250 per hour.109

1. Attorneys' Fees
Courts calculate attorneys' fees using either the lodestar or percentage-of-the-fund method. In a lodestar analysis, the court multiplies the number of hours reasonably expended by counsel on the matter by a reasonable hourly rate and adjusts the result upward or downward depending on a variety of factors. In a percentage-of-the-fund analysis, the court awards a percentage of the class recovery as fees. See State of Florida v. Dunne, 915 F.2d 542, 545 n. 3 (9th Cir. 1990). "Though courts have discretion to choose which calculation method they use, their discretion must be exercised so as to achieve a reasonable result." In re Bluetooth, 654 F.3d at 942 (citing In re Coordinated Pretrial Proceedings in Petroleum Products Antitrust Litig., 109 F.3d 602, 607 (9th Cir. 1997)). Because the settlement in this case contemplates only injunctive relief, there is no class recovery that could be used to award fees on a percentage-of-the-fund basis. The court will thus employ the lodestar method of calculating attorneys' fees.

a. Whether Class Counsel's Attorneys' Fees Request is Reasonable
As noted, the lodestar is "the number of hours reasonably expended [*43]  on the litigation multiplied by a reasonable hourly rate." Hensley, 461 U.S. at 433. The lodestar "presumptively provides an accurate measure of reasonable attorney's fees." See Harris v. Marhoefer, 24 F.3d 16, 18 (9th Cir. 1994); Clark v. City of Los Angeles, 803 F.2d 987, 990 (9th Cir. 1986). A court may increase or decrease the lodestar in rare or exceptional cases. See Blum v. Stenson, 465 U.S. 886, 898-901, 104 S. Ct. 1541, 79 L. Ed. 2d 891 (1984); Harris, 24 F.3d at 18; Clark, 803 F.2d at 990-91. As the court explained in In re Bluetooth:
"The court may adjust [the lodestar] upward or downward by an appropriate positive or negative multiplier reflecting a host of reasonableness factors, including the quality of representation, the benefit obtained for the class, the complexity and novelty of the issues presented, and the risk of nonpayment. Foremost among these considerations, however, is the benefit obtained for the class. Thus, where the plaintiff has achieved only limited success, counting all hours expended on the litigation — even those reasonably spent — may produce an excessive amount, and the Supreme Court has instructed district courts to instead award only that amount of fees that is reasonable in relation to the results obtained." In re Bluetooth, 654 F.3d at 941-42.
Class counsel contend that the lodestar is $338,870.85, which includes (1) attorneys' fees incurred prior to the date of the settlement in 2011 and (2) $11,839.48 for expenses incurred in prosecuting [*44]  the lawsuit.110 Class counsel ask that the court award fees of $256,000, a 24.45% reduction from the loadstar.111

(1) Reasonableness of Counsel's Hourly Rates
To assist the court in calculating the lodestar, a plaintiff must submit "satisfactory evidence . . . that the requested rates are in line with those prevailing in the community for similar services by lawyers of reasonably comparable skill, experience, and reputation." Blum, 465 U.S. at 895-96 n. 11. The relevant community is that in which the district court sits. See Schwartz v. Sec'y of Health and Human Serv., 73 F.3d 895, 906 (9th Cir. 1995). Declarations regarding the prevailing market rate in the relevant community suffice to establish a reasonable hourly rate. See Widrig v. Apfel, 140 F.3d 1207, 1209 (9th Cir. 1998); Guam Soc'y of Obstetricians & Gynecologists v. Ada, 100 F.3d 691, 696 (9th Cir. 1996) (noting that declarations from attorneys in the community can provide adequate proof of the reasonableness of counsel's rates). See also Earthquake Sound Corp. v. Bumper Industries, 352 F.3d 1210, 1215 (9th Cir. 2003) (discussing the affidavit of "an attorney practicing in the same region as Earthquake's attorneys," which opined that "Earthquake's attorney rates were reasonable and customary"). Courts can also use survey data to evaluate the reasonableness of attorneys' rates. See Fish v. St. Cloud State Univ., 295 F.3d 849, 852 (8th Cir. 2002) ("The parties presented two surveys of hourly rates, one reporting fees received by seven Twin Cities class action firms and the other reporting fees received by sixty-two [*45]  firms doing a variety of work around the state. The court set individual hourly rates at the median of the class action survey and near the upper limit of the statewide survey, also taking into account the number of years an attorney had been admitted to practice"); American Petroleum Inst. v. United States EPA, 72 F.3d 907, 912, 315 U.S. App. D.C. 268 (D.C. Cir. 1996) ("Petitioners have provided support for the reasonableness of their rates through affidavits and a survey of rates and we hold that these rates are reasonable"); Martin v. University of South Alabama, 911 F.2d 604, 607 (11th Cir. 1990) ("Based on the testimony and survey produced by plaintiffs the reasonable non-contingent hourly rate for civil rights lawyers in the relevant market (Alabama) was found to be $135 to $150 per hour for senior counsel and $105 to $115 per hour for junior counsel").
In calculating the lodestar, courts typically exclude time spent on clerical or ministerial tasks because such tasks are properly considered part of an attorney's overhead and are reflected in his or her hourly rate. See Missouri v. Jenkins, 491 U.S. 274, 288 n. 10, 109 S. Ct. 2463, 105 L. Ed. 2d 229 (1989) ("[P]urely clerical or secretarial tasks should not be billed at a paralegal [or lawyer's] rate, regardless of who performs them"). Where support staff performs substantive case-related work, however, fees for such work are recoverable. Id. at 285 ("Clearly, a 'reasonable attorney's fee' cannot [*46]  have been meant to compensate only work performed personally by members of the bar. Rather, the term must refer to a reasonable fee for the work product of an attorney. Thus, the fee must take into account the work not only of attorneys, but also of secretaries, messengers, librarians, janitors, and others whose labor contributes to the work product for which an attorney bills her client"); Earthquake Sound Corp., 352 F.3d at 1214-15 (affirming a lodestar-based fee award that included work performed by attorneys, paralegals, and clerks); Grays Harbor Adventist Christian School v. Carrier Corp., No. 05-05437 RBL, 2008 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 106515, 2008 WL 1901988, *5 (W.D. Wash. Apr. 24, 2008) (accepting class counsel's lodestar calculation, which included fees for support staff, and noting that "if [the] recoverable lodestar were limited to attorney time, law firms would be inclined to assign low-level work to attorneys rather than legal support staff. The Ninth Circuit discourages such an inefficient result by recognizing the contributions of attorneys and non-attorneys").
Twelve attorneys at two different law firms represented the class in this case. Class counsel seeks to have the court calculate fees using the following rates for attorneys at DLRC:112 $350 per hour for former staff attorney Carly Munson (a 2006 graduate [*47]  of Boston University School of Law); $300 per hour for former staff attorney Andrea Oxman (a 2007 graduate of University of Southern California Gould School of Law); $525 per hour for former legal director Shawna L. Parks (a 1999 graduate of the Boalt Hall School of Law at the University of California, Berkeley); $400 per hour for former staff attorney Elliot Field (a 2009 graduate of Loyola Law School); $725 per hour for former executive director Paula Pearlman (a 1982 graduate of Southwestern University School of Law); and $165 per hour for DRLC law clerks, who are law students attending local law schools.
Class counsel requests that the court use the following rates for work performed by attorneys at Milbank:113 $825 per hour for partner Daniel Perry (a 1999 graduate of Cornell University, School of Law); $650 per hour for former associate Hannah Cannom (a 2006 graduate of University of California at Los Angeles School of Law); $550 per hour for former associate Kate Eklund (a 2009 graduate of University of Michigan Law School); $600 per hour for associate Revi-ruth Enriquez (a 2008 graduate of Georgetown University School of Law); $600 per hour for former associate Caitlin Hawks (a [*48]  2008 graduate of University of California at Los Angeles School of Law); $715 per hour for special counsel Delilah Vinzon (a 2002 graduate of University of California Hastings College of Law); and $195 per hour for paralegal Rick Windom.
As evidence that these rates are reasonable, class counsel proffer evidence regarding DRLC's extensive experience litigating civil rights class action cases.114 They also cite prior court decisions from the Central District of California, in which courts held that DRLC's rates that were similar to those charged in this case were reasonable.115 See United Steelworkers of Am. v. Phelps Dodge Corp., 896 F.2d 403, 407 (9th Cir. 1990) (holding that courts may look to rate determinations in other cases in fixing a reasonable rate). Finally, while counsel has not submitted declarations from other attorneys stating that their rates are reasonable, they have submitted orders in other cases litigated in this district suggesting that their rates are generally in line with those of other attorneys working in their field.116 With the exception of Pearlman's rate, which reflects her position as DRLC's executive director and her years of experience, DRLC's rates fall well within the range of those approved in earlier, similar cases in this same community. [*49] 
As evidence that Milbank's rates are reasonable, counsel adduce evidence regarding the firm's and individual attorneys' considerable experience handling complex civil litigation. They note that Milbank's peer firms are large international firms headquartered in New York.117 They proffer a National Law Journal article,118 and cite Thomson Reuters' Peer Monitor Public Rates program,119 as evidence that average hourly rates for their peer firms are "high." The Thomson Reuters' program corroborates the numbers cited in the National Law Journal article. The program compiles attorney and support staff hourly rates as publicly reported in court filings throughout the country.120 Thomson Reuters found that in 2012, the highest average hourly rate for partners based in the New York and California offices of Am Law 100 law firms was $1195 for partners, $990 for associates, and $665 for assistants and paralegals.121 Class counsel do not provide information concerning the lowest average hourly rates, but Milbank's rates in this case are well [*50]  below the high averages.
Counsel also cite past cases in which courts have approved Milbank's hourly rates, both in complex commercial cases and actions in which Milbank served as pro bono counsel. None of the cases is direct evidence of rates in this community for this type of litigation, as they are from other districts or do not involve civil rights class actions.122 They nonetheless provide some evidence that the rates Milbank seeks to have the court in calculating the lodestar are reasonable. The rates Milbank seeks to have to court use in this case are within the range of rates approved in the commercial litigation cases cited — and for the most part near the low end of those ranges. While the rates awarded by the court in a Southern District of New York disability rights action are lower than those Milbank asks the court to employ here, Milbank's willingness to discount its lodestar by 25 percent accounts for a good portion of the discrepancy.
Class counsel have many years of experience in class action and civil rights litigation. Although the Milbank rates are higher than those charged by DRLC, counsel state "[i]t was essential for the DRLC to co-counsel with the attorneys from Milbank[,] . . . particularly given their expertise and experience with litigation."123 Based on the evidence proffered concerning counsel's experience and prevailing rates in the Los Angeles legal community, the court determines that the hourly rates requested are reasonable.

(2) Reasonableness of the Hours Expended
A court may award attorneys' fees only for the number of hours it concludes were reasonably expended on the litigation. Hensley, 461 U.S. at 434 ("[Counsel] should make a good faith effort to exclude . . . hours that are excessive, redundant, or otherwise unnecessary"). "[T]he fee applicant bears the burden of documenting the appropriate hours expended in the litigation and must submit evidence in support of th[e] hours worked. . . .'" Gates v. Rowland, 39 F.3d 1439, 1449 (9th Cir. 1994) (quoting Gates v. Deukmejian, 987 F.2d 1392, 1397-98 (9th Cir. 1992)); Chalmers v. City of Los Angeles, 796 F.2d 1205, 1210 (9th Cir. 1986) ("[C]ounsel bears the burden of submitting detailed time records justifying the hours claimed to have been expended"); Pac. W. Cable Co. v. City of Sacramento, 693 F.Supp. 865, 870 (E.D. Cal. 1988) ("The cases do not indicate that every minute of an attorney's time must be documented; they do, however, [*52]  require that there be adequate description of how the time was spent, whether it be on research or some other aspect of the litigation. . .").
Counsel report that they have spent 727.06 attorney hours working on Garcia's claims against the LACOE defendants between the time the action was filed in 2009 and the 2011 settlement.124 Both firms submitted records of the time expended and expenses incurred.125 Rivera states that DRLC reviewed its records and "wrote-off certain time due to a variety of reasons, such as too much time being spent on a task or if the task was arguably overstaffed."126 Similarly, Milbank "deduct[ed] certain time entries that [it], in the exercise of its billing judgment, . . . elected not to claim."127 Although work on the case continued, culminating in the amended settlement agreement in 2015,128 counsel seeks fees only for time expended through the date of the first settlement agreement in 2011.129 The court finds the total number of hours class counsel expended and included in the lodestar calculation reasonable.
In sum, Milbank's lodestar is $257,730,130 while DRLC's is $69,301.37.131 These amounts total $327,031.37. Counsel's request for fees and costs of $256,000 is thus lower [*53]  than the amount the court would consider a reasonable fee.

(3) Costs
The district court must also determine an appropriate award of costs. See Fed.R.Civ.Proc. 23(h) ("In a certified class action, the court may award reasonable attorney's fees and nontaxable costs that are authorized by law or by the parties' agreement"); Trans Container Services v. Security Forwarders, Inc., 752 F.2d 483, 488 (9th Cir. 1985). One court has noted that, in evaluating the reasonableness of costs, "the judge has to step in and play surrogate client." See In re Continental Illinois Securities Litigation, 962 F.2d 566, 572 (7th Cir. 1992). In keeping with this role, the court must examine prevailing rates and practices in the legal marketplace to assess the reasonableness of the costs sought. Jenkins, 491 U.S. at 286-87. "Expenses such as reimbursement for travel, meals, lodging, photocopying, long-distance telephone calls, computer legal research, postage, courier service, mediation, exhibits, document scanning, and visual equipment are typically recoverable." Rutti v. Lojack Corp., Inc., No. SACV 06-350 DOC (JCx), 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 107677, 2012 WL 3151077, *12 (C.D. Cal. July 31, 2012). Courts also have discretion to reimburse consulting and expert witness fees. In re Media Vision Technology Securities Litigation, 913 F.Supp. 1362, 1366-67 (N.D. Cal. 1996).
Costs are included in class counsel's request that the court award $256,000. DRLC reports that its costs related to Garcia's claims against LACOE are $790.88;132 Milbank states its costs associated with those claims are $11,048.60.133 Both firms recorded [*54]  costs contemporaneously as they were incurred.134 Based on the information they have provided, the court finds the costs reasonable. When these amounts are added to the lodestar fees the court found reasonable, the lodestar fees and costs total $338,870.85.
The fees and costs counsel ask the court to award represent a 24.45% discount from this number. Because both the lodestar fees and the costs are reasonable, and because counsel ask the court to award an amount less than those fees and costs, the court grants their request.

III. CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated, the court grants Garcia's motion for final approval of his settlement with the LACOE defendants. It also grants class counsel's motion for attorneys' fees and costs and awards them $256,000.
DATED: September 14, 2015
/s/ Margaret M. Morrow
MARGARET M. MORROW
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

