Gilliard v. Ga. Dep't of Corr.
United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division
March 2, 2012, Decided; March 2, 2012, Filed
CIVIL ACTION No. 1:10-cv-03269-GGB

Reporter
2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 200501 *; 2012 WL 12951863
BEVERLY GILLIARD, Plaintiff, v. GEORGIA DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS, CHARLES SMITH, SCOTT POITEVINT, UTE SHEPHERD, BECKY EAST, and CINDY SCHWEIGER, Defendants.
Subsequent History: Affirmed by Gilliard v. Ga. Dep't of Corr., 500 Fed. Appx. 860, 2012 U.S. App. LEXIS 25065 (11th Cir. Ga., Dec. 7, 2012)
Counsel:  [*1] Beverly Gilliard, Plaintiff, Pro se, Decatur, GA USA.
For Georgia Department of Corrections, Charles Smith, Scott Poitevint, Ute Shepherd, Becky East, Cindy Schweiger, Defendants: Christopher Andrew McGraw, Georgia Attorney General's Office, Atlanta, GA USA; Romy Diane Smith, State of Georgia Law Department, Atlanta, GA USA.
Judges: GERRILYN G. BRILL, UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE.
Opinion by: GERRILYN G. BRILL
Opinion



FINAL ORDER
Plaintiff Beverly Gilliard ("Plaintiff") is proceeding in this action pro se. The parties have consented to jurisdiction by the undersigned United States magistrate judge. This matter is before the Court on the following motions:
1) Plaintiff's Motion for Leave to Amend her Complaint [Doc. 62];
2) Defendants' Motion to Dismiss Plaintiff's Third Amended Complaint in Lieu of Answer [Doc. 63];
3) Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. 66];
4) Plaintiff's Motion to Sanction the Use of Her Deposition [Doc. 71];
5) Defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. 79]; and
6) Plaintiff's Motion for Leave to Exceed Page Limitation [Doc. 83].
7) Plaintiff's Motion for Leave to Submit Additional Evidentiary Materials in Support of Plaintiff's Pending Motion for Summary Judgment and in Opposition to Defendants' [*2]  Pending Motion for Summary Judgment, and motion for oral hearing [Doc. 86].

I. PRELIMINARY MOTIONS

A. Plaintiff's Motion for Leave to File Amended Complaint [Doc. 62] and Defendants' Motion to Dismiss Plaintiff's Third Amended Complaint in Lieu of Answer [Doc. 63]

1. Procedural Background
Plaintiff Beverly Gilliard ("Plaintiff") was employed by the Georgia Department of Corrections ("GDC") until she was terminated from her position on October 21, 2008. After her termination, Plaintiff, proceeding pro se, filed the instant lawsuit on or about October 12, 2010 asserting the following claims against the GDC and a number of individual GDC employees ("Individual Defendants")(collectively, "Defendants"): "Religious Liberty, Disability, Mental Illness, Harassment, and Retaliation discrimination claims under Title I and Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act and section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, Georgia Equal Employment for People with Disabilities Code, The Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, pursuant to Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq. (hereinafter 'Title VII'), and the Civil Rights Act of 1991, 42 U.S.C. § 1981(a), Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) [*3] , Health Information Privacy and Portability Act (HIPPA) [sic] and whistleblower laws in an effort to remedy the alleged discriminatory practices of the Defendants." [Doc. 3, Complaint].
On December 30, 2010, Defendant GDC filed its answer [Doc. 22], and the Individual Defendants filed a motion to dismiss in lieu of answer [Doc. 23].
On May 6, 2011, the Court issued an order granting in part and denying in part the Individual Defendants' motion to dismiss, and dismissed the following claims: (1) Plaintiff's Title VII claims against the Individual Defendants in their individual and official capacities; (2) Plaintiff's FMLA, ADA and Rehabilitation Act claims against the Individual Defendants in their individual capacities; and (3) all of Plaintiff's claims against the Individual Defendants under 42 U.S.C. § 1981(a), HIPAA, the Georgia Equal Employment for Persons with Disabilities Code, O.C.G.A. §§ 34-6A-1, et seq., and the Georgia Whistleblower Act, O.C.G.A. §§ 45-1-4, et seq., in their individual and official capacities. Plaintiff's FMLA, ADA and Rehabilitation Act claims against the Individual Defendants in their official capacities were allowed to proceed. [Doc. 58, May 6, 2011 Order, at 18-19].
The Court's May 6, 2011 Order also granted Plaintiff leave [*4]  to re-plead her complaint within fourteen (14) days of the date of the Order, setting forth which specific acts support each cause of action, and taking into account the Court's dismissal of claims against the Individual Defendants and the standards articulated in Iqbal and Twombly. See Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 129 S. Ct. 1937, 173 L. Ed. 2d 868 (2009); Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 127 S. Ct. 1955, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929 (2007). The Court instructed Plaintiff that in the amended complaint, Plaintiff was not to simply reaffirm and re-allege the narrative preceding each count, but she needed to specify clearly what facts related to each cause of action. Plaintiff was also expressly instructed to describe allegations of particular conduct by a particular defendant in connection with each cause of action, specifying (1) which defendant or defendants each cause of action is asserted against; (2) what factual allegations form the basis of each claim against each defendant; (3) each legal theory upon which Plaintiff asserts liability against each defendant; (4) what injury or adverse action Plaintiff claims she has suffered; and (5) whether the claim against any particular individual defendant is being brought in his or her individual or official capacity. The Order directed Defendants to file an answer or 12(b) motion within [*5]  fourteen (14) days of the docketing of Plaintiff's amended complaint. [See Fed. R. Civ. P. 15(a)(3); Doc. 59].
On May 18, 2011, Plaintiff filed a combined motion to amend her complaint and proposed amended complaint, along with over two hundred exhibits. [Doc. 62, "Amended Complaint"]. On June 1, 2011, Defendants filed the instant Motion to Dismiss Plaintiff's Third Amended Complaint in Lieu of Answer [Doc. 63].

2. Legal Standards
Rule 15 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure governs amendments to the pleadings. The rule states, in pertinent part:
A party may amend its pleading once as a matter of course within: (A) 21 days after serving it, or (B) if the pleading is one to which a responsive pleading is required, 21 days after service of a responsive pleading or 21 days after service of a motion under Rule 12(b), (e), or (f), whichever is earlier.
Fed. R. Civ. P. 15(a)(1)(A) & (B). "In all other cases, a party may amend its pleading only with the opposing party's written consent or the court's leave. The court should freely give leave when justice so requires." Fed. R. Civ. P. 15(a)(2).
The Supreme Court has emphasized that leave to amend must be granted absent a specific, significant reason for denial:
In the absence of any apparent or declared reason — such as undue delay, bad faith or dilatory motive on the part of the movant, [*6]  repeated failure to cure deficiencies by amendments previously allowed, undue prejudice to the opposing party by virtue of allowance of the amendment, futility of amendment, etc. — the leave sought should, as the rules require, be freely given.
Spanish Broad. Sys. of Fla., Inc. v. Clear Channel Commc'ns, Inc., 376 F.3d 1065, 1077 (11th Cir. 2004)(quoting Foman v. Davis, 371 U.S. 178, 182, 83 S. Ct. 227, 9 L. Ed. 2d 222 (1962)(internal quotation marks omitted)). The decision whether to grant or deny leave to amend rests in the sound discretion of the court. Loggerhead Turtle v. County Council of Volusia County, Fla., 148 F.3d 1231, 1257 (11th Cir. 1998).
In order to survive a motion to dismiss, a complaint need not contain "detailed factual allegations," but must "'give the defendant fair notice of what the ... claim is and the grounds upon which it rests.'" Twombly, 550 U.S. at 555 (citation omitted); Iqbal, 129 S. Ct. at 1950-51. Complaints filed pro se are to be liberally construed and "held to less stringent standards than formal pleadings drafted by lawyers." Erickson v. Pardus, 551 U.S. 89, 94, 127 S. Ct. 2197, 167 L. Ed. 2d 1081 (2007)(citations and internal quotation marks omitted).

3. Discussion
Defendants object to the filing of Plaintiff's [Third] Amended Complaint on the grounds that Plaintiff failed to follow this Court's guidance on how to re-plead her claims and also because the proposed Amended Complaint continues to be in the form of an impermissible shotgun pleading, like her original complaint and first and second attempts to amend. However, Defendants do not assert [*7]  that the entirety of the complaint, as amended, fails to state a cognizable cause of action; rather, Defendants argue that Plaintiff's Title VII, FMLA, ADA and Rehabilitation Act claims against the individually-named defendants in their individual capacities have already been dismissed by this Court; Plaintiff's Amended Complaint adds facts, but no new claims against the GDC or the individually-named defendants beyond what were contained in Plaintiff's original complaint as initially filed; and the GDC has already answered Plaintiff's original complaint which included the same claims regarding the FMLA, ADA, and Rehabilitation Act that Plaintiff has included in her Amended Complaint.
Although the Court can deny a motion to amend as futile on these grounds, see Cockrell v. Sparks, 510 F.3d 1307, 1310 (11th Cir. 2007)("[l]eave to amend a complaint is futile when the complaint as amended would still be properly dismissed or be immediately subject to summary judgment for the defendant"), the Court finds that this is not such a case. See Wyatt v. BellSouth, Inc., 176 F.R.D. 627, 630-31 (M.D. Ala. 1998)("An amendment adding a cause of action is considered futile if the new cause of action does not state a claim upon which relief can be granted, Rudolph v. Arthur Andersen & Co., 800 F.2d 1040, 1042 (11th Cir. 1986), or if the claim would not survive an affirmative defense.").
 [*8] The Court agrees that Plaintiff's Amended Complaint is at best only a marginal improvement over her initial complaint. However, if allowed, this would be Plaintiff's first amendment, and thus, well within the liberal policy of "freely given" leave. Moreover, there is no showing of bad faith or undue delay in seeking to amend. "When a district court denies the plaintiff leave to amend a complaint due to futility, the court is making the legal conclusion that the complaint, as amended, would necessarily fail." St. Charles Foods, Inc. v. America's Favorite Chicken Co., 198 F.3d 815, 822-23 (11th Cir. 1999). As the Court has not yet found on the record before it that the proposed Amended Complaint would necessarily fail, and as Plaintiff has not abused the privilege of amendment, the Court GRANTS Plaintiff's motion to amend [Doc. 62]. The Clerk is DIRECTED to change the text for Docket Entry 62 to "Plaintiff's Amended Complaint."
As a general matter, "[a]n amended pleading supersedes the former pleading; the original pleading is abandoned by the amendment, and is no longer a part of the pleader's averments against his adversary." Dresdner Bank AG v. M/V Olympia Voyager, 463 F.3d 1210, 1215 (11th Cir. 2006)(citation and quotation marks omitted); Fritz v. Standard Sec. Life Ins. Co., 676 F.2d 1356, 1358 (11th Cir. 1982)("Under the Federal Rules, an amended complaint supersedes the original complaint."). "That means that specific claims made against particular defendants in the original complaint are not preserved unless they are also set forth in the amended complaint." Gross v. White, 340 F. App'x 527, 534 (11th Cir. 2009). Nevertheless, by filing an amended complaint, Plaintiff is not entitled to resurrect claims that the Court has previously dismissed. Thus, to the extent that Plaintiff in her Amended Complaint is seeking to renew or re-assert her Title VII claims against the Individual Defendants in their individual and official capacities, and Plaintiff's FMLA, ADA and Rehabilitation Act claims against the Individual Defendants in their individual capacities, [*9]  Defendants' Motion to Dismiss Plaintiff's [Third] Amended Complaint in Lieu of Answer [Doc. 63] is GRANTED IN PART. The remainder of Defendants' Motion to Dismiss [Doc. 63] is DENIED AS MOOT.
Because the parties have already filed their cross motions for summary judgment, the Court sees no need at this late juncture for the Defendants to file an amended answer to Plaintiff's Amended Complaint. Instead, the Court will construe the Defendants' motion for summary judgment as being filed in response to Plaintiff's Amended Complaint.

4. Surviving Claims
Moving forward, Defendants have moved for summary judgment with regard to the following surviving claims: discrimination, denial of accommodation, hostile work environment, retaliation, and breach of confidentiality on the basis of disability, in violation of Titles I and II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 against the GDC and the Individual Defendants in their official capacities; and interference and retaliation in violation of the Family and Medical Leave Act against the GDC and the Individual Defendants in their official capacities.1
In Plaintiff's cross motion for summary judgment and [*10]  in her response in opposition to Defendants' motion for summary judgment, Plaintiff has not disputed Defendants' list of Plaintiff's surviving claims or argued that Defendants have failed to address one or more of Plaintiff's claims. Accordingly, the Court will accept these claims as the list of claims that remain pending before this Court for consideration on the parties' cross motions for summary judgment.

B. Plaintiff's Motion to Sanction the Use of Her Deposition [Doc. 71]
Also pending before the Court is Plaintiff's request that the transcript of her deposition taken on July 18, 2011 by the Defendants be "deemed un-useable by Defendants" and that the "Deposition become[ ] null and void." [Doc. 71]. Plaintiff bases her request on a verbal exchange that she states she had with the court reporter at the deposition after lunch and during one of the breaks. Plaintiff states that while the parties were off the record, the court reporter told Plaintiff that she was speaking too fast during the deposition and that she needed to slow down, or he could not guarantee that he would be able to take down everything she said. Plaintiff reports that she told the court reporter, "okay I will try [*11]  and talk a little slower," to which the court reporter responded angrily, "Don't try, you better do it." [Doc. 71 at 3]. As of the time that Plaintiff filed the instant motion, she had not yet had the opportunity to read and review the deposition transcript.
Defendants argue that apart from speculation, Plaintiff has presented no credible evidence that the deposition transcript is in any way inaccurate, or that the certified court reporter, who also tape recorded the deposition, was ultimately unable to accurately transcribe the testimony based upon the speed of Plaintiff's speech or for any other reason. In the court reporter's certificate attached to the transcription of Plaintiff's deposition testimony, the court reporter certified that the testimony was taken down and reduced to typewriting under his direction, and that the transcript represents a true, complete and correct transcript of the testimony given at the deposition. [See Doc. 79-11 at 189, Deposition of Beverly A. Gilliard taken on July 18, 2011 at 9:15 a.m.]. Neither party has submitted a signed errata sheet for the transcript showing that there were any material inaccuracies.
As Plaintiff has presented no evidence or [*12]  facts to support her claim that there was a material error or errors made in the transcript of her deposition testimony, Plaintiff's Motion to Sanction the Use of her Deposition [Doc. 71] is DENIED.

C. Plaintiff's Motion for Leave to Exceed Page Limitation [Doc. 83]
Plaintiff seeks the Court's permission to file a 25-page response to Defendants' statement of material facts. Plaintiff's request is unopposed and is hereby GRANTED nunc pro tunc. [Doc. 83].

II. CROSS MOTIONS FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT

A. Legal Standard
Summary judgment is proper when no genuine issues of material fact are present and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). The movant carries its burden by showing the court that there is "an absence of evidence to support the nonmoving party's case." Celotex v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 325, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). "Only when that burden has been met does the burden shift to the nonmoving party to demonstrate that there is indeed a material issue of fact that precludes summary judgment." Clark v. Coats & Clark, Inc., 929 F.2d 604, 608 (11th Cir. 1991).
The nonmovant is then required "to go beyond the pleadings" and to present competent evidence in the form of affidavits, answers to interrogatories, depositions, admissions and the like, designating "specific facts showing that there is [*13]  a genuine issue for trial." Celotex, 477 U.S. at 324; see Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e). Mere conclusions and unsupported factual allegations are legally insufficient to create a dispute to defeat summary judgment." Bald Mountain Park, Ltd. v. Oliver, 863 F.2d 1560, 1563 (11th Cir. 1989). Resolving all doubts in favor of the nonmoving party, the court must determine "whether a fair-minded jury could return a verdict for the plaintiff on the evidence presented." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 252, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986).

B. Facts
In light of the foregoing summary judgment standard, the Court finds the following facts for the purpose of resolving the parties' cross motions for summary judgment only.
Plaintiff, a 47-year old female, was hired on November 16, 2007 as a Procurement Officer-II within the GDC's Central Purchasing Office ("CPO"). Plaintiff has an associate degree in accounting and a bachelor's degree in business administration. Concurrent with her employment at GDC, Plaintiff also worked as a realtor through Metro Brokers/GMAC Real Estate. [Doc. 66-1 at 16-18].
In December 2007, Plaintiff was moved to the Purchasing Manager position in the CPO on a probationary basis. In that position, Plaintiff's duties included, among other responsibilities, assigning solicitations to staff, reviewing their work, developing solicitations for bids, administering contracts, [*14]  and managing the staff assigned to her. [Doc. 79-7, Shepherd Aff., at 3-4]. On February 16, 2008, Plaintiff satisfied her probationary period one month early and was formally promoted to the Purchasing Manager position. [Doc. 79-8, Smith Aff., ¶ 2].
At all relevant times, Individual Defendant Charles Smith ("Smith") was Director of Procurement for the CPO and oversaw the office, including personnel matters. Individual Defendant Ute Shepherd ("Shepherd") was Deputy Director of Procurement for the CPO and was responsible for the day-to-day operations of the CPO. As Purchasing Manager, Plaintiff reported to Shepherd, who reported to Smith. After July 1, 2008, when Plaintiff was reassigned to a purchasing standards analyst position, Plaintiff reported directly to Smith. Individual Defendant Becky East ("East") served as Administration Division Director of the GDC; Scott Poitevint ("Poitevint") was Assistant Division Director; and Individual Defendant Cindy Schweiger ("Schweiger") was Director of Human Resources. [Doc. 79-2, Defs.' Stmt. of Undisputed Mat. Facts ("DSMF"), ¶¶ 1-7]. Smith reported directly to Scott Poitevint, whose job responsibilities included oversight and supervision of [*15]  the business support functions for the GDC, including the CPO. [Doc. 77-3, Poitevint Aff., ¶ 2].
Shepherd states that she began having concerns about Plaintiff's job performance as early as January 2008. On or about January 9, 2008, Shepherd asked to meet with Plaintiff to discuss a work-related matter, but Plaintiff told her that she had too much work on her desk to meet with her on that date. [Doc. 77-6 at 5]. About a week later, Shepherd asked Plaintiff to handle an emergency procurement request; Shepherd then asked to speak with Bonita Jackson, an individual under Plaintiff's supervision. Although Shepherd had helped train Plaintiff on GDC's procurement procedures, Plaintiff believed that the emergency procurement request did not comply with GDC's procedures and was therefore "illegal," and so she refused to do what Shepherd had asked. [Doc. 84-1, Pl.'s Resp. to DSMF ("PRDSMF"), ¶ 23]. Plaintiff emailed Shepherd asking about the purpose of her meeting with Ms. Jackson, and informed Shepherd that, "this issue is for me to handle; I have to handle my staff my way for consistency. ... [A] meeting with Bo is not necessary and I am going to handle this from here...." [Shepherd Aff. ¶ [*16]  6; Doc. 77-6 at 3, Smith Aff. Ex. E]. Plaintiff also filed a complaint with Poitevint and Smith about the purported "highly illegal request" and Shepherd's role in the purchasing request. [PRDSMF ¶ 23]. Shepherd subsequently spoke with Smith about Plaintiff's behavior, and Smith and Shepherd verbally counseled Plaintiff about her work performance and attitude. [Id. ¶ 24].
On February 8, 2008, Plaintiff sent an email to Shepherd that stated:
I've been thinking about doing AWS [alternative work schedule] days, do you think I can start without causing too much disruption to our schedule. If so I would like Fridays off so I can have ever [sic] other Friday to prepare for my Sabbath. This will allow me to have two Fridays per month that I can have to do extra preparation which would be great for me since I do so much with my church. I am Seventh Day Adventist so my Sabbath worship starts from sunset Friday to sunset Saturday...."
[Doc. 77-9 at 2]. Plaintiff was given an alternative work schedule where she worked nine-hour days and had every other Friday off. [Shepherd Aff. ¶ 4; Doc. 77-8 ("Pl.'s Dep.") at 22-23].2
On February 20, 2008, Plaintiff was treated by her physician, Dr. Christopher [*17]  Johnson, and provided a release to return to work on February 25, 2008 with no restrictions. The work release form did not specify the medical condition for which Plaintiff received treatment. [Doc. 62-1 at 7; Pl.'s Dep. at 119].
On or about March 5, 2008, Smith wanted to speak with Plaintiff about an aftercare proposal she was working on, and asked Shepherd if she knew where Plaintiff was. Shepherd told him she did not know where Plaintiff was and that Plaintiff had not informed Shepherd before Plaintiff left the office. Smith then called Plaintiff on her cell phone, asked where she was, and asked her to let her supervisor, Shepherd, know her whereabouts. Plaintiff stated that she was at lunch and that during her employment with the GDC, she had never told Shepherd when she was leaving for lunch. [Doc. 84-2 at 99]. After Plaintiff failed to call Shepherd and instead called Smith back ten minutes later, Smith asked Plaintiff to return to the office to discuss the matter in private. When Plaintiff returned, she met with Smith and became upset that he was asking why she was out of the office from 12:30 until 1:50 p.m., which Plaintiff argued was her lunch hour. When Smith reviewed Plaintiff's [*18]  timesheet, however, the timesheet indicated that Plaintiff was out from 12:00 to 12:30 for lunch. Plaintiff told Smith that Shepherd had instructed her to complete her timesheet that way and that it was okay to document thirty minutes on her timesheet as long as she did not take the two 15-minute breaks that the GDC provided. After speaking with Shepherd, Smith concluded that Plaintiff had misrepresented and misinterpreted the timesheet policy. [Doc. 77-5 at 19]. Plaintiff disputes Smith's conclusion.
During the meeting with Plaintiff, Smith attempted to discuss the importance of keeping Plaintiff's supervisor informed of her whereabouts, but in response, Smith states that Plaintiff became loud, defensive, and argumentative, and complained that morale was bad in the office. [Id. at 18-19]. Plaintiff alleges in her Amended Complaint that during the meeting, Smith yelled at her, terrorized her, and locked her in his office, while Shepherd barred the door. [Doc. 62 at 5; PRDSMF ¶ 28; Doc. 66-1 at 15; Pl.'s Dep. at 83-86]. Defendants deny Plaintiff's allegations. [Doc. 22, GDC Answer, at 9 ¶ 8].
After the meeting ended, Plaintiff sent Smith an email, stating, in part:
I am very flabbergasted at the tone [*19]  you set for the meeting which was in my opinion unnecessary. I am also angry that you call my cell phone to shout at me and then followed this by treating me as if I am your child and it was okay to yell at me in a manner that was demeaning. ... Once again this is about fear and incompetence. ... [Shepherd] fears you and I will have conversation [sic] that may cause her to be replaced. ... You have no real issues with me except those caused by her. I do my work, I work hard, I am dedicated, I have a good rapport with my staff and I have their respect, I am helpful, I take initiative, I go above and beyond always, I am highly skilled yet I try to learn new things, I am a good communicator, and I offer great suggestions. I have proven to be very competent from day one. These are all the areas Ms. Shepherd lacks and she is my Supervisor. She has no supervisory skills, she causes strife, she looks for reasons to create riff, she proves her incompetence on a daily basis and she does not have and does not know how to gain the respect of the staff. ... None of the staff likes her or trust her and that will never change unless she can become and better person [sic] and I think the gates of [*20]  heaven and hell will open before that happens. ... I personally think Ms. Shepherd's biggest problem is she is my Supervisor but she cannot provide supervision to me because I know more than her, that is simply put. Her little bit of purchasing knowledge does not measure up to the vast knowledge base that I have. I don't have to ask her about purchasing because what I don't know can be learned by reading or I have my staff that I can go to. ... I have decided to take this to personnel for mediation because I feel at this point you are incapable of making a decision that will help the situation and I don't feel losing my job and GDC losing a good employee, because of Ms. Shepherd's incompetence is fair. ... I guess Ms. Shepherd wins again. And oh, while you were busy shouting at me, everyone says she came out into the hallway gloating, isn't that something. Have a bless and pleasant day!"
[Doc. 84-2 at 90-92]. On March 6, 2008, Plaintiff requested leave and did not come in to work "[d]ue to the unnecessary events of yesterday" and "the level of stress caused by the situation." [Doc. 77-9 at 3]. On March 10, Plaintiff emailed Shepherd to say that she was not coming in to work that day [*21]  either and that she was requesting sick leave for the day. [Id. at 4].
On March 11, 2008, Shepherd asked Plaintiff to use a different leave request form than the one she had turned in, which appeared to Shepherd to have been changed or altered. In response, Plaintiff sent an email to Shepherd stating:
I really need the nitpicking to stop. It is causing too much unnecessary stress. I have to deal with a lot on the job where the daily duties are concern [sic] and I think it is unnecessary to place a lot of nit picky issues on staff that creates staff to be stress [sic] and thereby missing work Not [sic] picking is one of the most detrimental issues to workplaces everywhere. I would rather spend my time dealing with conducive [sic] issues that allow for productivity and work enjoyment. If you have a real issue that need to be address [sic] that is causing all these nitpicking issues, I need for you to address them.
[Shepherd Aff. ¶ 9; Doc. 77-6 at 8].
Also on March 11th, Smith issued Plaintiff a written memorandum of concern addressing what he considered to be her insubordinate and detrimental behavior during their March 5th meeting when he spoke to her about her unexplained absence. The memorandum [*22]  informed Plaintiff that if her behavior continued or a similar outburst occurred again, Smith would recommend that she be removed from her supervisory duties and/or assigned to a lower grade or another position within the department. [Doc. 84-2 at 93-95].
After receiving the memorandum of concern, Plaintiff wrote a letter to Scott Poitevent, Smith's boss, stating that Plaintiff had been in "an on-going battle of incompetency, mismanagement and ineffective leadership" since she became employed with the GDC and informing Poitevint that the CPO staff "feel management, Mr. Smith, Ms. Shepherd, and [another manager] are incompetent and insincere in their dealings with them and so they trust [Plaintiff] and they don't trust them." [Id. at 96]. Upon receiving Plaintiff's email, Poitevint became concerned that Plaintiff was telling her staff to question the guidance provided by Shepherd and Smith; he also considered Plaintiff's email to be insubordinate conduct. Based upon the email, Poitevint spoke with Smith about monitoring Plaintiff's conduct and documenting in writing Smith's expectations and Plaintiff's performance. [Poitevint Aff. ¶ 3].
On March 13, 2008, Shepherd asked Plaintiff to meet with [*23]  her at 10:00 a.m. to discuss some updates, but Plaintiff responded by stating:
I need to meet with you at a later time. I am having a hard time right now and just trying to function and do those things that are pending on my desk and working on the coin laundry contract. I ineed [sic] time to myself so today is not a good day for me to meet. If it is something for me to do please send in an email and I will handle. I would rather be left alone today and please know it is not meant to be any disrespect; I am trying to avoid any issue happening because I am not in my best element right now. Thanks."
[Doc. 77-6 at 13 (emphasis in original)].
Sometime in March 2008, Plaintiff told Shepherd that she was having pain in her knee. [Shepherd Aff. ¶ 11; Doc. 84-2 at 50]. On March 19, 2008, Plaintiff emailed Shepherd informing her that "[d]ue to medical reason (my knees have too much fluid)," she needed to wear sneakers around the office "until the swelling goes away."3 [Doc. 66-1 at 19]. On March 20, 2008, Plaintiff emailed Shepherd requesting that she be allowed to leave early that day because of her knee. She stated, "I am trying to work around this knee but I am in severe pain. I can't sit for [*24]  long either because it locks up on me and the pain is worst [sic] standing at that point." [Id. at 20].
On March 24, 2008, Plaintiff saw Dr. Johnson for her knee pain and chronic low back pain. He referred her to Dr. Christopher Jarrett, an orthopedic surgeon, and provided a release to return to work on March 27, 2008 with no restrictions. [Pl.'s Dep. at 119; Doc. 77-17 at 2]. It is undisputed that GDC allowed Plaintiff to go to medical appointments when she requested the leave time, and also allowed her to work different hours to make up time so that she would not always have to use sick leave time. [Smith Aff. ¶ 7; DSMF ¶ 15; PRDSMF ¶ 15].
In mid May 2008, Plaintiff told Smith and Shepherd that she was going to have knee surgery the last week in May, and possibly would need a full knee replacement within six months. [Doc. 84-2 at 63]. She relayed that her doctor estimated her recovery time at around six weeks post-surgery, with the following proposed work restrictions: "Off work for 2 more weeks, Telecomute [sic] for 2 weeks, Light duty for two weeks starting on 5/27/08." [Doc. 66-1 at 34].
Plaintiff has produced a calendar of events that she states she prepared and submitted to the Equal Employment [*25]  Opportunity Commission ("EEOC"), indicating that on May 15th, she attended a meeting in Mr. Smith's office to discuss whether she would be able to continue to do her job and "limitation concern." [Doc. 84-3 at 4]. The entry notes that Plaintiff "[t]old them I have no limitations as long as I can control how much walking and standing I do." [Id.].
In late May, while Plaintiff was reconsidering whether and/or when to have knee surgery, she emailed Shepherd that the doctor had given her a handicapped sticker for her car and deemed her permanently disabled. [Doc. 84-2 at 65]. Shepherd responded that she did not realize that Plaintiff's condition was going to be permanent because Shepherd thought that after the surgery, Plaintiff's condition would improve. [Id.; Shepherd Aff. ¶ 12]. Plaintiff replied, "I am permanently disabled now and will be after the surgery. ... Currently, it is getting harder for me to walk by the minute and it is being a struggle more and more daily to make it out of bed." [Doc. 84-2 at 65]. Plaintiff stated, "I have come to the realization and acceptance that I am now a member of the disabled class of employees. I wanted to bring this to your attention so that we [*26]  can move forward as I try to adjust to my new condition. ... This pass [sic] weekend, I have come to terms with my situation and I am hoping that you all can help me by accepting that you now have a disabled employee on your staff." [Id.]. Plaintiff did not provide any medical documentation at that time to support her claim of disability. Although Plaintiff was approved for leave for the surgery, Plaintiff did not have knee surgery in May. [Shepherd Aff. ¶ 11].
On June 3, 2008, Plaintiff's physician recommended bilateral leg braces for her arthritis, physical therapy, and water aerobics to lose weight. [Doc. 84-2 at 66; Doc. 62-1 at 48]. Plaintiff began using a crutch or crutches at work and contends that Smith jokingly called her a "cripple" until Shepherd "told him to stop." [Doc. 66-1 at 38; Doc. 77-12 at 12]. Plaintiff also contends that every day for about a week, Smith said something to the effect of "come on hop-along." [Pl.'s Dep. at 68-72]. Smith denies making those statements, and Shepherd denies hearing Smith make such comments. [Smith Aff. ¶ 25; Shepherd Aff. ¶ 15].
In mid June, Plaintiff asked Shepherd and Smith if she could work four ten-hour days each week so that she [*27]  could have every Friday off to attend aquatic therapy. [Doc. 77-4 at 15]. In a June 19th email from Plaintiff to Smith, Plaintiff explained that the aquatic therapy one day per week was prescribed in an effort to prolong the need for surgery, which her physician "would like to do ... in three years." [Doc. 62-1 at 40]. Although Smith and Shepherd had recently solicited the staff to let them know of any changes they were requesting to their alternative work schedules (which, if approved, would take effect on July 1, 2008) [Shepherd Aff. ¶ 13], Plaintiff emailed Shepherd that her request was "not based on the unit being allowed to make changes in their schedule effective July 1," but rather her concern "with [her] disabling condition and [her] doctor's prescription." [Doc. 77-4 at 15]. Smith discussed Plaintiff's request with her and asked her to provide medical documentation so that he could consider an appropriate work schedule.
In June 2008, Plaintiff asked Shepherd and Smith for a parking space in a parking garage nearer to her workplace than where she had been parking. [Pl.'s Dep. at 148-50; Doc. 84-4 at 8; Doc. 77-10 at 6]. Smith forwarded Plaintiff's request to Cindy Schweiger [*28]  in Human Resources and Scott Poitevint. [Smith Aff. ¶ 12]. Poitevint looked into Plaintiff's request, but learned that the spaces assigned to the GDC were held by the Commissioner's Office and were reserved for its 18 board members and other executives. [Poitevint Aff. ¶ 8]. Poitevint informed Smith that Plaintiff would need to work with the Georgia Building Authority ("GBA") to change parking garages. Id. Plaintiff then contacted the Governor's office, who referred her request to the GBA and suggested that Plaintiff contact the GBA directly. [Doc. 84-4 at 9]. The GBA representative informed Plaintiff that the GDC was assigned 65 parking spaces, plus three reserved parking spaces. [Id. at 12-19]. After a series of emails, the GBA representative arranged for Plaintiff to have the closer parking space that Plaintiff had requested. The period of time from the date that Plaintiff requested closer parking to when she was provided a closer space was approximately thirty days. [DSMF ¶ 67; Pl.'s Dep. at 150-55].
Plaintiff states that at some point, she also asked about having an office instead of her cubicle so that she could use her wheelchair. [Am. Compl. ¶ 13; Pl.'s Dep. at 43-45]. Smith recalls Plaintiff [*29]  asking about having an office, but denies that Plaintiff said it was because she needed to use a wheelchair. [Smith Aff. ¶ 6]. It is undisputed that Plaintiff never presented a physician's note indicating that Plaintiff needed to use or was prescribed a wheelchair. Although the building was wheelchair accessible, it is also undisputed that Plaintiff never actually brought or attempted to bring a wheelchair to work or asked to change the layout of her assigned cubicle to accommodate a wheelchair. [Pl.'s Dep. at 45; Shepherd Aff. ¶ 3; Smith Aff. ¶ 6; PRDSMF ¶ 71].
Smith avers that Plaintiff was not provided an office because there was not an empty office available. [Smith Aff. ¶ 6]. Plaintiff disputes that no office was available once Cheryl Ealey (a CPO procurement analyst) relocated to Linda Mangham's office after Mangham retired. [PRDSMF ¶ 68]. Plaintiff testified in her deposition, however, that the "office" that Ealey vacated was actually just a wider, differently configured cubicle than Plaintiff's assigned cubicle. [Pl.'s Dep. at 43-44].
On June 24, 2008, Shepherd reviewed Plaintiff's timesheet and asked her to change it to accurately reflect the times that she had worked. Plaintiff [*30]  emailed Shepherd that it was unfair to ask her to change her timesheet and lose over six hours of time, especially since the GDC did not provide her with clear directives on how to complete timesheets. [DSMF ¶ 33; Doc. 84-4 at 46]. Shepherd then contacted Smith for assistance. Smith told Plaintiff to change her timesheet as directed. Plaintiff responded by stating,
How can I, who have been here for less than 1 year, have information on the timesheet policy, when my supervisor who has been here over 15 years had no directives herself. This has been an on-going issue in this department, which I explain [sic] to Ms. Shepherd, is making staff disgruntled. The policy change [sic] from day to day and bopth [sic] you and Ms. Shepherd refuses [sic] to put your directives in writing when requested so the staff have nothing to refer back to when needed.
I am not agreeing to change my leave so I will write on the leave that it is done under duress.
[Doc. 77-6 at 15]. Smith advised Plaintiff that her response was inappropriate and insubordinate, and instructed her to see him for further counseling. [Id.].
On June 25, 2008, Plaintiff emailed Poitevint complaining about the timesheet issue, and stating [*31]  that Smith was making "bad illegal decisions," that he had made a bad business deal that was going to come back "to haunt" the GDC, and that she was "constantly" telling her staff that she would not sign off on anything that was in violation of policy. [Doc. 77-3 at 14]. Plaintiff stated that when she disagreed with Smith's decisions, she had her staff review and follow the policy instead. Plaintiff closed by saying, "After 7 months I have determined both of my managers have no real leadership abilities." [Id.].
On June 26, 2008, Plaintiff emailed Smith stating that she felt both he and Shepherd were "abusing" their authority "on a daily basis" and that they were acting like a parent saying to a child, "do it because I said so." [Doc. 77-6 at 14]. Plaintiff asked them to put all future directives into writing so that there would be no confusion for the staff. [Id.].
Poitevint viewed Plaintiff's refusal to follow the directives and policies of her supervisors as insubordination and determined that her disruptive conduct needed to be addressed. [Poitevint Aff. ¶¶ 4-5]. After discussing the matter with Smith, Administration Division Director Becky East, and Cindy Schweiger in Human Resources, [*32]  Poitevint and the others concluded that Plaintiff was no longer able to function effectively as the purchasing manager, her conduct had become too disruptive to the operation of the CPO, and it was in the best interest of the CPO to remove Plaintiff from her duties as purchasing manager and place her in the non-management position of purchasing standards analyst, reporting directly to Smith, with no adjustment to Plaintiff's salary or pay grade. [Poitevint Aff. ¶ 6; Smith Aff. ¶ 17].
Although Plaintiff was informed that the new position involved no change in pay or grade, Plaintiff states that she was actually demoted from paygrade 15 (purchasing manager) to paygrade 14, and that the purchasing standards analyst position was a less prestigious position, with no managerial or supervisory responsibilities and less desirable hours. [PRDSMF ¶ 43; Doc. 84-3 at 59-62; Pl.'s Dep. at 105-06].
On June 30, 2008, Poitevint, East and Smith met with Plaintiff to discuss the change in assignment, and Poitevint sent Plaintiff an email on July 2, 2008 memorializing their conversation. [Doc. 77-3 at 16]. In the email, Poitevint cautioned Plaintiff that she would be expected to be responsive to directives [*33]  issued by all members of the leadership team, and that failure to do so "may result in disciplinary action up to and including termination." [Id.]. On July 1, it was announced that one of Plaintiff's subordinate staff, Verneicher Favors, was replacing Plaintiff as purchasing manager. [Poitevint Aff. ¶ 6].
On July 8, 2008, Plaintiff emailed Smith that she was requesting leave for the day due to stress at work and hurting knees. She also renewed her request "under ADA laws" that her schedule be adjusted to accommodate her disability and that she be approved for a four-day work week with 10-hour days and every Friday off. [Doc. 84-4 at 44].
On July 14, 2008, Plaintiff went to the Georgia EEOC to file a complaint of discrimination, but the person who notarized the complaints was not in. [Doc. 84-3 at 12]. Plaintiff then emailed Smith and Shepherd a description of various ADA, Title VII and "religious liberty" laws and provisions that she believed were applicable to her situation. [Doc. 77-5 at 23-26]. Her email again requested a four-day, 10-hour-a-day work schedule, with Fridays off to accommodate her disability and religious beliefs. She also stated that after the one hour of training [*34]  that management had authorized, she had concluded that the job duties of the new position were going to be "too tasking on my knees" and would involve too much walking and standing in light of her physical condition. [Doc. 77-5 at 23-24]. Plaintiff, however, did not present any medical documentation indicating that her physician had placed any limitations on her ability to walk or stand. [Smith Aff. ¶ 18].
After reviewing the requirements of Plaintiff's new position with one of the CPO's other procurement analysts, Cheryl Ealey, Smith concluded that Plaintiff was exaggerating the amount of standing and walking that she would have to perform in the new position and suggested ways to consolidate her job duties to limit the amount of walking she would have to do. In response, Plaintiff insisted that the position involved too much walking and standing for her to handle and that she wanted a ten-hour-a-day, four-days-a-week work schedule to accommodate her disability and religious beliefs. [Doc. 77-5 at 23-24; Smith Aff. ¶ 18].
On July 15, 2008, Smith asked again for a doctor's statement "that outlines your work limitations." [Doc. 79-14 at 23; Doc. 62-1 at 73]. On July 17, 2008, Plaintiff [*35]  sent Smith an email requesting leave because her knees were hurting and she did not have someone to drive her to work. [Doc. 77-12 at 6]. Plaintiff subsequently provided a physician's verification of treatment form from Dr. Johnson indicating that Plaintiff was seen in his office on July 17, 2008 and was released to return to work on July 22, 2008 with the following restrictions: "As per orthopedist." [Doc. 77-12 at 8]. However, there were no specific restrictions provided. Under "Special Instructions," the note states, "It is recommended that patient limit her work week to 4 days," with no additional explanation. [Id.]. Dr. Johnson's office notes from July 17th state that Plaintiff "has been referred to aquatic therapy. She wants a 4 day work week — she was advised to discuss this with the orthopedist as well. She does 9 hour shifts. She states that the acquatic [sic] therapy is on georgia 400." [Doc. 77-7 at 5].
On July 22, 2008, Plaintiff emailed the Commissioner of the GDC, James Donald, regarding her "New Position, ADA Request & Religious Liberty Request," to bring to his attention that she had requested a four-day work week two months prior, but it had not yet been approved. [Doc. [*36]  84-4 at 35]. In her email, Plaintiff referred to herself as "an abled disabled employee of GDC," and stated that she was writing him "because I know everyone is now trying to figure how to get rid of me rather than appreciating me for trying to do a good job and appreciating the skills I bring to GDC." [Id.]. She asked that if she was going to be terminated, that he be the one to make the decision. She closed by stating that, "I feel that the treatment I have received from GDC is unprofessional, unbecoming, unnecessary, inhumane and cruel and could have been resolved a long time ago without this back and forth. I have had to provide a doctor's note as well as a Religious Liberty letter to try and get my request honored and to date nothing has changed." [Id.].
On or about July 23, Plaintiff provided a doctor's note from Dr. Christopher Jarrett's office stating that Plaintiff was to have aquatic therapy once a week (with no specific appointment day or time specified). [Doc. 84-2 at 74]. Plaintiff also gave Smith a doctor's note dated July 23, 2008 stating, "Please allow patient to have 4 day work week to minimize ambutory [sic] due to arthritus [sic]." [Id. at 72].
After considering Plaintiff's [*37]  requests and the notes from Plaintiff's physicians, Smith told Plaintiff that he would allow her to take time off for therapy, but he did not see a justification for a modification to her adjusted work schedule, based on the information that she had provided. [Smith Aff. ¶ 9]. Plaintiff contends that everyone in her department but her received their preferred alternative work schedules. [Doc. 66-1 at 40-49; Doc. 77-8 at 57].
On July 28, 2008, Plaintiff filed a charge of discrimination with the EEOC, alleging discrimination on the bases of disability and religion. In her charge, Plaintiff alleged that she had been denied reasonable accommodations and then demoted, without being given a reason, in violation of Title VII and Title I of the ADA. [Doc. 77-29 at 2 ("EEOC Charge")].
Poitevint states that following Plaintiff's change in job assignment, her conduct did not improve, she continued to complain about performing the new position, and continued to insist on a four-day work week without providing medical documentation that explained her work limitations. [Poitevint Aff. ¶ 7]. Therefore, on or about July 28, 2008, due to Poitevint's concerns about Plaintiff's job performance, her need [*38]  to be trained and supervised in the new position, and management's inability to see how even longer days would help Plaintiff's medical condition, Poitevint formally denied Plaintiff's request for a four-day work week, and instead changed her schedule back to a traditional five days per week, eight hours per day work schedule purportedly so that GDC could ensure that she was able to receive adequate training and fully perform the duties of her new position. [Poitevint Aff. ¶ 7; Doc. 84-3 at 24-25; Doc. 84-4 at 41]. Poitevint asked Plaintiff to have her physician review the written description of her job requirements and tasks and identify the medical restrictions, limitations and duration of limitations that GDC should be aware of. [Doc. 83-4 at 24]. Plaintiff, however, went out on Family and Medical Leave before the plan was implemented. [Poitevint Aff. ¶ 7].
Plaintiff testified in her deposition that after her meeting with Poitevint, she "broke down," went to her office, threw up, picked up her bag, and went home. "I left after my workday was done and that was it, [I] never returned." [Pl.'s Dep. at 187].
On July 29, 2008, Plaintiff went out on leave and gave notice that she would [*39]  be out of the office from July 29, 2008 through August 22, 2008 due to work-related stress and a mental health condition. [East Aff. ¶ 4; Doc. 84-4 at 58-60]. Via email dated July 31, 2008, Smith asked Plaintiff to provide supporting medical documentation no later than August 1, 2008. [Doc. 84-4 at 59]. In response, Plaintiff stated that she was in therapy, and she would provide any required paperwork "as soon as I am healthy to do so," after she returned to the office on August 25th. [Doc. 84-4 at 59]. Plaintiff asked to be "left alone for the next three weeks to work on my healing and I cannot cope with any communication with this office due to the fact it adds more stress." [Id.].
On August 5, 2008, East sent a letter to Plaintiff informing her that she was being placed on Family Leave Without Pay effective July 29, 2008 and continuing through August 22, 2008. [Doc. 77-1 at 10]. The letter explained that approval of Plaintiff's family leave was contingent on Plaintiff providing documentation from her licensed treating physician in the form of a Certification of Serious Health Condition (or other medical statement with similar information) by August 18, 2008. The GDC's family leave [*40]  policy requires medical certification of the individual's health condition and allows for the conditional approval of the leave, pending the receipt of the required documentation by a specified deadline. [Id.; Doc. 77-2 at 13].
On August 11, 2008, East received notice that Plaintiff had filed a charge of discrimination with the EEOC. [East Aff. ¶ 10; Doc. 62-2 at 8].
On August 18, Plaintiff submitted a verification of treatment form that indicated that she was receiving treatment and could return to work on August 25, 2008. However, the form did not contain information identifying the date the disability commenced, the serious health condition which made Plaintiff unable to perform the essential functions of her position, and other essential information that the GDC needed to verify that Plaintiff's leave qualified under the FMLA. [East Aff. ¶ 5; Doc. 77-2 at 19].
On August 19, 2008, Plaintiff sent an email to the HR director advising that she was scheduled for knee-replacement surgery on August 20, 2008. [East Aff. ¶ 6]. Because the knee surgery was different from the mental health issue for which she had taken leave on July 29th, East sent a follow-up letter to Plaintiff indicating [*41]  that the GDC now needed her to provide two Serious Health Condition forms (or medical statements with similar information), one for her mental health condition and one for her knee surgery, by September 2, 2008. The letter explained that Plaintiff's absences since July 28th had not yet been approved because she had not yet met her burden to show that her mental health condition qualified for family medical leave. However, because it appeared that Plaintiff had at least attempted to comply with the directive to provide medical documentation within the given deadline, East told Plaintiff that she would be given additional time, until September 2, 2008, to cure the defect. The letter explained that if Plaintiff failed to submit the requested documentation by that deadline, her absences beginning July 29th would be designated as unauthorized leave and she would be subject to immediate adverse action, up to and including termination of employment. The letter also explained that because Plaintiff had exhausted all of her annual and sick leave and exceeded her leave balance by 36.01 hours, she had been over-paid in salary in the amount of $443.09, which she was required to re-pay. [Doc. 77-2 [*42]  at 21-22]. Plaintiff disputes that she exceeded her leave balance and was over-paid. [Doc. 84-1 ¶ 80; Doc. 84-3 at 33-35]. Plaintiff had knee surgery on August 20, 2008. [DSMF ¶ 17].
On September 5th, East sent a letter to Plaintiff explaining that East had not received the requested medical documentation and that the GDC still needed the information to verify that Plaintiff qualified for leave under the FMLA. [DSMF ¶ 81]. The submission deadline was extended to September 15, 2008 to provide the requested certification forms. Plaintiff was instructed that she was expected to return to duty no later than October 21, 2008. [Doc. 77-2 at 24]. Plaintiff was also notified that an adverse action was going to be taken against her when she returned from FMLA leave for her failure to comply with the prior directive to provide medical documentation. [East Aff. ¶ 7].
Plaintiff responded, via email, that she was incapacitated from her August 20, 2008 knee replacement surgery, and "remind[ed East] that for the next two months I am totally disabled and cannot always meet deadlines." [Doc. 84-4 at 62]. East informed Plaintiff that her email notification did not fulfill her obligation to respond with [*43]  the requested information within the time frames given to her in the previous letter. [Id.].
On September 5th, East sent a separate letter to Plaintiff notifying her that a five percent salary reduction for three months was going to be taken, once she returned from FMLA leave, for failing to have Plaintiff's licensed treating health care providers complete the Serious Health Condition forms or comparable medical statements and provide the forms to the GDC by September 2, 2008. [East Aff. ¶ 7; Doc. 77-2 at 29].
On September 11th, East received notice that Plaintiff had provided a Certification of a Serious Health Condition form relating to her mental health condition. [East Aff. ¶ 8; Doc. 77-23 at 4-5]. East sent Plaintiff an email on September 12th informing her that her leave from July 29 through August 25, 2008 had been approved and designated as FMLA leave. East also informed Plaintiff that she still needed the certification form relating to Plaintiff's knee condition. [Doc. 77-2 at 31].
Plaintiff subsequently provided a certification for her knee condition, which was signed by Dr. Maurice Jove on September 10, 2008. [Doc. 77-23 at 2-3]. Via letter dated September 16, 2008, Plaintiff [*44]  was informed that her family leave was approved from July 29, 2008 through October 20, 2008. [Doc. 77-24 at 2; Doc. 77-2 at 33]. Plaintiff was also advised that she was expected to return to work on October 21, 2008 at the expiration of her twelve weeks of family leave, and that "failure to comply with these terms may result in your release from employment." [Doc. 77-24 at 2; East Aff. ¶ 8].
On October 8, 2008, Plaintiff sent an email to Poitevint indicating that her doctor was not going to release her to return to work on October 21, 2008, and that according to her physician's certification, she would be in "disable status ... through February 1, 2009." [Doc. 84-4 at 67]. Based on Plaintiff's email and her physician's estimated "Probable Duration or Ending Date of 02/01/09" [Doc. 84-4 at 64], Individual Defendants East, Poitevint and Schweiger considered whether to offer a contingent or extended leave of absence to Plaintiff following the conclusion of her FMLA leave. However, they determined that additional leave was not a reasonable request, under the circumstances, because they needed someone to perform Plaintiff's duties, and contingent leave following FMLA approved leave was ordinarily [*45]  only granted to employees who had been successfully performing their jobs. [East Aff. ¶ 9]. After reviewing and considering Plaintiff's job performance, attitude, and behavior during Plaintiff's short tenure with the GDC, and the performance issues that had been brought to management's attention, the decision was made to terminate Plaintiff's employment for failure to return from FMLA leave on October 21, 2008. [East Aff. ¶ 9; Doc. 77-2 at 33]. East's letter of termination, dated October 21, 2008, informed Plaintiff that because she was unable to return to work and had not submitted her resignation, the GDC had no choice but to terminate her employment "effective October 21, 2008 for 'Failure to Return From a Leave of Absence', which is deemed a voluntary resignation." [Doc. 77-2 at 33].
After Plaintiff was terminated, the GDC mailed her personal belongings to her. Plaintiff asserts that when she received her belongings, several items were broken and her notary seal was missing. [Doc. 62 at 16].
Plaintiff testified that after she was terminated, she applied for Social Security disability benefits and supplemental security income in approximately November 2009 and listed her onset date [*46]  of total disability as August 20, 2008.4 [Pl.'s Dep. at 181-86]. Plaintiff's claims were later denied (initially and upon reconsideration) on the basis that her conditions and/or combination of conditions were not severe enough to be considered disabling and the evidence did not show an impairment that would prevent most work-related activities. Accordingly, Plaintiff was determined to be not disabled under the Social Security Act prior to August 1, 2010. [Doc. 84-4 at 69; Doc. 86-2 at 2].
On July 29, 2010, Plaintiff was issued a notice of right to sue by the EEOC. [Doc. 77-30 at 2]. Plaintiff filed the instant lawsuit in federal court on October 12, 2010 and her initial complaint was docketed on October 21, 2010. [Doc. 3, Compl.].
The parties' cross motions for summary judgment have been fully briefed and are ripe for consideration. Defendants' motion for summary judgment will be addressed first.

C. Discussion

1. Plaintiff's Claims Under the Family and Medical Leave Act
Plaintiff alleges that Defendant GDC and Individual Defendants Smith, Poitevint, Shepherd, Schweiger, and East, in their official capacities, violated the FMLA by not giving Plaintiff her full entitlement to twelve weeks [*47]  of leave under the self-care provisions of the FMLA, and by retaliating against her for exercising her rights under the FMLA. Plaintiff seeks, inter alia, reinstatement, back pay with interest, including annual and sick pay leave, "compensatory and other applicable relief in the amount of $150,000 and front pay," $25,000 from each Individual Defendant, and other retrospective damages and relief. Defendants argue that Plaintiff's FMLA claims are barred by the immunity conferred upon the State of Georgia by the Eleventh Amendment to the United States Constitution.

a. Eleventh Amendment Immunity
Under the Eleventh Amendment, a state is immune from suit in federal court without its consent. Pennhurst State Sch. & Hosp. v. Halderman, 465 U.S. 89, 100, 104 S. Ct. 900, 79 L. Ed. 2d 67 (1984), overruled in part on other grounds by Will v. Michigan Dep't of State Police, 491 U.S. 58, 109 S. Ct. 2304, 105 L. Ed. 2d 45 (1989). There are two ways in which a state's Eleventh Amendment immunity may be abrogated. "Congress may ... abrogate such immunity in federal court if it makes its intention to abrogate unmistakably clear in the language of the statute and acts pursuant to a valid exercise of its power under § 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment." See Nevada Dep't of Human Res. v. Hibbs, 538 U.S. 721, 726, 123 S. Ct. 1972, 155 L. Ed. 2d 953 (2003). A state may also waive its Eleventh Amendment immunity and consent to be sued in federal court. Gamble v. Florida Dep't of Health and Rehab. Servs., 779 F.2d 1509, 1512 (11th Cir. 1986). Absent a legitimate abrogation of immunity by Congress or a waiver of immunity by the state being sued, the Eleventh Amendment is a bar to suit by an individual against a state or its agencies in federal court.  [*48] Id. (citing Edelman v. Jordan, 415 U.S. 651, 94 S. Ct. 1347, 39 L. Ed. 2d 662 (1974)).
In the landmark case of Ex parte Young, 209 U.S. 123, 28 S. Ct. 441, 52 L. Ed. 714 (1908), however, a significant exception to Eleventh Amendment immunity was announced. Young allows a federal court plaintiff to enjoin unconstitutional state action by naming the responsible state officer in the complaint, and requesting that the officer be enjoined from further unconstitutional conduct. Gamble, 779 F.2d at 1511. The Supreme Court has held, however, that the rule of Ex parte Young applies only to prospective, as opposed to retroactive, relief. Id. at 1512 (citing Edelman, 415 U.S. at 664, 94 S.Ct. at 1356).
In this case, Congress has not abrogated the State of Georgia's immunity by explicit Congressional enactment through its legislative powers granted to it by the states in § 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment. In Garrett v. University of Alabama at Birmingham Board of Trustees, 193 F.3d 1214, 1219 (11th Cir. 1999), reversed in part on other grounds, 531 U.S. 356, 121 S. Ct. 955, 148 L. Ed. 2d 866 (2001), the Eleventh Circuit expressly held that Congress was without authority to abrogate the sovereign immunity of the states from complaints under the self-care provision of the FMLA. Id.; see also Batchelor v. South Fla. Water Mgmt. Dist., 242 F. App'x 652, 653 (11th Cir. 2007)(affirming Garrett's validity post-Hibbs). Nor has the State of Georgia consented to waive its Eleventh Amendment immunity. See O.C.G.A. § 50-21-23(b); Ga. Const., art. I, § II, ¶ IX(f).
"As an arm of the state," the GDC is entitled to the same sovereign immunity as the state itself. Stephens v. Ga. DOT, 134 Fed. Appx. 320, 324 (11th Cir. 2005). Plaintiff's claims for monetary damages under the FMLA against the Individual Defendants in their official [*49]  capacities are similarly barred. See Gamble, 779 F.2d at 1513 (stating that where state [or agency] officers are being sued for damages in their official capacity, the Eleventh Amendment precludes such relief).
With regard to the prospective injunctive relief of reinstatement, Defendants argue that subsequent to her termination, Plaintiff filed for Social Security disability benefits claiming that she was totally disabled and unable to work as of August 20, 2008. [Doc. 79-1 at 8; Pl.'s Dep. at 185]. Defendants contend that this effectively cuts off any claims for reinstatement and/or front pay because Plaintiff was claiming to have been totally disabled and unable to work prior to (and subsequent to) her termination from employment on October 21, 2008. The record also shows that Plaintiff submitted to the GDC a Serious Health Condition form indicating that Plaintiff was totally disabled from August 20, 2008 to February 1, 2009. [Doc. 77-23 at 2-3].
Even assuming that Plaintiff's official capacity claims for prospective relief may proceed, regardless of sovereign immunity, see Cobb v. Alabama, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 93904, 2011 WL 3666696, at *3 (M.D. Ala. Aug. 22, 2011)(stating that "[r]einstatement is a quintessential form of prospective relief"), Plaintiff's FMLA claims still fail because she has not shown a violation [*50]  of the FMLA that would entitle her to relief under the statute. The FMLA provides that an eligible employee is entitled to a maximum of twelve weeks of leave (in any twelve-month period) during which her employment status is protected. O'Connor v. PCA Family Health Plan, Inc., 200 F.3d 1349, 1352 (11th Cir. 2000)(citations omitted); [Doc. 77-2 at 3]. The FMLA creates two types of claims: (1) interference claims, in which an employee asserts that her employer denied or otherwise interfered with her substantive rights under the Act, see 29 U.S.C. § 2615(a)(1); and (2) retaliation claims, in which an employee asserts that her employer discriminated against her because she engaged in activity protected by the Act, see 29 U.S.C. § 2615(a)(2); 29 C.F.R. 825.220(c). Strickland v. Water Works and Sewer Bd., 239 F.3d 1199, 1206 (11th Cir. 2001).
Although it is not completely clear from Plaintiff's Amended Complaint, the Court will assume that Plaintiff has alleged both types of claims: (1) that Defendants interfered with Plaintiff's right to take a full twelve weeks of leave under the FMLA by terminating her three days too early [Am. Compl. at 12-13]; and (2) that Defendants retaliated against her while on FMLA leave by "count[ing] her leave retroactively with the intent to terminate," id., by deciding to terminate her rather than offering Plaintiff the option of extending her leave of absence period, and [*51]  by assessing a five-percent salary reduction penalty for not timely sending in her FMLA forms in accordance with her employer's explicit directions.

b. FMLA Interference Claim
To prove FMLA interference, an employee must demonstrate that she was denied a benefit to which she was entitled under the FMLA. Martin v. Brevard County Pub. Sch., 543 F.3d 1261, 1266-67 (11th Cir. 2008)(citing 29 U.S.C. § 2615(a)(1); Strickland, 239 F.3d at 1206-07). Plaintiff alleges and argues that her FMLA leave did not actually start until August 1, 2008 (instead of July 29, 2008) because her employer's calculation that she had exhausted her leave balance (and thus received an overpayment of salary in her July 31, 2008 check) was incorrect. [Doc. 84, Pl.'s Br., at 8-9; Doc. 84-3 at 31, 33-35]. However, Plaintiff has not shown that the alleged discrepancy and subsequent salary deduction have any bearing on determining when her eligibility for FMLA leave commenced.
The GDC's leave policy provides that, "Any employee absence which is found to be 'qualifying' as a 'serious health condition' ... will be designated/approved as Family & Medical Leave (with or without pay), regardless of the individual's desire or wishes for FMLA leave. The period cannot exceed twelve total weeks in the same calendar year." [Doc. 77-2 at 3, GDC Standard Operating [*52]  Procedures, IVO10-0011, Family Leave, Section I(B) (underlining in original)]. Entitlement to family leave begins on the date the employee becomes unable to perform the most critical functions of the employee's position. [Id. at 10, ¶ B(1)].
Here, Plaintiff requested leave beginning on July 29, 2008. In accordance with GDC's policy, the GDC conditionally granted FMLA leave pending the provision by Plaintiff of appropriate certifying documentation from her treating physicians. [See id. at 13 ¶ 3 ("If sufficient information is not available to determine whether FMLA should be approved, the Appointing Authority/designee may conditionally approve the FMLA contingent upon receiving required documentation by a specified deadline date.")]. The documents on which Plaintiff relies appear to show a possible mistake in her leave balance that was adjusted by payroll in December 2008. [Doc. 84-3 at 33-35, Pl.'s Exs. 102-04]. However, the exhibits do not support Plaintiff's contention that the payroll deduction reduced or shortened her twelve-week FMLA leave period by three days.
The FMLA regulations expressly provide that "[t]he employer is responsible in all circumstances for designating leave as FMLA-qualifying." [*53]  29 C.F.R. § 825.300(d)(1). Moreover, "[a]n employer may ... construe as FMLA leave any leave that an employee is taking as a result of a qualifying event, without express notice to the employee." Johnson v. Morehouse Coll., Inc., 199 F. Supp. 2d 1345, 1356 (N.D. Ga. 2002)(citing McGregor v. Autozone, 180 F.3d 1305, 1308 (11th Cir. 1999)). Plaintiff has not shown (nor has she cited any legal authority showing) that Defendants violated the FMLA when the GDC designated Plaintiff's leave commencing on July 29, 2008 as FMLA leave. Thus, Plaintiff has not shown or established that Defendants interfered with Plaintiff's right to take a full twelve weeks of leave under the FMLA.
Plaintiff also complains that she was terminated too early and seeks reinstatement to her position. [Doc. 62 at 22]. Upon return from FMLA leave, an employee is entitled to be restored to the same position held prior to the beginning of the leave, or its equivalent, in terms of benefits, pay and other terms and conditions. 29 U.S.C. § 2614(a)(1). "However, an employee is not entitled to restoration if, at the end of the FMLA leave period, the employee is still unable to perform an essential function of the job." Bloom v. Metro Heart Group of St. Louis, Inc., 440 F.3d 1025, 1029 (8th Cir. 2006)(citations omitted).
It is undisputed that during Plaintiff's unpaid leave, her condition did not change, and upon expiration of her leave period, she continued to be unable to perform the [*54]  essential functions of her job. Thus, under the FMLA, the GDC was not required to reinstate her. See Colburn v. Parker Hannifin/Nichols Portland Div., 355 F. Supp. 2d 566, 574 (D. Me. 2005)( "If the employee is unable to perform an essential function of the position which he held at the time he took FMLA leave because of a physical condition, including the continuation of a serious health condition, he has no right to restoration to another position under the FMLA upon expiration of the period of leave to which he is entitled."). "The FMLA does not require an employer to allow an employee to stay in a position that the employee cannot perform." Hatchett v. Philander Smith Coll., 251 F.3d 670, 677 (8th Cir. 2001).
Plaintiff has failed to demonstrate that she was denied a benefit to which she was entitled under the FMLA. Accordingly, as to Plaintiff's FMLA interference claim, Defendants' motion for summary judgment is due to be granted.

c. FMLA Retaliation Claim
For similar reasons, Plaintiff's FMLA retaliation claim also fails. When evaluating claims of retaliation under the FMLA, absent direct evidence of discrimination, courts apply the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework for evaluating Title VII discrimination claims. Strickland, 239 F.3d at 1207. In order to establish a prima facie case of retaliatory discharge or retaliation using the McDonnell Douglas [*55]  framework, a plaintiff must show that (1) she engaged in statutorily protected conduct; (2) she suffered an adverse employment action; and (3) there is a causal connection between the protected conduct and the adverse employment action. Brungart v. BellSouth Telecomms., Inc., 231 F.3d 791, 798 (11th Cir. 2000). A plaintiff bringing a retaliation claim faces the increased burden of showing that her employer's actions "were motivated by an impermissible retaliatory or discriminatory animus." Strickland, 239 F.3d at 1207 (citation omitted).
Plaintiff alleges that she was subjected to a salary reduction and termination in retaliation for exercising her rights under the FMLA.5 Defendants do not dispute that Plaintiff has satisfied the first two elements of the prima facie case. Plaintiff did engage in protected conduct by seeking leave for her mental condition and knee surgery, and she also suffered the adverse employment action of being discharged. However, Defendants argue that Plaintiff's retaliation claims fail because she cannot establish that the pay reduction notification was an adverse employment action or that there is a causal connection between Plaintiff taking FMLA leave and her termination from employment.
An adverse employment action is one that "a reasonable employee would have found ... materially adverse, which in this context means it well might have dissuaded a reasonable worker from making or supporting a charge [*56]  of discrimination." Burlington N. & Santa Fe Ry. Co. v. White, 548 U.S. 53, 68, 126 S. Ct. 2405, 165 L. Ed. 2d 345 (2006)(internal quotation marks omitted). Defendants argue that Plaintiff was notified on September 5, 2008 that she would be subject to a five percent reduction in pay for three months (effective upon her return to active pay status) due to her failure to provide the required FMLA medical certification documents by the deadline. However, Plaintiff never returned to active pay status, and so her pay was never docked. [East Aff. ¶ 6]. Thus, Plaintiff never actually suffered any materially adverse action for failing to provide the required documentation in a timely manner and cannot establish an actionable adverse employment action. Defendants cite Gupta v. Florida Board of Regents, 212 F.3d 571, 588 (11th Cir. 2000) for the proposition that "[a]n action which, it turns out, had no effect on an employee is not an 'adverse' action." [Id.; Doc. 79-1 at 12].
In her response brief, Plaintiff has not addressed or attempted to rebut Defendants' argument or cited any contrary binding legal authority; nor has she provided any probative evidence in support of her claim that she suffered a five percent salary reduction. Accordingly, the Court finds that Plaintiff has abandoned her claim that Defendants retaliated against her by reducing her pay by [*57]  five percent. See Wilkerson v. Grinnell Corp., 270 F.3d 1314, 1322 (11th Cir. 2001)(deeming claim abandoned where argument was not presented in initial response to motion for summary judgment); see also Resolution Trust Corp. v. Dunmar Corp., 43 F.3d 587, 599 (11th Cir. 1995)("grounds alleged in the complaint but not relied upon in summary judgment are deemed abandoned") and Otu v. Papa John's USA, Inc., 400 F. Supp. 2d 1315, 1328 (N.D. Ga. 2005)(Thrash, J.)("Plaintiff's failure to respond to Defendant's legal arguments relating to a claim ... constitutes abandonment of the claim.").
Even if the Court did not deem Plaintiff's claim abandoned, the claim would still fail. In Stavropoulos v. Firestone, 361 F.3d 610 (11th Cir. 2004), the Eleventh Circuit determined that where the act the plaintiff complained of ultimately had no effect on her employment status, and the plaintiff suffered no tangible harm as a result of an employment decision that never became final, the complained-of employment "decision" did not constitute an adverse employment action. Id. at 617-18. The same applies here. Because Plaintiff never returned to active pay status, her pay was never docked; thus, Plaintiff cannot show that the proposed — but not actual — five percent pay reduction constituted a materially adverse employment action.
With regard to Plaintiff's termination, as discussed above, courts have held that an employee has no right to reinstatement if she has not returned to work [*58]  after her twelve weeks of FMLA leave have ended. See Cehrs v. Northeast Ohio Alzheimer's Research Ctr., 155 F.3d 775, 784-85 (6th Cir. 1998)(termination of employee did not violate FMLA where employee was unable to return to work after the twelve week leave period). Plaintiff does not dispute that she was unable to return to work when her twelve weeks of FMLA-protected leave expired. [Doc. 62-2 at 76 ("I receive [sic] your letter requiring my return to work on October 20, 2008. This will not be possible.")]. In her deposition and in the medical forms that she submitted to her employer, Plaintiff stated that she was unable to work throughout October 2008, and by the date of her discharge, no doctor had released her to return to work. Plaintiff testified that she remained unable to return to work well into 2009 and beyond. "The FMLA permits termination when an employee remains absent from work after [her] qualified leave expires." Roseboro v. Billington, 606 F. Supp. 2d 104, 111 (D.D.C. 2009).
Even assuming that Plaintiff established a prima facie case of retaliation under the FMLA, Plaintiff's employer had a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for termination -- with no evidence from Plaintiff that the reason was pretextual -- when Plaintiff was unable to return to work after the end of her protected leave under the FMLA. At the [*59]  end of Plaintiff's FMLA leave, the GDC was lawfully allowed to require Plaintiff to return to work or lose her position, and Plaintiff made it clear that she could not work after the expiration of her leave period. Plaintiff has not offered any probative evidence that Defendants demanded that she return to work before her FMLA leave -- however calculated -- expired, or that the Defendants took any other action or failed to act in a way that could reasonably be interpreted to indicate that the fact that Plaintiff had taken FMLA leave was the Defendants' motivation.
Because Defendants have proffered a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for terminating Plaintiff — Plaintiff's inability to return to work after twelve weeks of FMLA leave — and Plaintiff has offered no evidence of pretext, Defendants' motion for summary judgment as to Plaintiff's FMLA retaliation claim is due to be granted.

2. Plaintiff's Claims Under the ADA and Rehabilitation Act
In her Amended Complaint, Plaintiff brings claims against the GDC and the Individual Defendants in their official capacities for discrimination, denial of accommodation, hostile work environment, retaliation, and breach of confidentiality, on [*60]  the basis of disability, in violation of Titles I and II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, and Plaintiff's federal constitutional rights.
As a preliminary matter, effective January 1, 2009, Congress enacted major changes to the ADA. See ADA Amendments Act of 2008 ("ADAAA"), Pub. L. No. 110-325, 122 Stat. 3553 (2008)(codified as 42 U.S.C. § 12102 (2009)). Although Plaintiff has not addressed the issue, the ADAAA does not appear to apply to Plaintiff's case because her claims stem from actions that occurred prior to January 1, 2009, and courts in this circuit have concluded that the 2008 ADA amendments cannot be applied retroactively to conduct that preceded the amendments' effective date. See Fikes v. Wal-Mart, Inc., 322 F. App'x 882, 883 n.1 (11th Cir. 2009)(stating that absent Congressional expression to the contrary, a presumption against retroactive application applies); see also Shannon v. Postmaster Gen. of United States Postal Serv., 335 Fed. Appx. 21, 25 n.5 (11th Cir. 2009)(noting the lack of Eleventh Circuit published opinion on the issue). This Court, therefore, will apply the ADA as it was in effect at the time of the alleged discrimination.
Defendants seek dismissal of Plaintiff's Title I and Title II ADA claims against them based upon their immunity from suit under the Eleventh Amendment to the United States Constitution.

a. ADA Title I Claim against Defendants
Title I of the ADA prohibits certain employers, including states, [*61]  from discriminating "against a qualified individual on the basis of disability in regard to job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). However, the United States Supreme Court has specifically held that the Eleventh Amendment bars private individuals from filing suit against states in federal court under Title I for money damages. Board of Trustees v. Garrett, 531 U.S. 356, 374, 121 S. Ct. 955, 148 L. Ed. 2d 866 (2001).
Here, other than seeking reinstatement and a mandatory training session for all of GDC's employees "on tolerance and their obligations arising under Title VII, ADA, and ADA vs. FMLA, and the Rehabilitation Act" [Am. Compl. at 23], Plaintiff is not requesting injunctive relief; she is simply seeking money damages. Pursuant to the Supreme Court's decision in Garrett, Plaintiff's claims seeking money damages under Title I of the ADA are barred by the Eleventh Amendment. Id.; Clifton v. Georgia Merit Sys., 478 F. Supp. 2d 1356, 1363 (N.D. Ga. 2007).

b. ADA Title II Claim Against Defendants
Plaintiff's Amended Complaint also appears to be asserting a disability discrimination claim under Title II of the ADA. The law is unsettled as to whether Title II of the ADA covers employment discrimination. Without answering the question itself, [*62]  the Supreme Court, in Garrett, acknowledged a split of opinion among the circuits. Garrett, 531 U.S. at 360 n.1 ("[N]o party has briefed the question whether Title II of the ADA ... is available for claims of employment discrimination when Title I of the ADA expressly deals with that subject.... The Courts of Appeals are divided on this issue ...."). One of the two decisions cited by the Supreme Court to illustrate the circuit split on the issue is the Eleventh Circuit's decision in Bledsoe v. Palm Beach County Soil & Water Conservation Dist., 133 F.3d 816, 820 (11th Cir. 1998) (holding that Title II covers employment discrimination). The other decision is Zimmerman v. Oregon Dep't of Justice, 170 F.3d 1169, 1183-84 (9th Cir. 1999) (holding that Title II does not cover employment discrimination).
In Bledsoe, the plaintiff sued his employer, a county agency, under Title II for failing to accommodate his knee injury. The Eleventh Circuit, addressing the issue for the first time, held that Title II of the ADA allows a cause of action for employment discrimination. Id. at 825. However, the court did not consider whether Eleventh Amendment immunity would bar such a claim against a state public employer (and has yet to address whether the Eleventh Amendment immunizes states from suits for monetary damages for violations of Title II in the employment context).
In a subsequent case, the Hon. Charles A. Pannell, U.S. District Judge, [*63]  Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division, found the reasoning in Bledsoe to be problematic for a number of reasons. See Clifton, 478 F. Supp. 2d at 1365-66 ("First, interpreting Title II to encompass employment discrimination claims would make many of Title I's provisions redundant, risking violation of one of the canons of statutory construction."). The court noted that "allowing employment discrimination claims to proceed under Title II provides a loophole for plaintiffs to circumvent the administrative exhaustion requirements of Title I" because Title II does not require plaintiffs to pursue any relief through the EEOC. Id. However, despite the court's concerns, the court concluded that it was bound by prior circuit precedent and therefore found the plaintiff's claims against the Georgia Merit System under Title II of the ADA cognizable.
Nonetheless, "[f]ollowing careful review of the statutory scheme and language of the ADA, as well as existing case law on the subject," the court concluded that Congress did not validly abrogate sovereign immunity with regard to state employment discrimination actions under Title II, and therefore, the state merit system was protected by Eleventh Amendment immunity from such a claim. Id. at 1368. The court [*64]  reasoned that "a plaintiff should not be permitted to circumvent the holding of Garrett immunizing states from employment discrimination claims brought pursuant to Title I of the ADA by commencing suit under Title II, a subchapter which lacks any of the procedural protections afforded employers under Title I." Id.
Based on Judge Pannell's well-reasoned opinion, which I find persuasive, and the cited authority, I similarly conclude that Defendants are immune from Plaintiff's ADA Title II claim. See Leverette v. Alabama Revenue Dep't, 453 F. Supp. 2d 1340, 1345 (M.D. Ala. 2006)(concluding that with Title II, Congress did not validly abrogate sovereign immunity with regard to state employment discrimination against the disabled); Williamson v. Georgia Dep't of Human Res. & Georgia Reg'l Hosp., 150 F. Supp. 2d 1375, 1381-82 (S.D. Ga. 2001)(holding that because Congress failed to adequately identify a pattern of irrational state conduct when it enacted Title II, it improperly abrogated the states' Eleventh Amendment immunity).
In sum, for the reasons discussed above, Defendants are immune from suit for purposes of Plaintiff's Title I and Title II ADA claims for money damages because Congress has not abrogated the State of Georgia's Eleventh Amendment immunity, and the State of Georgia has not consented to be sued. See Garrett, 121 S. Ct. at 968 n.9 (holding that Congress did not validly abrogate the States' sovereign immunity from suit by [*65]  private individuals for money damages under Title I); Gary v. Georgia Dep't of Human Res., 323 F. Supp. 2d 1368, 1372 (M.D. Ga. 2004)(stating that although Congress "clearly expressed its intention to abrogate the states' Eleventh Amendment immunity for violations of Title I of the ADA," the Supreme Court "found that Congress exceeded its constitutional authority in doing so"); see also Shotz v. City of Plantation, Fla., 344 F.3d 1161, 1174-75 (11th Cir. 2003)(finding that a state's acceptance of federal funding does not constitute waiver under the ADA because the ADA does not expressly condition a state's acceptance of funding upon the state's agreement to waive Eleventh Amendment immunity); Clifton, 478 F. Supp. 2d at 1365-66 (addressing state employment discrimination actions under Title II).
As with Plaintiff's FMLA claims, to the extent that Plaintiff is seeking the prospective injunctive relief of reinstatement under the ADA, for purposes of this motion, the Court will assume that such relief is not barred by the Eleventh Amendment. See Collier v. Clayton County Cmty. Serv. Bd., 236 F. Supp. 2d 1345, 1364 (N.D. Ga. 2002)(concluding that equitable remedy of reinstatement is not barred by Eleventh Amendment); Keene v. Prine, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 66628, 2011 WL 2493120, at *11 (M.D. Ga. June 22, 2011)(addressing FMLA and ADA claims solely for purpose of determining whether equitable relief, including reinstatement, was available to plaintiffs). Accordingly, the Court will address Plaintiff's claims under the ADA solely for the purpose of determining whether equitable relief is available to Plaintiff.

c. Rehabilitation [*66]  Act Claims
With regard to Plaintiff's claims under the Rehabilitation Act, Defendants do not assert Eleventh Amendment immunity from Plaintiff's Rehabilitation Act claims. Because the same analysis is applied to discrimination claims under the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act, the Court will discuss the two claims together. See Cash v. Smith, 231 F.3d 1301, 1305 (11th Cir. 2000)(stating that "[d]iscrimination claims under the Rehabilitation Act are governed by the same standards used in ADA cases, see 29 U.S.C. § 794(d), and therefore we will discuss these two claims together."). See also Gary, 323 F. Supp. 2d at 1373 n.16 (stating that "[t]he law in the Eleventh Circuit is that states do not consent to suit on Title I ADA claims by accepting federal funds, and yet they do consent to suit on Section 504 Rehabilitation Act claims by accepting federal funds.").
The ADA prohibits discrimination against a qualified individual with a disability based on that disability when the discrimination involves the hiring, advancement, termination or conditions of employment of that qualified individual. 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). The ADA requires an employer to make reasonable accommodations that allow a disabled individual to perform her job, unless that accommodation would cause an undue hardship. Harris v. H & W Contracting Co., 102 F.3d 516, 519 (11th Cir. 1996); 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). The Rehabilitation Act provides, in pertinent part, [*67]  that:
No otherwise qualified individual with a disability ..., shall, solely by reason of her or his disability, be excluded from the participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance....
29 U.S.C. § 794(a).
In order to establish a prima facie case of discrimination under the ADA (and the Rehabilitation Act), Plaintiff must demonstrate that (1) she had, or was perceived to have, a "disability"; (2) she was a "qualified" individual; and (3) she was discriminated against because of her disability. Carruthers v. BSA Adver., Inc., 357 F.3d 1213, 1215-16 (11th Cir. 2004)(ADA); Ellis v. England, 432 F.3d 1321, 1326 (11th Cir. 2005)(Rehabilitation Act). "A severe limitation that is short term and temporary is not evidence of a disability." Garrett v. Univ. of Ala. at Birmingham Bd. of Trs., 507 F.3d 1306, 1315 (11th Cir. 2007)(interpreting the definition of disability under the Rehabilitation Act).
The ADA defines a "qualified individual with a disability" as a disabled person "who ... can perform the essential functions" of her job, including those who can do so only "with ... reasonable accommodation." Cleveland v. Policy Mgmt. Sys. Corp., 526 U.S. 795, 801, 119 S. Ct. 1597, 143 L. Ed. 2d 966 (1999)(citing 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8)). The Supreme Court has interpreted the meaning of "qualified individual" as someone who can meet all of the requirements of the job despite his or her disability. Southeastern Cmty. Coll. v. Davis, 442 U.S. 397, 406, 99 S. Ct. 2361, 60 L. Ed. 2d 980 (1979)(interpreting the meaning of "qualified individual" [*68]  under § 504 of the Rehabilitation Act). The plaintiff bears the burden to demonstrate that she can perform the essential functions of the job. Lucas v. W.W. Grainger, Inc., 257 F.3d 1249, 1255-56 (11th Cir. 2001). Under the Rehabilitation Act, "[i]t is not enough for a plaintiff to demonstrate that an adverse employment action was based partly on [her] disability. [Cit. omitted]. Rather, ... a plaintiff must prove that [she] suffered an adverse employment action 'solely by reason of' [her disability]. 29 U.S.C. § 794(a)." Ellis, 432 F.3d at 1326.
The basis of Plaintiff's claims under the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act is that Defendants unlawfully discriminated against her, denied her accommodations, subjected her to a hostile work environment, and retaliated against her for requesting accommodations, based on her medical conditions, including "debilitating osteoarthritis and structural damage to the knees"; "Bulging Disc which caused Sciatica giving rise to additional pain in the lower back, paralysis and spasms to the legs" and pain (on a scale of 1 to 10) "at a 3 or 4 all of the time, and pain at a 6 or 7 at least 4 days a week for five to seven hours"; "exertional impairments" allegedly affecting her ability to stand, walk, stoop, climb, bend, kneel and carry; "non-exertional impairments," including [*69]  pain, pain medication side effects and obesity; "stroke level hypertension" that allegedly caused side effects such as drowsiness and fatigue; and mental illness with severe depression, stress and anxiety. [Am. Compl. ¶¶ 1-5; Doc. 84 at 16]. Plaintiff specifically contends that she was discriminated against, because of her disabilities, when she was demoted on or about July 1, 2008, when she was notified while out on FMLA leave that her salary would be reduced by five percent upon her return, and when she was terminated instead of being offered additional leave.
Under the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting scheme for discriminatory treatment cases, in the absence of direct evidence of discrimination, an ADA (and/or Rehabilitation Act) plaintiff must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination. The burden then shifts to the employer to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its employment action, and if the employer meets this burden, a presumption of intentional discrimination disappears, but the plaintiff can still prove disparate treatment by, for instance, offering evidence demonstrating that the employer's explanation is pretextual. See Raytheon Co. v. Hernandez, 540 U.S. 44, 49-50, 124 S. Ct. 513, 157 L. Ed. 2d 357 & n.3 (2003)(ADA); Webb v. Donley, 347 F. App'x 443, 445 (11th Cir. 2009)(applying McDonnell [*70]  Douglas burden-shifting analysis to claims under the Rehabilitation Act).

Disability Discrimination
The Court's initial inquiry is whether Plaintiff's various medical problems rose to the level of a disability. Under both the ADA and the regulations interpreting the Rehabilitation Act, an individual is "disabled" if she (A) has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such individual; (B) has a record of such an impairment; or (C) is regarded by her employer as having such an impairment. Cash, 231 F.3d at 1305 (citing 42 U.S.C. § 12102(2)). Major life activities include caring for oneself, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, and working. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(i). "Substantially limits" means "significantly restricted as to the condition, manner or duration under which the average person in the general population can perform the same major life activity." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(1). The mere existence of a physical impairment does not constitute a disability under the ADA; the impairment must substantially limit a major life activity. Gordon v. E.L. Hamm & Assocs., Inc., 100 F.3d 907, 911 (11th Cir. 1996). Under the pre-amendment ADA, an impairment substantially limits a major activity if it makes an individual completely unable to perform [*71]  the activity or if it "significantly restricts the duration, manner or condition under which an individual can perform a particular major life activity as compared to the average person in the general population's ability to perform that same major life activity." Nadler v. Harvey, 2007 U.S. App. LEXIS 20272, 2007 WL 2404705, at *6 (11th Cir. Aug. 24, 2007) (quoting 29 C.F.R. Pt. 1630, App.)(unpublished).
In determining whether an individual is substantially limited, the court considers: "(1) the nature and severity of the impairment; (2) the duration or expected duration of the impairment; and (3) the permanent or long term impact, or the expected permanent or long term impact of or resulting from the impairment." Gordon, 100 F.3d at 911 (citing 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(2))(other citations omitted). Pre-ADAAA, these provisions required a substantial limitation on a major life activity and excluded individuals with minor impairments which merely affected the ability to satisfy the singular demands of a particular job, Cash, 231 F.3d at 1306, and individuals with only temporary impairments, Sutton v. Lader, 185 F.3d 1203, 1209 (11th Cir. 1999)("A temporary inability to work while recuperating from surgery is not such a permanent or long-term impairment and does not constitute evidence of a disability covered by the Act."). The burden of establishing disability is the plaintiff's and, pre-ADAAA, the burden is a heavy [*72]  one. See Toyota Motor Mfg., Ky., Inc. v. Williams, 534 U.S. 184, 197, 122 S. Ct. 681, 151 L. Ed. 2d 615 (2002)("[T]hese terms need to be interpreted strictly to create a demanding standard for qualifying as disabled ..."), superseded in part by ADA Amendments Act of 2008, Pub. L. 110-325, 122 Stat. 3553 (2008).
Plaintiff argues that she was both actually disabled and regarded as disabled by her employer due to her knee and back conditions, and due to mental health issues that were exacerbated beginning around March 2008 as a result of her employment with the GDC. [Doc. 66 at 7-8; Doc. 84 at 18-19; Pl.'s Dep. at 39-41, 186-87]. Defendants argue that Plaintiff has not established that at the time she worked for the GDC, that her medical conditions or problems rose to the level of a disability as required under the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act. Defendants also deny that they regarded Plaintiff as disabled.
The Court must evaluate the plaintiff's disability as manifested at the time of the alleged adverse employment action.6 Cash, 231 F.3d at 1306 n.5. Here, while Plaintiff "has exhaustively chronicled her many health problems and enumerated their symptoms," her Amended Complaint does not expressly identify a major life activity in which she is substantially limited, "nor has she provided any evidence of such a limitation." Id. at 1305. A reasonable jury could not find that at the time [*73]  of Plaintiff's re-assignment or demotion, she suffered from a physical or mental impairment that substantially limited a major life activity. Plaintiff argues that her "debilitating osteoarthritis, bulging disc and sciatica ... affected her ability to walk, stand, sit, bend, lift, carry [and] reach," and that she suffered from severe depression, anxiety and poor concentration. [Doc. 84 at 16]. However, as discussed below, the undisputed medical evidence upon which Plaintiff relies does not provide a sufficient basis for a jury to conclude that she suffered from a permanent or long-term impairment that substantially impacted one or more major life activities.
With regard to Plaintiff's physical impairments, Plaintiff claims that she suffered from various medical problems for years before she started working for the GDC, including hypertension, obesity, and osteoarthritis. However, "[i]t is insufficient for individuals attempting to prove disability status under [the ADA] to merely submit evidence of a medical diagnosis of an impairment. Instead, the ADA requires those 'claiming the Act's protection ... to prove a disability by offering evidence that the extent of the limitation [caused [*74]  by their impairment] in terms of their own experience ... is substantial.'" Toyota Motor Mfg., 122 S. Ct. at 691-92; see also Sutton v. United Air Lines, Inc., 527 U.S. 471, 483, 119 S. Ct. 2139, 144 L. Ed. 2d 450 (1999), superseded by statute on other grounds, ADA Amendments Act of 2008, Pub. L. 110-325, 122 Stat. 3553 (2008)(citing 29 C.F.R. pt. 1630, App.§ 1630.2(j)("The determination of whether an individual has a disability is not necessarily based on the name or diagnosis of the impairment the person has, but rather on the effect of that impairment on the life of the individual.")).
The record reflects that on February 20, 2008, Plaintiff was treated by her physician, Dr. Christopher Johnson, for an unspecified medical condition, and the doctor released her to return to work five days later with no restrictions. [Doc. 62-1 at 7; Pl.'s Dep. at 119]. Plaintiff sought medical care for her knee pain and chronic low back pain on March 24, 2008, and three days later was again released to return to work with no restrictions. [Pl.'s Dep. at 119; Doc. 77-17 at 2]. By May 2008, Plaintiff's knee condition and pain had apparently worsened to the point where Plaintiff was considering having knee surgery in late May. However, Plaintiff decided to put off the surgery and elected instead to follow her physician's conservative recommendations of physical therapy and water aerobics in order for her to lose weight.
For [*75]  purposes of Defendants' motion, the Court accepts Plaintiff's allegations and testimony that during the relevant time period, Plaintiff's knee and back conditions resulted in Plaintiff experiencing significant knee pain, sciatica, and swelling, which made it painful for Plaintiff to walk, stand and sit. EEOC regulations provide, and no one here contests, that walking, standing and sitting are major life activities. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(i). Plaintiff testified that at times she used a crutch or crutches at work, and wore leg braces on a couple of occasions. [Pl.'s Dep. at 43]. Plaintiff also states, without medical evidence to support her assertions, that she "could not straighten up or sit for long periods" [Doc. 66-4 at 34].
Plaintiff points to the fact that she told her employer in May that she had obtained a handicapped parking sticker as proof that she was "permanently disabled." [Doc. 84-2 at 65]. However, the fact that Plaintiff obtained a handicapped placard for her car does not establish that she suffered from an ADA-protected disability. Howard v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 2005 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 41233, 2005 WL 2861107, at *2 (N.D. Ohio Nov. 1, 2005); Robinson v. Hoover Enters. LLC, 2004 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 25375, 2004 WL 2792057, at *5 (N.D. Ga. Oct. 20, 2004)("Certification or diagnosis of a disability [by a physician] for purposes of a parking permit falls short of the exacting standards of qualifying as disabled [*76]  under the ADA.").
Even if Plaintiff had elected to have knee surgery at the end of May as she had initially proposed to her employer, Plaintiff's physician estimated that her period of recovery would only last approximately six weeks; she would be unable to work at all for two weeks post-surgery; she could telework for the following two weeks, and she would be able to return to work, with light restrictions, during the fifth and sixth weeks. [Doc. 66-1 at 34; Doc. 84-2 at 61-63]. Under Eleventh Circuit precedent, "[a] severe limitation that is short term and temporary is not evidence of a disability." Garrett, 507 F.3d at 1315 (citing Sutton, 185 F.3d at 1209 ("A temporary inability to work while recuperating from surgery is not such a permanent or long-term impairment and does not constitute evidence of a disability covered by the Act.")). See also DiCarlo v. Potter, 358 F.3d 408, 418 (6th Cir. 2004)(concluding that evidence of osteoarthritis and pre-existing knee disability was insufficient to demonstrate that plaintiff was substantially limited in a major life activity); Rossbach v. City of Miami, 371 F.3d 1354, 1358 (11th Cir. 2004)(noting that "courts have consistently held [pre-ADAAA] that someone who walks, sits, [and] stands ... 'moderately below average' is not disabled under the Act.").
The demanding standard for qualifying as disabled [*77]  (under the pre-amendment ADA) is evident in the Eleventh Circuit's decision in Rossbach v. City of Miami, 371 F.3d 1354 (11th Cir. 2004). In Rossbach, the plaintiffs, five City of Miami police officers, brought an action alleging employment discrimination in violation of the ADA. Id. at 1357. Each officer testified to significant impairments that, more often than not, resulted from injuries sustained in performing the physically-demanding job of a combat-ready police officer. Among other things, Plaintiff Rossbach severely injured his arm in a car door while trying to apprehend a suspect, suffered a herniated disc and nerve damage in his back after being involved in a near head-on collision while on duty, and re-injured his neck when an escalator in the courthouse stopped working. The second plaintiff severely injured, and re-injured, his right knee on numerous occasions while trying to apprehend a suspect and, later, by being hit by a police car. The third plaintiff injured his right knee while on dignitary detail and suffered severe neck and back injuries while practicing control techniques with an overly-aggressive corrections officer. Id. at 1357-58. The fourth plaintiff tore ligaments in his knee during a charity football game and later re-injured the same [*78]  knee in a car accident, in which he also suffered a concussion and injured his back. Finally, the fifth plaintiff tore the meniscus in his knee in an on-duty accident and later suffered two herniated discs and high blood pressure. All were, at one time or another, classified as light or limited duty police officers by the City and were placed in a variety of administrative-type jobs within the department. Id. at 1358.
All plaintiffs complained of essentially the same limitations - difficulties with respect to the major life activities of walking, sitting, standing, sleeping, and working. Each of the officers claimed that his impairment prevented him from standing, sitting, walking or sleeping for "extended periods of time." Id. at 1359. Rossbach alleged that he could not sit or stand "for long periods." The second plaintiff testified that he could not walk or sit for "long periods of time" or "sleep normally." Because the officers' testimony was "couched in vague terms and unaccompanied by any evidence that the described afflictions were any worse than is suffered by many adults," the district court rejected the officers' contention that these particular life activities were substantially limited by their [*79]  impairments. The Eleventh Circuit later affirmed the district court's finding that Rossbach and his fellow officers failed to show that each was disabled under the ADA. Id. at 1361-62.
Like the plaintiffs in Rossbach, Plaintiff has failed to show that she was disabled. Plaintiff testified that in her position as purchasing manager, she had flexibility to control her work space and work environment as far as how long she would have to sit, walk to the accounting department, or go out into the field. She "had the freedom to come and go and do what [she] needed based on [her] work." [Pl.'s Dep. at 18-21]. Plaintiff testified that her job required "a lot of thinking" and "some walking." [Id. at 41]. She further testified that the osteoarthritis in her knees did not impact her ability to perform the duties of her job [id. at 48 ("I did not let it affect my job")], but that she initially requested the accommodation of a four-day work week so she would not have to drive to work the fifth work day because it hurt to press on the pedals. [Id. at 46-47]. She later gave as her reason for wanting a four-day workweek her need or desire to take water aerobics or aquatic therapy on Fridays.
Yet apart from Plaintiff's subjective observations [*80]  of her pain and limitations, Plaintiff has provided no medical evidence that as of July 1, 2008, she was expected to continue to suffer from any long-term or permanent impairment of sufficient severity to constitute a physical disability; indeed, the record lacks any objective evidence of the extent of Plaintiff's limitations. Despite multiple requests for supporting medical documentation that would clarify Plaintiff's purported disability and work restrictions, if any, so that Defendants could consider an appropriate work schedule, Plaintiff did not present any doctor's notes containing work restrictions relating to her specific work duties. [Smith Aff. ¶ 9]. The notes that Plaintiff provided simply stated that she was prescribed aquatic therapy once a week and that the doctor (the record shows, at Plaintiff's request) was recommending a four-day work week "to minimize ambutory [sic] due to arthritus [sic]" [Doc. 84-2 at 72], without any specific limitations as to Plaintiff's job duties. For the reasons stated, Plaintiff has failed to show that she was substantially limited in the major life activities of walking, standing and sitting.
With regard to Plaintiff's alleged mental impairments, [*81]  Plaintiff's Amended Complaint contains no allegations that Plaintiff was substantially limited in concentrating and/or thinking. Nevertheless, Plaintiff now argues that beginning in March 2008 and continuing, she was substantially limited in concentrating and thinking. [Pl.'s Dep. at 42-43]. Plaintiff's conclusory assertion that she was substantially limited in those activities, however, is not sufficient to create an issue for trial. Moreover, unlike the ADAAA, the pre-2009 version of the ADA does not include "concentrating" or "thinking" in its definition of major life activities. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(i). Although the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals has not expressly addressed whether concentrating constitutes a major life activity, several other courts (including courts in this district) have held that concentration is not a major life activity itself, but may be considered a component of a major life activity, such as working. See Robinson, 2004 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 25375, 2004 WL 2792057, at *5 n.5 (listing courts concluding that concentration is not itself a major life activity).
Even assuming that concentrating and thinking qualify as major life activities, Plaintiff has failed to present sufficient evidence to establish that she had a substantial limitation in [*82]  those areas. Plaintiff has pointed to no medical evidence in the record that would support her assertion that prior to her FMLA leave on July 29th, she was substantially limited (or limited at all) in her ability to concentrate or think. Nor does Plaintiff's deposition testimony support her assertion. Plaintiff testified that during her employment with the GDC, despite the fact that her pain at times affected her ability to think, the impact was not enough to interfere with her job performance. [See Pl.'s Dep. at 42-43 ("[m]y job was never in jeopardy as far as performing my job. I performed my job. I just dealt with the pain. You know, come what may, I did what I had to do. There was not ever no complaint about my job, not ever. Everything on my desk was done.")]. When she was asked if she was able to perform her duties as purchasing manager, even after she requested a four-day work week, Plaintiff replied, "Definitely." [Id. at 99].
The record also lacks any basis to conclude that Defendants regarded Plaintiff as having a disability. While the Defendants clearly had knowledge that Plaintiff was being treated for her knee condition, Plaintiff has not offered any evidence that Defendants regarded [*83]  that condition, her treatment, or its side effects, as disabling. In fact, the crux of Plaintiff's claim is that Defendants repeatedly ignored her claims that she was disabled and refused to accommodate her by giving her the four-day work week that she requested. Accordingly, Plaintiff cannot qualify as disabled under the regarded-as analysis either.
In sum, the evidence of Plaintiff's impairments and limitations fails to raise an issue of triable fact that she was disabled, as defined under the ADA or Rehabilitation Act, at the time of her re-assignment. Thus, Plaintiff has not met her burden of showing that she was disabled at the time of her re-assignment/demotion in July 2008.
Even if Plaintiff had established a prima facie case of discrimination under the ADA and/or Rehabilitation Act, she has failed to show that her employer's reasons for her re-assignment (or, in Plaintiff's view, demotion) were pretextual. Plaintiff has not rebutted or attempted to rebut Defendants' explanation that Plaintiff was reassigned based upon her poor job performance, refusal to follow the directives and policies of her supervisors, insubordination, and other disruptive conduct. In her response brief, [*84]  Plaintiff admits that some of her emails to GDC management were unprofessional and "there is no justification." [Doc. 84 at 23]. She also admits refusing to sign documents that she considered to be "illegal procurement activities." [Id. at 24]. Although Plaintiff argues that she was treated more harshly than other employees, she has presented no evidence of employees who engaged in similar misconduct and were treated more favorably. [Id.]. Thus, Plaintiff has failed to establish that she was demoted or reassigned "'solely by reason of' [her disability]. 29 U.S.C. § 794(a)." Ellis, 432 F.3d at 1326.
With regard to Plaintiff's claim that Defendants violated the ADA and/or Rehabilitation Act by reducing her salary by five percent, for the reasons stated with regard to the FMLA, Plaintiff has failed to show that the proposed salary reduction - which did not occur - constitutes an adverse employment action.
Plaintiff's termination claim also fails because she has not established that she was an otherwise qualified individual. In the employment context, an otherwise qualified person is one who can perform "'the essential functions' of the job in question with or without reasonable accommodation." Sutton, 185 F.3d at 1210 (citing 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(m); School Board of Nassau County v. Arline, 480 U.S. 273, 275, 107 S. Ct. 1123, 94 L. Ed. 2d 307 (1987)). "If the individual is unable [*85]  to perform an essential function of his job, even with an accommodation, he is, by definition, not a 'qualified individual' and, therefore, not covered under the ADA. In other words, the ADA does not require the employer to eliminate an essential function of the plaintiff's job." D'Angelo v. ConAgra Foods, Inc., 422 F.3d 1220, 1229 (11th Cir. 2005)(quotation marks and alterations omitted).
Plaintiff has not shown that at the time of her discharge on October 21, 2008, she was able to perform the essential functions of her position as purchasing standards analyst, with or without reasonable accommodations. The FMLA medical certification form that Plaintiff submitted from her treating physician for her knee surgery indicated that she was "totally disabled" and unable to work from August 20, 2008 through February 1, 2009. Plaintiff testified that after her termination from the GDC, Plaintiff applied for Social Security disability benefits, claiming that as of August 20, 2008, she was totally disabled from performing work. [See Pl.'s Dep. at 185]. As of the date of her deposition on July 18, 2011, Plaintiff testified that she was still unable to return to the workplace because she had not "fully received treatment for [her] mental health issues." [Id. at 184-85]. Plaintiff [*86]  has pointed to no evidence showing that she was ever released by her physicians to return to work or that she has ever sought employment elsewhere. "There is no obligation under the Act to employ people who are not capable of performing the duties of the employment to which they aspire." Sutton, 185 F.3d at 1211 (citing Carter v. Tisch, 822 F.2d 465, 467 (4th Cir. 1987)(Rehabilitation Act permits employer to release a disabled or injured employee who cannot perform all of his duties); Southeastern Cmty. Coll. v. Davis, 442 U.S. 397, 413-14, 99 S. Ct. 2361, 60 L. Ed. 2d 980 (1979)(Rehabilitation Act does not require employer to change job requirements or ignore the fact that the plaintiff could not perform them)). "The case law is clear that, if a [disabled] employee cannot do his job, he can be fired." Carter, 822 F.2d at 467. See also Duckett v. Dunlop Tire Corp., 120 F.3d 1222, 1225 (11th Cir. 1997)(per curiam)(concluding that employer was not required to allow an employee to stay on medical leave under a different program where employee could not represent that he likely would have been able to work within two months); Wood v. Green, 323 F.3d 1309, 1314 (11th Cir. 2003)(stating that the holding in Duckett "is that an [extended leave] accommodation is unreasonable if it does not allow someone to perform his or her job duties in the present or in the immediate future.").
Even if Plaintiff had established a prima facie case of disability discrimination, Plaintiff has failed to show that [*87]  a discriminatory reason more likely than not motivated the employer's decision. In other words, Plaintiff has failed to discredit Defendants' proffered explanation for the GDC's employment decision to terminate Plaintiff's employment by demonstrating "such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, or contradictions" in Defendants' proffered reason for the GDC's action that a reasonable factfinder could find the reason unworthy of credence. Combs v. Plantation Patterns, 106 F.3d 1519, 1538 (11th Cir. 1997). Although Plaintiff has attempted to show pretext by arguing that there is a discrepancy in GDC's explanation for her termination, Plaintiff's citation to a Department of Labor claim examiner's conclusion that she was terminated for unsatisfactory job performance - rather than for failing to return from a leave of absence - is unavailing. The claim examiner neither worked for nor represented the GDC.
Moreover, Defendants have consistently stated that they took Plaintiff's poor job performance and insubordinate conduct into consideration in deciding whether to offer Plaintiff an extended leave period or terminate her employment for failing to return upon the expiration of her FMLA leave of absence. In addition, the Georgia Department of Labor [*88]  form provided by Plaintiff entitled, "Employer's Information on Discharge for Failure to Obey Orders, Rules or Instructions or Failure to Perform the Duties for Which Hired," indicates, in response to the question, "2. What was the reason this person was discharged on this particular day?" that Plaintiff was discharged for "Failure to return from authorized Family Medical Leave." [Doc. 66-3 at 54, Bates No. GDC-0613]. Thus, the explanation that the GDC proffered has not varied: Plaintiff's employer discharged Plaintiff for failing to return to work after her FMLA leave expired. Under these circumstances, no question of pretext arises. See Stewart v. Happy Herman's Cheshire Bridge, Inc., 117 F.3d 1278, 1287-88 (11th Cir. 1997)(citing Combs, 106 F.3d at 1534-35 (employer entitled to judgment as a matter of law when the reasons for the employer's action remain unrebutted)).
With regard to Plaintiff's application for Social Security Disability ("SSDI") benefits, Defendants argue that Plaintiff is estopped from seeking reinstatement based upon the representations that she made in her application for SSDI benefits that she was totally disabled and unable to work starting on August 20, 2008. Although the U.S. Supreme Court has held that while "pursuit, and receipt, of SSDI benefits does not automatically [*89]  estop the recipient from pursuing an ADA claim," Cleveland, 526 U.S. at 797, to survive summary judgment, "an ADA plaintiff cannot simply ignore her SSDI contention that she was too disabled to work" but "must explain why that SSDI contention is consistent with her ADA claim that she could 'perform the essential functions' of her previous job, at least with 'reasonable accommodation.'" Id. at 806; see also Talavera v. School Bd. of Palm Beach County, 129 F.3d 1214, 1220 (11th Cir. 1997)(explaining that whether a certification of total disability for SSDI purposes is inconsistent with an ADA claim depends on "the facts of the case, including the specific representations made in the application for disability benefits and the nature and extent of the medical evidence in the record," but that "an ADA plaintiff is estopped from denying the truth of any statements made in her disability application").
Here, Plaintiff has not provided an adequate explanation for the inconsistency. Plaintiff does not deny that she claimed total disability in her application for Social Security disability benefits. [Pl.'s Dep. at 184-85]. Nonetheless, Plaintiff argues in her response brief that she "still can do her work with or without accommodation and is only concern [sic] about going into a similar workplace without completing [*90]  her mental health treatment" [Pl.'s Resp. Br. at 30]. In contrast, Plaintiff testified in her deposition that she was unable to work at all because she needed treatment for her mental health condition. [Pl.'s Dep. at 184-85].
Unlike the plaintiff in Cleveland, who claimed the inconsistency was explained because the disability application statements were made without reference to whether she could perform the position with a reasonable accommodation, Plaintiff has given no explanation for the inconsistency. On the one hand, Plaintiff argues that she could perform the essential functions of her position if she returned to work, while, on the other hand, she testified in her deposition and certified to the Social Security Administration that she is disabled because she has not received sufficient mental health treatment. Plaintiff has not proffered a sufficient explanation for the apparent contradiction. Cleveland, 526 U.S. at 807 ("To defeat summary judgment, that explanation must be sufficient to warrant a reasonable juror's concluding that, assuming the truth of, or the plaintiff's good-faith belief in, the earlier statement, the plaintiff could nonetheless 'perform the essential functions' of her job, with [*91]  or without 'reasonable accommodation.'"). Accordingly, summary judgment is due to be granted on Plaintiff's ADA and Rehabilitation Act claims of discrimination.

Failure to Accommodate
Plaintiff next contends that Defendants discriminated against her by failing to accommodate her disability. In the Rehabilitation Act (and ADA) context, the term "discriminate" includes "not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who is an ... employee, unless such covered entity can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business of such covered identity." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). An accommodation is "reasonable" and necessary only if it enables the employee to perform the essential functions of the job. Holly v. Clairson Indus., L.L.C., 492 F.3d 1247, 1256 (11th Cir. 2007)(citing Lucas v. W.W. Grainger, Inc., 257 F.3d 1249, 1259-60 (11th Cir. 2001); LaChance v. Duffy's Draft House, Inc., 146 F.3d 832, 835 (11th Cir. 1998); 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(1)(ii)("The term reasonable accommodation means: ... Modifications or adjustments to the work environment, or to the manner or circumstances under which the position held or desired is customarily performed, that enable a qualified individual with a disability to perform the essential functions of that position ....")). The plaintiff is not entitled to the accommodation of her [*92]  choice, but only to a reasonable accommodation. Lewis v. Zilog, Inc., 908 F. Supp. 931, 948 (N.D. Ga. 1995).
To determine the appropriate reasonable accommodation, it may be necessary for the employer to initiate an informal, interactive process with the employee with a disability in need of the accommodation. "This process should identify the precise limitations resulting from the disability and potential reasonable accommodations that could overcome those limitations." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3).
To state a prima facie claim for failure to accommodate, the plaintiff must show that: (1) she is disabled; (2) she is a qualified individual; and (3) she was discriminated against by way of the defendant's failure to provide a reasonable accommodation. See Lucas, 257 F.3d at 1255. Once the plaintiff has presented a prima facie case, the burden shifts to the employer to demonstrate that the employee cannot reasonably be accommodated, because the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of its programs. DiCarlo, 358 F.3d at 419. The plaintiff bears the burden of identifying a reasonable accommodation, "and of demonstrating that the accommodation allows [her] to perform the job's essential functions." Lucas, 257 F.3d at 1255-56.
In Plaintiff's Amended Complaint, Plaintiff alleges that her employer discriminated against her by [*93]  denying her the following accommodations: (1) a four-day, 10-hour-a-day work week so that she could attend aquatic therapy on Fridays; (2) an office so that she could use a wheelchair at work; (3) a parking space in a garage closer to her workplace; and (4) extended leave following her FMLA leave.7 Plaintiff further alleges that her employer failed to enter into any good faith interactive process with her concerning her requests.
Defendants argue that Plaintiff's failure-to-accommodate claims fail for the same reason as her discrimination claims: Plaintiff has failed to demonstrate that she is a qualified individual with a disability, under the ADA or Rehabilitation Act. The Court agrees. Nonetheless, even assuming that Plaintiff has met the first two elements of her prima facie case, she has not shown that Defendants failed to provide a reasonable accommodation.
With regard to Plaintiff's requests for a schedule change, the record shows that in February 2008, Plaintiff requested an alternative work schedule where she would work nine-hour days and have every other Friday off, in order to accommodate her religious practices. Plaintiff's request was approved, and Plaintiff was assigned [*94]  a work schedule of nine-hour work days with every other Friday off. Then in June/July 2008, Plaintiff made a series of requests for a four-day, 10-hour-a-day work week, with all Fridays off, so that she could attend aquatic therapy.
In response to Plaintiff's requests concerning aquatic therapy, Smith asked Plaintiff to provide him with a doctor's note indicating her work restrictions so that he could consider an appropriate work schedule. However, the notes that Plaintiff provided contained no information as to any particular work limitations or specific time during the work week that Plaintiff would be required to receive aquatic therapy. Plaintiff did not present any evidence to the GDC explaining the medical necessity for attending aquatic therapy on Fridays, how long the therapy would last, or why the therapy required her to be out of the office for an entire day.
After considering Plaintiff's requests and what she provided, Smith informed Plaintiff that she would be permitted to take time off to attend aquatic therapy; however, he did not see a justification for modifying Plaintiff's adjusted work schedule, where she already had every other Friday off. Plaintiff refused to accept [*95]  Smith's offer to allow her to attend therapy during the work week and insisted that the only accommodation that she would accept was the four-day work week. The record is clear that Plaintiff failed to engage her employer in an interactive process after it offered her the accommodation of attending therapy during her current work schedule, in that Plaintiff did not provide the GDC with any substantive reasons as to why the proffered accommodation was unreasonable given her medical needs. Instead, Plaintiff simply demanded that the GDC capitulate and give her the four-day work week schedule that she demanded. See Stewart, 117 F.3d at 1286-87 (holding that summary judgment was appropriate where employee failed to engage in interactive process after employer offered accommodations).
Under the circumstances, the Court finds that Plaintiff's employer met its burden to engage in an informal, interactive process with the employee to determine an appropriate reasonable accommodation. Even assuming that Plaintiff was a qualified individual with a disability, under the ADA and/or Rehabilitation Act, a qualified individual with a disability is not entitled to the accommodation of her choice, only to a reasonable accommodation. [*96]  Stewart, 117 F.3d at 1286 (citing Lewis, 908 F. Supp. at 948).
Moreover, Plaintiff has failed to meet her burden of demonstrating that the requested accommodation would enable her to perform the essential functions of her position. Rather, the accommodation that Plaintiff requested would have enabled her not to have to perform the essential functions of her position on the two Fridays a month that she was scheduled to work, under her alternative work schedule. Thus, Defendants were under no obligation under the Rehabilitation Act or the ADA to provide the specific schedule accommodation that Plaintiff was requesting.
Plaintiff next claims that she requested to move to an office so that she could use a wheelchair at work, but her request was denied. Plaintiff has not identified when, during her employment, she asked to be provided an office. Although Smith recalls Plaintiff requesting an office, he does not recall her stating that she needed the office so she could use a wheelchair at work. Smith states that Plaintiff was not given an office because there was not one available at the time, which Plaintiff disputes. It is undisputed, however, that Plaintiff never presented to her employer any medical documentation showing that she had [*97]  been prescribed a wheelchair or that she needed to use one to enable her to perform the essential functions of her position. Plaintiff also admits that she never actually used or attempted to use a wheelchair at work or asked her employer to modify her cubicle to accommodate a wheelchair. There is no documentary evidence in the record showing that Plaintiff ever expressly asked to be moved to Cheryl Ealey's cubicle for any reason.
Although the record is replete with emails that Plaintiff authored complaining about her knees, her pain, her supervisors, her parking situation, and the GDC's delay and/or refusal to provide her with the accommodations she was seeking, Plaintiff has pointed to no documentation in the extensive record showing that she ever asked her employer for the accommodation of an office so that she could use her wheelchair at work. Nor has she shown that she attempted to engage in any formal or informal interactive process with her employer to identify "the precise limitations resulting from the disability and potential reasonable accommodations that could overcome those limitations." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3). Even accepting that Plaintiff asked for a larger office to accommodate her wheelchair, [*98]  Plaintiff has not shown or established that her employer refused to engage in an interactive process with regard to her request for an office, or that the denial of an office was in any way based upon her alleged disability or disabilities. Accordingly, summary judgment is appropriate on her failure-to-accommodate claim with regard to the provision (or non-provision) of an office.
Plaintiff also alleges that she was denied the accommodation of a parking space in a garage closer to her workplace than where she was assigned to park. However, the record shows that her employer investigated her request and determined that she would have to make her request to the GBA, who was in charge of the parking facilities. Plaintiff did so, and was eventually authorized to park in the garage she had requested. Although the process took approximately a month, it is clear that at least some of the delay is attributable to the fact that the parking garages were under GBA, rather than GDC, jurisdiction, and Plaintiff did not provide the GBA with a copy of her handicapped sticker until the fourth week in June. Plaintiff has not shown that she was discriminated against on the basis of her disability by [*99]  being denied a closer parking space.
Finally, Plaintiff claims that she was entitled to an extended leave following her FMLA leave as a reasonable accommodation. Defendants argue that such an accommodation was not reasonable because it would not have enabled Plaintiff to perform the essential functions of her position and also an extended leave would have imposed a hardship on her employer because the GDC needed someone to perform the duties of Plaintiff's analyst position. [East Aff. ¶ 9]. Defendants argue further that contingent leave following FMLA-approved leave was ordinarily only granted to employees who had been successfully performing their jobs, and Plaintiff did not meet that criterion due to the performance deficiencies that led to her re-assignment and ongoing performance issues in the purchasing standards analyst position.
As an initial matter, Plaintiff has pointed to no evidence in the record showing that she ever requested an extended leave period under the ADA or Rehabilitation Act following her FMLA leave as an accommodation. Even if she had, her FMLA medical certification documents indicated that at the time of her termination, Plaintiff was "totally disabled" and, [*100]  at a minimum, Plaintiff would be off from work following her FMLA leave for an additional three months. Courts in this circuit have held that an extended leave accommodation is unreasonable if it does not allow someone to perform his or her job duties in the present or in the immediate future. Duckett v. Dunlop Tire Corp., 120 F.3d 1222, 1225 (11th Cir. 1997)(per curiam); see also Wood v. Green, 323 F.3d 1309, 1313-14 (11th Cir. 2003)(noting that 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8) and 45 C.F.R. § 1232.3(i) "contain no reference to a person's future ability to perform the essential functions of his position"). In other words, "an accommodation that does not enable the employee to perform an essential function of his position is facially unreasonable and is not required by the ADA." Holly, 492 F.3d at 1262 n.16. Plaintiff does not contest that she was unable to return to work and perform the essential functions of her position at the time she was terminated.
Because Plaintiff has not met her burden to show that the extended leave request was a reasonable accommodation, the GDC is not required to demonstrate that the employee could not reasonably be accommodated because the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of its programs. DiCarlo, 358 F.3d at 419; 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A).
As Plaintiff has not raised a genuine issue of material fact that she was discriminated against on the basis of disability by being [*101]  denied a reasonable accommodation, Defendants are entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's failure-to-accommodate claims.

Hostile Work Environment Claim
Plaintiff next claims that she was subjected to a hostile working environment based upon her alleged disabilities, in violation of the Rehabilitation Act.8 [Am. Compl. at 5; Pl.'s Resp. Br. at 39]. Plaintiff alleges that her management's constant harassment and retaliation exacerbated her depression and caused her to vomit in her trash can at work almost daily. [Am. Compl. at 8].
The employee has the burden of proving a hostile work environment. Edwards v. Wallace Cmty. Coll., 49 F.3d 1517, 1521 (11th Cir. 1995). In order to set forth a prima facie case for a hostile work environment claim, Plaintiff must demonstrate: (1) that she belongs to a protected group; (2) she has been subjected to unwelcome harassment; (3) the harassment was based on a protected characteristic; (4) the harassment was sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the terms and conditions of employment and create a discriminatorily abusive working environment; and (5) employer responsibility through direct or vicarious liability. See Miller v. Kenworth of Dothan, Inc., 277 F.3d 1269, 1275 (11th Cir. 2002).
To survive summary judgment on a hostile work environment claim, a plaintiff must produce [*102]  enough evidence that a reasonable jury could find that her workplace was permeated with "discriminatory intimidation, ridicule, and insult ... sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of [her] employment and create an abusive working environment." Harris v. Forklift Sys., Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21, 114 S. Ct. 367, 126 L. Ed. 2d 295 (1993) (citing Meritor Sav. Bank v. Vinson, 477 U.S. 57, 65, 106 S. Ct. 2399, 91 L. Ed. 2d 49 (1986)); Sykes v. Pinellas Suncoast Transit Auth., 128 F. App'x 100, 101 (11th Cir. 2005). The "severe and pervasive" element contains both an objective and a subjective component. To be actionable, the challenged conduct must create an environment that is both objectively hostile or abusive (the reasonable person standard) and an environment that the plaintiff herself perceives to be abusive (the subjective standard). Miller, 277 F.3d at 1276.
In determining whether an environment is "hostile" or "abusive," the court must consider the entirety of the circumstances, including the frequency of the discriminatory conduct; its severity; whether it is physically threatening or humiliating, or a mere offensive utterance; and whether it unreasonably interferes with an employee's work performance. Harris, 510 U.S. at 23. As the Supreme Court explained in Faragher v. City of Boca Raton, 524 U.S. 775, 118 S. Ct. 2275, 141 L. Ed. 2d 662 (1998), "simple teasing...offhand comments, and isolated incidents (unless extremely serious) will not amount to discriminatory changes in the 'terms and conditions of employment.' ... We have made it clear [*103]  that conduct must be extreme to amount to a change in the terms and conditions of employment...." Id. at 788.
Defendants argue that Plaintiff has not established the first and fourth prongs: she has not established that she was a member of a protected group — i.e., a disabled employee — and she has not established that she was subjected to harassment that was severe or pervasive enough to alter the terms and conditions of her employment.
Here, Plaintiff alleges and has proffered evidence (which I presume to be true for the purpose of Defendants' motion for summary judgment) that Smith called her a "cripple" and made comments such as "hurry up hop-a-long" during a one-week period until Shepherd made him stop. [Pl.'s Dep. at 70]. Plaintiff further alleges that on one occasion in early March, Smith locked her in his office and yelled at her. Plaintiff claims she required psychiatric assistance because of these comments and conduct, and that the comments and conduct still haunt Plaintiff emotionally today. [Pl.'s Resp. Br. at 40-41].
Plaintiff also alleges that Shepherd harassed and retaliated against Plaintiff by "losing" Plaintiff's NIGP certification training paperwork in early March, writing Plaintiff [*104]  up for having a second job as a realtor,9 requiring Plaintiff to be fingerprinted numerous times allegedly because of "smudges," using coworkers "to spy on Plaintiff," unnecessarily summoning Plaintiff to come to Shepherd's office just to cause Plaintiff to have to walk, shifting some of Plaintiff's responsibilities to other employees in late May (when Plaintiff was contemplating going out on medical leave for knee surgery) and June (when GDC management was considering re-assigning Plaintiff to a non-management position), and by giving Plaintiff only one hour of training after her reassignment to what Plaintiff characterizes as "an undesirable position." [Am. Compl. at 6-7].
Even assuming that Plaintiff were able to satisfy the first element — i.e., that she belongs to a protected group — based on Plaintiff's allegations and testimony, the incidents Plaintiff describes lack the frequency, severity and pervasiveness that have been found to constitute a hostile work environment. As to Smith's calling her a cripple and to "hurry up hop-along," Plaintiff testified that most, if not all, of the objectionable comments occurred during a one-week period. [Pl.'s Dep. at 70-72]. The isolated comments [*105]  that Plaintiff reports -- as offensive and hurtful as they may have been to Plaintiff -- amount to no more than "a mere utterance that engendered negative feelings," and do not rise to the level of a hostile work environment. See Harris, 510 U.S. at 21-22 ("As we pointed out in Meritor, mere utterance of an ... epithet which engenders offensive feelings in an employee does not sufficiently affect the conditions of employment to implicate Title VII"); see also Fitch v. Solipsys Corp., 94 F. Supp. 2d 670, 676-77 (D. Md. 2000)(concluding that two uses of the term "cripple" by the plaintiff's employer were not sufficiently severe or pervasive to constitute discriminatory harassment); Strebel v. Roosevelt City Police Dep't, 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 131213, 2010 WL 5140490, at *5-6 (D. Utah Dec. 10, 2010)(concluding that evidence that supervisor joked about plaintiff's knee injury, calling plaintiff "gimp" and "cripple," among other objectionable conduct, failed to demonstrate that supervisor's actions were so severe and pervasive that they changed the terms and conditions of plaintiff's employment); Edwards, 49 F.3d at 1521 (noting that "racial slurs allegedly spoken by co-workers had to be so 'commonplace, overt and denigrating that they created an atmosphere charged with racial hostility'").
With regard to Plaintiff's "loud" meeting with Smith in early March, there is no indication that the subject of her alleged disability [*106]  was a topic of discussion. A reasonable jury could not infer that the meeting had any relation to her alleged disability. While Plaintiff may have felt that Smith's conduct was unwarranted, demeaning, and highly inappropriate, the requirement is that the workplace be so permeated with "discriminatory intimidation, ridicule, and insult" that it altered the conditions of Plaintiff's employment. See Meritor, 477 U.S. at 65 (italics added). Plaintiff has failed to establish or provide any evidence that the meeting concerned anything apart from Plaintiff's interactions with her direct supervisor, Shepherd, and the CPO's workplace lunch and timesheet practices and procedures (or lack thereof), or that the meeting occurred because of any alleged disability.
Nor do Plaintiff's allegations concerning Shepherd's treatment of Plaintiff rise to the level of a hostile work environment. Although, from the record, it appears without doubt that Plaintiff had a difficult working relationship with Shepherd, Plaintiff has presented no evidence demonstrating that Shepherd's alleged isolation of Plaintiff, withholding of adequate training, misplacing paperwork, asking Plaintiff to come to her office, and other objectionable conduct [*107]  towards Plaintiff were based on Plaintiff's alleged disability or that the conduct was sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of her employment and create an objectively abusive and hostile environment.
While Plaintiff may not have agreed with Shepherd's supervisory style, managerial abilities or decisions, as unpleasant and frustrating as being on the receiving end may have been for Plaintiff, the conduct described by Plaintiff does not generally constitute actionable harassment. See Hesse v. Avis Rent A Car Sys., Inc., 394 F.3d 624, 630 (8th Cir. 2005) (allegations of "frequent yelling" and other objectionable conduct were not sufficiently severe or pervasive to state a harassment claim); Patton v. Indianapolis Pub. Sch. Bd., 276 F.3d 334, 339 (7th Cir. 2002) (allegations that supervisor treated plaintiff in a rude, abrupt, arrogant manner and subjected her to "stern and severe criticism" fell short of stating an actionable hostile work environment claim); Pierri v. Cingular Wireless, LLC, 397 F. Supp. 2d 1364, 1380 (N.D. Ga. 2005)("Job performance criticism from a supervisor or manager is a common vicissitude of life in the working world, even if harsh or unjustified."). "Generalized harassment in the workplace is not illegal[.]" See Hesse, 394 F.3d at 630 (citing Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Servs., Inc., 523 U.S. 75, 80, 118 S. Ct. 998, 140 L. Ed. 2d 201 (1998) (discussing same sex harassment)). The Court finds that Shepherd's alleged actions were not sufficiently severe or pervasive to be actionable. [*108] 
Because no evidence exists in the record that the alleged unfavorable employment conditions were on account of Plaintiff's protected status as a disabled employee, and Plaintiff's supervisors' actions were not sufficiently severe or pervasive to be actionable, Plaintiff has failed to establish a prima facie case of hostile work environment. Accordingly, Defendants' motion for summary judgment is due to be granted with respect to Plaintiff's hostile work environment claim.

Retaliation Claim
Plaintiff's retaliation claim appears to be substantively similar to her failure-to-accommodate and hostile work environment claims. The Rehabilitation Act "incorporates the anti-retaliation provision from § 12203(a) of the [ADA]." Burgos v. Chertoff, 274 F. App'x 839, 842-43 (11th Cir. 2008). Under the ADA's anti-retaliation provision, "[n]o person shall discriminate against any individual because such individual has opposed any act or practice made unlawful by this chapter." Id. (citing 42 U.S.C. § 12203(a)). This anti-retaliation provision is similar to Title VII's prohibition on retaliation. Id. (citing Stewart v. Happy Herman's Cheshire Bridge, Inc., 117 F.3d 1278, 1287 (11th Cir. 1997)). Accordingly, the Court must assess Plaintiff's retaliation claims pursuant to the Rehabilitation Act under the same framework used for Title VII retaliation claims. Id.
To establish a [*109]  prima facie case of retaliation, a plaintiff must show that: (1) she engaged in statutorily protected expression; (2) she suffered an adverse employment action; and (3) there was some causal relationship between the two events. Holifield v. Reno, 115 F.3d 1555, 1566 (11th Cir. 1997). A "plaintiff must show that a reasonable employee would have found the challenged action materially adverse." Burlington N. & Santa Fe Ry. Co. v. White, 548 U.S. 53, 68, 126 S. Ct. 2405, 165 L. Ed. 2d 345 (2006). A materially adverse action is one that "well might have dissuaded a reasonable worker from making or supporting a charge of discrimination." Id. (internal quotation and citation omitted). "To establish a causal connection, a plaintiff must show that the decision-makers were aware of the protected conduct and that the protected activity and the adverse action were not wholly unrelated." Gupta v. Florida Bd. of Regents, 212 F.3d 571, 590 (11th Cir. 2000)(quotations and alterations omitted), abrogated on other grounds by Burlington N., 548 U.S. at 68.
Once the plaintiff establishes a prima facie case of retaliation, the burden shifts to the employer to articulate a non-retaliatory reason for its treatment of the employee. Goldsmith v. Bagby Elevator Co., 513 F.3d 1261, 1277 (11th Cir. 2008). If the employer presents a legitimate explanation for its actions, the burden then returns to the employee to show that the explanation is pretextual. Id. The plaintiff bears the ultimate burden of proving retaliation by showing [*110]  that the reason provided by the employer is a pretext for prohibited retaliatory conduct. Id.
Plaintiff alleges that Defendants retaliated against her for requesting accommodations by failing to reasonably accommodate her, by writing her up (but not other staff) for lunch rule violations (which appears to relate to the memorandum of concern that Smith issued to Plaintiff in early March 2008), by requiring her, but not any other staff, to sign in and out of work via email, by falsely accusing her of insubordination and removing her from her position as purchasing manager, and by terminating her employment.
In the Eleventh Circuit, where the plaintiff's retaliation claim is based on a refusal to accommodate her (which has already been addressed by the Court), the claim is not a proper claim for retaliation. See Stewart, 117 F.3d at 1288 (refusing to address plaintiff's retaliation claims that were based on refusals to accommodate her, stating that "[i]n our view, the acts [plaintiff] describes relate directly to her 'reasonable accommodation' discrimination claim, not her retaliation claim."); see also Lucas, 257 F.3d at 1261 (rejecting a retaliation claim based on a failure to reasonably accommodate because it "merely reclothes Lucas' [*111]  ADA discrimination claim"). Therefore, the Court will turn to Plaintiff's other allegations of retaliation.
Plaintiff's claim relating to the memorandum of concern concerning Plaintiff's alleged violation of lunch rules fails because Plaintiff has not established that she engaged in protected activity prior to receiving the memorandum on March 11, 2008, that the issuance of Smith's memorandum of concern constituted an adverse employment action, or that the memorandum was causally connected to her charges of discrimination. Further, Defendants have offered a non-retaliatory reason for the memorandum of concern, and Plaintiff has not offered any evidence to establish that the reason is pretextual.
Plaintiff also has failed to show that Smith required her to sign in and sign out for a discriminatory or retaliatory reason, or that the request constituted an adverse employment action. On July 14, 2008, Smith asked that Plaintiff send him an email when she arrived at work, if she came in earlier than her normal scheduled arrival time, because he was concerned that Plaintiff was not accurately reflecting the hours she worked on her timesheet. [Smith Aff. ¶ 20]. Smith states that on June 30th, [*112]  Plaintiff entered on her timesheet that she arrived at work at 5:58 a.m. But when Smith arrived at 6:20 a.m., the lights were off and it did not appear to him that she was in the office as she reported on her timesheet. [Id.]. Even if Plaintiff could show an adverse employment action and causal connection, Plaintiff has presented no evidence to show that Smith's proffered reason is pretextual.
With regard to Plaintiff's reassignment or demotion, Plaintiff has failed to establish a causal connection. The record indicates that Plaintiff was reassigned almost one month prior to the time she filed her EEOC charge of discrimination on July 28, 2008. Even accepting July 10th as the date on which Plaintiff informed Smith that she was going to file a claim with the EEOC, her reassignment still preceded her protected activity. Plaintiff cannot establish a causal connection when the adverse employment activity preceded her protected activity. King v. Kennesaw State Univ., No. 1:05-CV-3169-TWT, 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 68195, 2007 WL 2713252, at *17 (N.D. Ga. Sept. 13, 2007); see also Brungart v. BellSouth Telecomms., Inc., 231 F.3d 791, 799 (11th Cir. 2000)("A decision maker cannot have been motivated to retaliate by something unknown to him."). Even if Plaintiff could establish a causal connection, she has provided no evidence tending to show that [*113]  the reasons given for her reassignment were a pretext for discriminatory retaliation.
Plaintiff has also failed to establish a causal connection regarding her termination. The causation element may be shown by the temporal proximity of the complaints to the adverse employment action. Thomas v. Cooper Lighting, Inc., 506 F.3d 1361, 1364 (11th Cir. 2007). However, the timing of the events must be "very close." Id. (stating that a three to four month disparity between the statutorily protected expression and the adverse employment action was insufficient to show causation). Here, Plaintiff has presented no evidence that a causal link existed between the protected activity, which allegedly occurred on July 28, 2008, and her October 21, 2008 termination, approximately three months later. See id.
Even if Plaintiff were able to establish an inference of retaliation on the basis of the three months between her July 2008 EEOC complaint and Defendants' decision in late October to terminate Plaintiff's employment, the Court would still find that a causal connection is lacking. This Court has held that "any inference of retaliatory intent otherwise created by a short lapse of time can be dispelled when intervening factors [i.e., other reasons for the adverse action [*114]  arising after the protected activity] are established." Wu v. Southeast-Atlantic Bev. Corp., 321 F. Supp. 2d 1317, 1337 (N.D. Ga. 2004)(citing cases).
In this case, uncontroverted testimony shows that Plaintiff was warned over a period of months that her managers considered her conduct to be insubordinate and unacceptable. Then immediately after Plaintiff filed her EEOC complaint, she left work — without prior notice — and took an extended unapproved leave of absence. Although Plaintiff's leave was later approved as family and medical leave, Plaintiff was warned in writing while she was out on FMLA leave that failure to return to work once the leave expired would result in her termination. Plaintiff has introduced no probative evidence tending to show that she was terminated for any reasons other than those stated by GDC management (including Poitevint, Smith, Shepherd, East and Schweiger), or that their articulated concerns were less than genuine.
In arguing pretext, Plaintiff points generally to the Department of Labor's statement that Plaintiff was terminated for poor job performance, but she fails to explain how that statement indicates that the reason given for her termination was a pretext for prohibited retaliatory conduct. In sum, Plaintiff has failed to [*115]  produce sufficient evidence from which a reasonable jury could conclude that Defendants' stated reason for terminating her was pretextual. Accordingly, summary judgment against Plaintiff on her retaliation claim is warranted.

d. Confidentiality Claim Under the FMLA, ADA and Rehabilitation Act
Finally, Plaintiff alleges that she made several requests to Defendants regarding what medical information they needed for her to receive an accommodation, and that they did not adequately respond to her requests or make clear what information was needed. [Am. Compl. ¶ 21]. As a result, Plaintiff alleges that she disclosed more medical information than was necessary, in violation of the ADA.
The ADA prohibits an employer from "requir[ing] a medical examination" or "mak[ing] inquiries of an employee as to whether such employee is an individual with a disability or as to the nature or severity of the disability, unless such examination or inquiry is shown to be job-related and consistent with business necessity." Grimsley v. Marshalls of MA, Inc., 284 Fed. Appx. 604, 610 (11th Cir. 2008)(quoting 42 U.S.C. § 12112(d)(4)(A)). The ADA also requires an employer to keep confidential any information about an employee's medical condition or history gleaned from a permissible medical examination or inquiry. [*116]  Id. (citing 42 U.S.C. § 12112(d)(3)(B), (d)(4)(C)). However, when an employee voluntarily discloses this information to the employer rather than provides it to the employer in response to a permissible inquiry or examination, the employee cannot establish an unlawful disclosure under the ADA. Id. (citing Cash v. Smith, 231 F.3d 1301, 1307 (11th Cir. 2000)).
In this case, Plaintiff has failed to allege or establish that the disclosure that Plaintiff complains of was the result of an inquiry made by her employer rather than a voluntary disclosure that Plaintiff made to the Defendants. The statute and regulations cited by Plaintiff do not govern voluntary disclosures initiated by the employee. Accordingly, Plaintiff has not alleged or shown an unlawful disclosure under the ADA. Cash, 231 F.3d at 1307.
Plaintiff further contends that Defendants violated her confidentiality under the Rehabilitation Act, the FMLA, and the ADA, by "not maintaining her medical files separately," in other words, separate from Plaintiff's personnel file, by allowing "several employees to handle or review Plaintiff's medical files including but not limited to [GDC] receptionist Discel Norris" [Am. Compl. ¶ 21], by letting too many supervisors be involved in Plaintiff's FMLA request, and by allegedly leaving her medical [*117]  information unattended on Norris's desk "which was immediately at the front entrance in plain view to all employees, visitors and vendors." [Id.]. Defendants argue that Plaintiff's allegations fail to state a claim under the FMLA, the ADA, or the Rehabilitation Act.
Under the FMLA, "[r]ecords and documents relating to certifications, recertifications or medical histories of employees or employees' family members, created for purposes of FMLA, shall be maintained as confidential medical records in separate files/records from the usual personnel files, and if the ADA, as amended, is also applicable, such records shall be maintained in conformance with ADA confidentiality requirements (see 29 C.F.R. 1630.14(c)(1)), except that: (1) Supervisors and managers may be informed regarding necessary restrictions on the work or duties of an employee and necessary accommodations." 29 C.F.R. § 825.500(g). The confidentiality of any medical information that Plaintiff submitted to the GDC when applying for leave is one of the rights protected under the FMLA. See Mahran v. Benderson Dev. Co., LLC, 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 41599, 2011 WL 1467368, at *4 (W.D.N.Y. Apr. 18, 2011) (citing 29 U.S.C. § 2615(a)(1)("It shall be unlawful for any employer to interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of or the attempt to exercise, any right provided under this subchapter.")). The FMLA [*118]  permits private civil actions to enforce its provisions. See id. (citing § 2617(a)(2)(A)); see also Sista v. CDC Ixis N. Am., Inc., 445 F.3d 161, 174 (2d Cir. 2006)(holding that the FMLA creates a private right of action against any employer "should that employer interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of FMLA rights")(internal quotation marks and citation omitted).
Similarly, under the ADA, section 12112(d)(4)(C) requires that medical records be kept separately from nonconfidential information, and that access to confidential files be limited. However, "[a] covered entity may make inquiries into the ability of an employee to perform job-related functions" § (d)(4)(B), and any information obtained pursuant to such inquiries is to be treated as a confidential medical record, "except that — (i) supervisors and managers may be informed regarding necessary restrictions on the work or duties of the employee and necessary accommodation." Id. § (d)(3)(B)(i); 29 C.F.R. § 1630.14(c)(1)(i).
Here, Plaintiff has produced no evidence showing that her employer failed to keep her medical file separate from her personnel file. "[T]he tenet that a court must accept as true all of the allegations contained in a complaint is inapplicable to legal conclusions. Threadbare recitals of the elements of a cause of action, supported [*119]  by mere conclusory statements, do not suffice." Iqbal, 129 S. Ct. at 1949 (citation omitted).
Plaintiff contends that Defendants also violated § 12112(d)(4)(A), which prohibits an employer from inquiring into the disability status of an employee "unless such inquiry is shown to be job-related and consistent with business necessity." To demonstrate compliance with § 12112(d)(4)(A), the employer bears the burden to show the asserted "business necessity" is vital to the business and the request for a medical examination or inquiry is no broader or more intrusive than necessary. Conroy v. N.Y. State Dep't of Corr. Servs., 333 F.3d 88, 97-98 (2d Cir. 2003). "[C]ourts will readily find a business necessity if an employer can demonstrate ... a medical examination or inquiry is necessary to determine ... whether the employee can perform job-related duties when the employer can identify legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons to doubt the employee's capacity to perform his or her duties (such as frequent absences ...)," or "whether an employee's absence or request for an absence is due to legitimate medical reasons, when the employer has reason to suspect abuse of an attendance policy." Id. at 98; see, e.g., Sullivan v. River Valley Sch. Dist., 197 F.3d 804, 811 (6th Cir. 1999) (holding "there must be significant evidence that could cause a reasonable person to inquire as to whether an employee is still [*120]  capable of performing his job" to uphold an employer's request for an exam). The examination or inquiry need not be the only way to achieve a business necessity, but it must be a reasonably effective method to achieve the employer's goals. Conroy, 333 F.3d at 98.
The Court's review of the record clearly indicates that to the extent Defendants requested medical information from Plaintiff and/or her treating physicians to substantiate the existence and extent of Plaintiff's underlying medical conditions and attendant work restrictions relating to her work duties, such inquiries were "job-related and consistent with business necessity." See 42 U.S.C. § 12112(d)(4)(A). During the relevant time period, Plaintiff repeatedly requested time off due to her knee condition and work-related stress, without providing any substantive medical documentation to support her claims of disability. On these facts, Defendants had legitimate reasons to inquire into Plaintiff's capacity to perform her work duties.
Furthermore, Plaintiff has not shown that Defendants' requests for supporting medical documentation were overly broad or more intrusive than necessary. In fact, a review of the record shows that even though Defendants made repeated requests for [*121]  medical documentation to support Plaintiff's claims of disability and to provide some insight as to what, if any, work restrictions may have been appropriate, Plaintiff did not present any such documentation prior to going out on FMLA leave at the end of July. Employers are permitted "to use reasonable means to ascertain the cause of troubling behavior without exposing themselves to ADA claims." Thomas, 483 F.3d at 528 (citing Cody v. CIGNA Healthcare of St. Louis, Inc., 139 F.3d 595, 599 (8th Cir. 1998)).
In sum, Plaintiff has failed to show that any such inquiries were overly broad, unnecessarily intrusive, unrelated to her job or inconsistent with her employer's legitimate interest in clarifying Plaintiff's purported disability and work restrictions, if any, so that Defendants could consider an appropriate work schedule and/or reasonable accommodations.
With regard to Plaintiff's allegation that her medical file was left unattended on Discel Norris's desk, Plaintiff has not identified when the incident allegedly occurred, how she learned of the incident, or what medical information was contained in the file. Plaintiff testified that Shepherd and Discel Norris handled requests for leave. [Pl.'s Dep. at 57]. Apart from speculation, Plaintiff has not shown that any of Plaintiff's confidential [*122]  medical information was ever disclosed to an unauthorized person or individual. See Tice v. Centre Area Transp. Auth., 247 F.3d 506, 520 (3d Cir. 2001)(concluding that where plaintiff (1) had submitted no evidence of harm due to commingling of employees' medical records with nonconfidential files and (2) had "not even identified a single person who improperly viewed his medical files," plaintiff could not maintain suit against his employer for violation of § 12112(d) on the ground of improper recordkeeping). "Mere conclusions and unsupported factual allegations are legally insufficient to create a dispute to defeat summary judgment." Bald Mountain Park, Ltd. v. Oliver, 863 F.2d 1560, 1563 (11th Cir. 1989).
Nor has Plaintiff alleged, identified, or established any compensable injury or damages caused by Defendants' purported violation of § 12112(d). See Harrison v. Benchmark Elecs. Huntsville, Inc., 593 F.3d 1206, 1216 (11th Cir. 2010)(concluding that in order to overcome summary judgment, a non-disabled plaintiff must show some damages caused by § 12112(d) violation)(listing cases, including Tice). Even assuming that Plaintiff could show a technical violation of § 12112(d), courts have held that a mere technical violation of § 12112(d) does not give rise to damages liability. See Tice, 247 F.3d at 520 (citing Armstrong v. Turner Indus., Inc., 141 F.3d 554, 561 (5th Cir. 1998)(holding, in the pre-employment medical inquiry context, that damages liability under § 12112(d) "must be based on something more than a mere violation of that provision. There [*123]  must be some cognizable injury in fact of which the violation is a legal and proximate cause for damages to arise from a single violation."). In this case, Plaintiff has not alleged any actual injury flowing from the alleged Section 12112(d) violation, nor has she directed this Court's attention to any basis for damages relief.
Accordingly, for all the reasons stated, summary judgment is warranted on Plaintiff's unlawful disclosure/confidentiality claims under the ADA, Rehabilitation Act and FMLA.
As Plaintiff does not have a viable claim for prospective injunctive relief under the FMLA and/or the ADA, the Court further concludes that the Individual Defendants have Eleventh Amendment immunity from Plaintiff's claims under those statutes.
In sum, for all the reasons stated, Defendants are entitled to summary judgment on all of Plaintiff's claims.

D. Plaintiff's Cross Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. 66]
Given the Court's ruling on Defendants' motion for summary judgment, Plaintiff's motion for summary judgment [Doc. 66] is DENIED.

E. Plaintiff's Motion for Leave to Submit Additional Evidence [Doc. 86]
On February 20, 2012, well after briefing on the pending motions for summary judgment was completed, Plaintiff filed the referenced [*124]  motion, pursuant to Rule 15(d) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, requesting permission to submit the findings and final decision of the Administrative Law Judge ("ALJ") assigned to Plaintiff's Social Security appeal, which was issued on February 1, 2012 [Doc. 86-2]. Plaintiff also requests an oral hearing on her motion.
Rule 15(d) provides that on motion and reasonable notice, "the court may, on just terms, permit a party to serve a supplemental pleading setting out any transaction, occurrence, or event that happened after the date of the pleading to be supplemented." Fed. R. Civ. P. 15(d). A supplemental pleading is an appropriate vehicle by which to "set forth new facts in order to update the earlier pleading, or change the amount or nature of the relief requested in the original pleading." Lussier v. Dugger, 904 F.2d 661, 670 (11th Cir. 1990)(citing 6A C. Wright, A. Miller, & M. K. Kane, 4 Federal Practice and Procedure § 1504 at 177). Local Rule 7.1(E) provides that "[m]otions will be decided by the court without oral hearing, unless a hearing is ordered by the court." LR 7.1(E), NDGa.
Contrary to the stated purpose of Rule 15(d), Plaintiff has not requested permission to serve a supplemental pleading, but rather additional evidence in support of her motion for summary judgment and in opposition to Defendants' motion for summary judgment. Nevertheless, [*125]  because Plaintiff is proceeding pro se, the Court has reviewed and considered what Plaintiff has submitted.
Plaintiff argues that in the recently issued ALJ's decision, dated February 1, 2012, the ALJ found that Plaintiff was able to do light work up until August 1, 2010, at which time she became disabled. [Doc. 86-1 at 4]. On that basis, Plaintiff argues that with accommodation from Defendants, she could have returned to work on February 1, 2009.
However, the Court's independent review of the proffered supplemental materials discloses no genuine issues of material fact which would preclude summary judgment. Although the ALJ did find that prior to August 1, 2010, Plaintiff had the residual functional capacity to perform light work as defined in the Social Security regulations, with a number of restrictions, the ALJ expressly found that since July 28, 2008, Plaintiff has been unable to perform any of her past relevant work [Doc. 86-2 at 8, Finding of Fact 7], which includes her work at the GDC. The ALJ further concluded that Plaintiff became disabled, under the Social Security Act, beginning on August 1, 2010. [Id. at 2].
Because the ALJ's conclusions as to the July 28th date substantially conform [*126]  to this Court's analysis, and the August 2010 onset of disability date and determination are irrelevant to these proceedings, the Court does not find that an oral hearing is necessary in the present case. Accordingly, Plaintiff's request for an oral hearing [Doc. 86] is DENIED. For the same or similar reasons, because the "new" evidence is, at the most, cumulative, and creates no material issues of fact which would prevent summary judgment, Plaintiff's motion to supplement [Doc. 86] is also DENIED.

III. CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated, it is hereby ORDERED that:
1) Plaintiff's Motion for Leave to Amend her Complaint [Doc. 62] is GRANTED. The Clerk is DIRECTED to change the text for Docket Entry 62 to "Plaintiff's Amended Complaint";
2) Defendants' Motion to Dismiss Plaintiff's Third Amended Complaint in Lieu of Answer [Doc. 63] is GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART AS MOOT;
3) Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. 66] is DENIED;
4) Plaintiff's Motion to Sanction the Use of Her Deposition [Doc. 71] is DENIED;
5) Defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. 79] is GRANTED in its entirety; and
6) Plaintiff's Motion for Leave to Exceed Page Limitation [Doc. 83] is GRANTED as unopposed [*127]  nunc pro tunc.
7) Plaintiff's Motion for Leave to Submit Additional Evidentiary Materials in Support of Plaintiff's Pending Motion for Summary Judgment and in Opposition to Defendants' Pending Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. 86] and motion for oral hearing [Doc. 86] are DENIED.
IT IS SO ORDERED, this 2nd day of March, 2012.
/s/ Gerrilyn G. Brill
GERRILYN G. BRILL
UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE


End of Document

