Goos v. Shell Oil Co.
United States District Court for the Northern District of California
July 1, 2009, Decided; July 1, 2009, Filed
No. C 07-06130 CRB

Reporter
2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 140529 *
CAROL A. GOOS, Plaintiff, v. SHELL OIL COMPANY, Defendant.
Subsequent History: Motion granted by Goos v. Shell Oil Co., 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 47067 (N.D. Cal., Apr. 15, 2010)
Counsel:  [*1] For Carol A. Goos, Plaintiff: Randal M. Barnum, LEAD ATTORNEY, Law Offices of Randal M. Barnum, Benicia, CA USA.
For Shell Oil Company, doing business as Shell Oil Products US, Defendant: Ramona Kaur Tumber, LEAD ATTORNEY, Lafayette & Kumagai LLP, San Francisco, CA USA; Brian H. Chun, Gary T. Lafayette, Lafayette & Kumagai LLP, Oakland, CA USA.
Judges: CHARLES R. BREYER, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: CHARLES R. BREYER
Opinion



ORDER
Plaintiff Carol Goos brings suit against her employer, Shell Oil Company ("Shell"), asserting claims for failure to accommodate her disability, failure to participate in the interactive process, discrimination, harassment, and retaliation. Compl. ¶¶ 13, 19. Shell has granted Plaintiff medical leave since June 2006, but Plaintiff contends that it should have offered her reassignment to a different position. Shell has filed a motion for summary judgment, and Plaintiff seeks partial summary judgment. Oral argument was held on June 26, 2009, and after considering the submissions of both parties, the Court hereby GRANTS in part and DENIES in part Shell's motion for summary judgment, and DENIES Plaintiff's motion for partial summary judgment.

FACTUAL & PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
I. Plaintiff's [*2]  Employment History
Plaintiff Carol Goos has been employed at Defendant Shell Oil Company's Martinez refinery since 1991. Goos Decl. ¶ 2. While working for Shell, Plaintiff earned a bachelor's degree in human development. Id. ¶ 4. Plaintiff has been an exemplary employee and has received numerous accolades based on her performance. Id. ¶ 3.
During her tenure at Shell, Plaintiff has served in several positions, including as a machinist, planner, rover, seal room attendant, special projects coordinator, and temporary trainer. Id. ¶ 5. Between 2002 and 2005, Plaintiff was transferred back and forth between positions as a machinist, a temporary planner, and a temporary trainer. Id. ¶ 9. Plaintiff sought a permanent planner position, but was returned to work as a machinist in January 2006. Goos Decl. 2 ¶ 10. A "machinist" operates heavy machinery to transform pieces of metal into other objects. A "planner" writes estimates and job plans for the servicing of equipment in the refinery. Id. ¶ 9. A "trainer" works in the human resources department. Id. ¶ 8.
II. Plaintiff's Disability
Plaintiff began receiving treatment for depression in 2004. Goos Decl. ¶ 11. In 2006, Plaintiff began treatment with [*3]  psychiatrist Dr. Peter Brandes, who diagnosed Goos with major depression. Id. ¶ 12. Brandes continues to be Plaintiff's primary provider of mental treatment. Id. Plaintiff has taken various prescription medications to treat her depression since 2004. Id.
In June 2006, Plaintiff commenced medical disability leave from her position at Shell. Id. ¶ 2. She has not returned to work.
A. Communication with Shell
In June 2006, Dr. Brandes began submitting Shell's "Medical Certification for Non-Occupational Injury or Illness" forms verifying that Plaintiff had become "too depressed to work at all at this time." See Chun Decl. Ex. D. Dr. Brandes provided an estimated "return to work" date of August 1, 2006. Id. On July 28, 2006, Dr. Brandes extended Plaintiff's leave through September 20, 2006. Chun Decl. Ex. H. On September 15, 2006, Plaintiff's leave was extended through November 11, 2006. Chun Decl. Ex. I.
In October 2006, Dr. Gregg Sorenson, a contract physician for Shell, contacted Plaintiff to request permission to review her medical records and discuss when she would be able to return to work. Goos Depo. 132:11-133:8. Dr. Sorenson also sent a fax to Dr. Brandes to set up a phone call regarding [*4]  Plaintiff. Chun Decl. Ex. E. Plaintiff agreed to allow Shell to review her medical records, so long as the underlying cause of her depression was not revealed to the company. Goos Depo. 139:19-140:1. Plaintiff did not want Shell to know that she was suffering, in part, due to a hostile work environment inflicted by a co-worker. Id. 140:20-142:9.
On November 10, 2006, Dr. Brandes extended Plaintiff's leave through January 11, 2007. Chun Decl. Ex. J. On December 11, 2006, Dr. Sorenson and Dr. Brandes spoke on the phone for five to ten minutes about Plaintiff's condition. Brandes Depo. 43:13-44:19. Dr. Brandes confirmed that Plaintiff was diagnosed with major depression. Id. 44:9-19. On December 18, 2006, Jon Sharp, the Disability Care Manger for Shell, sent Dr. Brandes a fax with "a request to release Ms. Goos to work with appropriate instructions, per your opinion." Chun Decl. Ex. F. On December 22, 2006, Dr. Brandes responded with a fax attaching Plaintiff's medical certification with an anticipated return to work date of January 11, 2007. Chun Decl. Ex. G, Ex. L.
In January 2007, Dr. Brandes extended Plaintiff's leave until March 15, 2007. Chun Decl. Ex. M. In March, leave was extended [*5]  until May 2007. Chun Decl. Ex. P, Ex. S. In deposition, Brandes stated that "what [he] understood was the case [was] that she had either the option of going back to the position she had been in [machinist] or not being at work," so he "kept her off." Brandes Depo. 37:7-13. All certifications specified that Plaintiff was on leave from a position as a "machinist." See, e.g., Chun Decl. Ex. D. The forms permit the provider to "check applicable restrictions" if a doctor thinks an individual can return to work with certain limitations. Id. However, nothing on the forms refer to accommodations, such as returning to work in a different position.
Aside from the certification forms, there has been no further communication between Shell and Dr. Brandes since December 2006. At no point during the initial communications between Plaintiff, Sharp, Dr. Sorenson, Dr. Brandes did the parties discuss returning Plaintiff to a position other than machinist.
B. Dr. Fenner's IME
In March 2007, at Defendant's request, Plaintiff was evaluated by Dr. Carol F. Fenner for an independent medical exam ("IME"). Dr. Fenner concluded that Plaintiff suffered from "moderate to severe" major depression. See Chun Decl. [*6]  Ex. DD. Fenner "was unable to detect evidence of intentional malingering." Id. Shell specifically asked if Plaintiff "is disabled from work as a machinist." In response, Fenner responded: "It is my opinion that at the present time, on a psychiatric basis, she is still unable to return as a machinist." Id.
In response to a question about whether "the employee may not be working due to a preference or strong desire to enter a different vocation or job assignment," Fenner stated:
Ms. Goos did openly discuss her desire of pursing [sic] a vocation in the human resources field. This was her goal or reason for obtaining a BA Degree in human development. She reported that she had hoped to get a position at Shell in the department of human resources and had applied but to no avail.
. . .
While I think it is quite possible that being thwarted from realizing her desire to go into the human resources department at Shell contributed to [the] decompensation, I do not think that she is not working simply because she wishes to enter a different vocation.
Id.
Finally, Shell asked for Fenner's opinion on "Can the claimant return to work with restrictions or accommodations and if so what are they?" Fenner [*7]  replied:
Whether or not Ms. Goos can return to work at this time is really a question for Dr. Brandes and Cynthia O'Neal, MFCC, who are her treaters and thus best able to make this determination. I would however offer a very cautious yes to this question with the restriction that the return be accomplished in such a way that would be restorative to her morale at this point in time. As previously stated I do not think a return to work as a machinist is in either of the party's best interests, and I gathered that this would also be untenable to the examinee.
As to accommodations, the first would be that Ms. Goos indeed be reinstated as a planner. She has the prior experience for this job and it would probably be beneficial to her morale.
There is a second suggestion based on the following: (1) We have here an individual of good intellect and learning ability who has gone to college and earned 3 degrees while working full time and who has petition[ed] numerous times for professional advancement. Thus she appears to be capable and industrious. (2) Ms. Goos described her relationships with others in the workplace as very good overall in both the maintenance department and the planning department. [*8]  She has been with the company for a very long time (15 years) with a good attendance record. (3) She reportedly complied with all assignments and training suggested by management for advancement over the years. It appears, in the absence of any information from the examinee's personnel file that would indicate that she has been a problematic or difficult employee, that she is a worthy employee and I offer the additional suggestion that she be mentored into the human resources department at Shell Oil Company.
Id.
Fenner noted that when she told Plaintiff she was thinking of recommending these accommodations, Plaintiff appeared "neither pleased nor displeased nor did she ask for anything. Her reply was 'Well, I guess I'll wait to hear from Shell.'" Id. Fenner admits that she never reviewed any job descriptions for either position and based her suggestions on what Plaintiff told her during the examination. Fenner Depo. 62:7-63:33.
On March 30, 2007, Dr. Fenner transmitted her IME to Jon Sharp at Shell. Chun Decl. Ex. DD. Sharp received and reviewed the IME on April 2, 2007. On April 3, Sharp sent an e-mail to a human resources representative in Martinez stating "Emp[loyee] and IME agree [*9]  emp[loyee] might [return to work] sooner as a Planner in an accommodated position. (I believe this has previously been ruled out as an option)." Barnum Decl. Ex. D. Other than that email, the record reflects no other communication within Shell, with Plaintiff, or with Dr. Brandes about whether Plaintiff could return to work in an accommodated position before this lawsuit was filed.
C. Commencement of Litigation
On June 28, 2007, before receiving a copy of the IME, Plaintiff sent a demand letter to Shell. See RJN Ex. A. At that time, Plaintiff argued that she was the victim of gender discrimination and wrongful disclosure of private information. Id. at 2. Plaintiff complained that she was treated unfairly when Shell demoted her back to a machinist position after she served as a temporary planner. Id. at 3. Plaintiff also stated that her foreman, Charles Owen, harassed and discriminated against her on account of her gender. Id. at 4-5. The letter mentioned Plaintiff's depression as a side effect of Defendant's conduct, but Plaintiff's disability was not the focal point of her claims. Id. at 5. The letter insinuated that Shell was improperly pressuring Plaintiff to return to work, despite the fact that Plaintiff's own psychiatrist [*10]  "has not released Ms. Goos to return to work" and that she had not expressed "a desire to return to work." Id. Counsel stated that "Shell Oil's actions appear to be the basis of a potential adverse employment decision, specifically, a premature release to return to work." Id. After receiving the letter, Shell made no more efforts to contact Plaintiff.
In July 2007, Plaintiff filed a complaint with the Department of Fair Employment and Housing. RJN Ex. A. The Department issued a right to sue letter one day later. RJN Ex. B.
Also in July 2007, Jon Sharp sent a copy of the IME to Plaintiff's insurance carrier and Dr. Brandes. Sharp Depo. 130:16-21. After receiving the IME, Dr. Brandes discussed the report with Plaintiff. Brandes Depo. 39:6-40:20. In particular, Dr. Brandes shared Dr. Fenner's suggested accommodations with Plaintiff. Id. at 40:4-7. Dr. Brandes testified that if he knew there was a planner position available for Plaintiff, he would have released her to that position if she felt comfortable taking it on. Id. at 80:22-81:7. Plaintiff testified that she did not view the IME as an "offer" of reassignment. Goos Depo. 207:22. Neither Plaintiff nor her doctor requested reassignment [*11]  as an accommodation for her disability. Dr. Brandes continued to file medical certification forms extending Plaintiff's leave of absence from her position as a machinist. See, e.g., Chun Decl. Ex. Z.
At some point after receiving the IME, Plaintiff's theory of the case changed. Whereas in July 2007, Plaintiff's administrative complaint charged Shell with gender discrimination and harassment, the complaint filed on October 22, 2007 asserted claims for (1) "Discrimination Based on Disability, Harassment, Failure to Accommodate Disability, and Failure to Prevent Discrimination" in violation of California Government Code § 12940; and (2) "Retaliation for taking Medical Leave" in violation of § 12945.2. Plaintiff's complaint is based in large part on the information contained in Dr. Fenner's IME and Shell's alleged abrogation of its duties in not following up on Dr. Fenner's recommendations. See Compl. ¶¶ 10-11.
Now before the Court are (1) Defendant's motion for summary judgment and (2) Plaintiff's motion for partial summary judgment.

DISCUSSION
Plaintiff Goos presents several claims under California Government Code § 12940: (1) failure to accommodate disability; (2) failure to engage in the interactive process; (3) disability discrimination; (4) harassment based on [*12]  disability; and (5) failure to prevent discrimination. These claims are based on the assertion that Shell failed to provide reasonable accommodation for Plaintiff's alleged disability and failed to engage in the interactive process. Also, Goos presents a claim of retaliation for taking medical leave under California Government Code § 12945.2.
I. Exhaustion of Administrative Remedies
Defendant Shell argues that Plaintiff Goos has failed to exhaust her administrative remedies. Under the Fair Employment and Housing Act ("FEHA"), an employee must exhaust the administrative remedy provided by the statute by filing a complaint with the Department of Fair Employment and Housing ("DFEH") and obtaining a right-to-sue letter. Romano v. Rockwell Int'l, Inc., 14 Cal. 4th 479, 492, 59 Cal. Rptr. 2d 20, 926 P.2d 1114 (1996). Whether a plaintiff has exhausted administrative remedies "depends on an analysis of the 'fit' between the administrative charge and the lawsuit." Yurick v. Superior Court, 209 Cal. App. 3d 1116, 1121, 257 Cal. Rptr. 665 (1989). "The test for that 'fit' is whether the alleged discriminatory acts in the lawsuit are 'like or reasonably related to' the allegations contained in the administrative charge." Id. at 1121 (citing Ong v. Cleland, 642 F.2d 316, 320 (9th Cir. 1981)). "The absence of a perfect 'fit' between the administrative charge and the judicial complaint is therefore not fatal to judicial review if the policies of promoting conciliation [*13]  and avoiding bypass of the administrative process have been served." Ong, 642 F.2d at 319. Allegations in the civil complaint that fall outside the scope of the administrative charge are barred for failure to exhaust," Rodriguez v. Airborne Express, 265 F.3d 890, 897 (9th Cir. 2001), but FEHA's procedural requirements are to "be construed liberally for the accomplishment of the purposes" of FEHA, Cal. Gov't Code § 12993(a).
Plaintiff Goos has exhausted her administrative remedies. In her DFEH complaint, Plaintiff checked the boxes for "demoted," "harassed," "denied promotion," "denied accommodation, and "denied equal pay." See RJN Ex. A. She also checked boxes indicating that these acts were taken because of her "sex" and "mental disability." Id. Plaintiff further stated on the form that "[t]he factual and legal bases for Ms. Goos' claims of discrimination are set forth in detail in Ms. Goos' attorney's letter to Shell Oil Products, a copy of which is attached hereto." Id.
Defendant Shell argues that because the attached letter "did not make any allegations related to Plaintiff's claims in this case for failure to accommodate, failure to engage in the interactive process, harassment and discrimination based on disability, failure to investigate complaints of discrimination and retaliation for [*14]  taking medical leave," claims in the civil complaint are not "like or reasonably related to" the claims in the administrative complaint. Def. Mot. at 14-15. Shell relies on Sandhu v. Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., 26 Cal. App. 4th 846, 31 Cal. Rptr. 2d 617 (1994), but that case does not help Defendant. Sandhu urges against an overly-rigid application of the exhaustion requirement. There, the plaintiff filed a DFEH complaint where he alleged discrimination based on "race and/or national origin." Id. at 858. The plaintiff did not check the "national origin" box in the DFEH complaint. Id. The court held that although he did not check this box, he should be permitted to bring suit on that ground. Id. "By removing the 'technical barricades barring [his] entry,'" the Sandhu court held that the plaintiff is "entitled to get into the courthouse in the first place." Id. at 859 (internal citation omitted).
As discussed above, the June 2007 attorney letter focuses on a gender discrimination claim, but Plaintiff's counsel does touch on her mental disability. Clearly, Plaintiff's theory of the case shifted since she filed her administrative complaint and received Dr. Fenner's IME. But the underlying basis of her claim is not so different that this Court will abstain from hearing her case. Plaintiff did, [*15]  after all, check the right boxes for the claim she now asserts, thereby putting Shell on notice of the scope of the litigation. The Court is satisfied that Plaintiff's current claims are "like or reasonably related" to the claims asserted in the administrative complaint.
II. Summary Judgment Standard
A principal purpose of the summary judgment procedure is to isolate and dispose of factually unsupported claims. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323-24, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). A party moving for summary judgment that does not have the ultimate burden of persuasion at trial (usually the defendant) has the initial burden of producing evidence negating an essential element of the non-moving party's claims or showing that the non-moving party does not have enough evidence of an essential element to carry its ultimate burden of persuasion at trial. Nissan Fire & Marine Ins. Co. v. Fritz Cos., 210 F.3d 1099, 1102 (9th Cir. 2000).
If the moving party does not satisfy its initial burden, the non-moving party has no obligation to produce anything and summary judgment must be denied. If, on the other hand, the moving party has satisfied its initial burden of production, then the non-moving party may not rest upon mere allegations or denials of the adverse party's evidence, but instead must produce admissible evidence that shows there is [*16]  a genuine issue of material fact for trial. Nissan Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 210 F.3d at 1102. A genuine issue of fact is one that could reasonably be resolved in favor of either party. A dispute is "material" only if it could affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248-49, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986).
Special rules of construction apply to evaluating summary judgment motions: (1) all reasonable doubts as to the existence of genuine issues of material fact should be resolved against the moving party; and (2) all inferences to be drawn from the underlying facts must be viewed in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. T.W. Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Pac. Elec. Contractors Ass'n., 809 F.2d 626, 630 (9th Cir. 1987).
III. First Cause of Action - Violation of Cal. Gov't Code § 12940
Plaintiff's first cause of action alleges that Shell discriminated against Plaintiff by failing to accommodate her disability and failing to engage in the interactive process. Compl. ¶ 15.
A. Failure to Accommodate Claim
FEHA requires an employer to make reasonable accommodation for the known disabilities of an employee, unless doing so would produce undue hardship to the employer's operations. Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(m). An employee can establish a prima facie claim by proving that (1) she suffers from a disability; (2) she is a qualified individual for a position for which reassignment is sought; and (3) the employer [*17]  failed to provide a reasonable accommodation for her disability. Jensen v. Wells Fargo Bank, 85 Cal. App. 4th 245, 256, 102 Cal. Rptr. 2d 55 (2000). Both Plaintiff and Shell seek summary judgment on this claim.
Shell does not dispute that Plaintiff is mentally disabled, and Plaintiff concedes that she was not ready to return to work as a machinist. The question here is whether Shell failed to provide a reasonable accommodation by failing to reassign her to a vacant position. Under California Government Code § 12926(n)(2), "reasonable accommodation" may include "reassignment to a vacant position." "Ordinarily, the reasonableness of an accommodation is an issue for the jury." Prilliman v. United Air Lines, Inc., 53 Cal. App. 4th 935, 954, 62 Cal. Rptr. 2d 142 (1997) (internal quotation marks omitted).
1. Plaintiff's Failure to Request Specific Accommodation
Plaintiff never specifically requested reassignment, and Shell never discussed reassignment options with Plaintiff or her doctor. Shell argues that Plaintiff's failure to request reassignment bars her recovery on this claim, whereas Plaintiff argues Shell's failure to offer reassignment is conclusive as to Shell's liability. The underlying question remains: Was Defendant's accommodation reasonable? Summary judgment is denied because there remain disputed questions of fact on this issue, at least as to the period of time after Shell received the [*18]  IME and before it received Plaintiff's demand letter.
In Prilliman, the issue before the court was whether defendant had "reasonably accommodated" two airline pilots who had been diagnosed with AIDS. The appellate court reversed the trial court's grant of summary judgment in favor of the employer in part, finding that there was a triable issue of fact as to whether the employer should have offered one plaintiff an alternative position. 53 Cal. App. 4th at 953. Plaintiff had not specifically requested reassignment. The court held:
an employer who knows of the disability of an employee has an affirmative duty to make known to the employee other suitable job opportunities with the employer and to determine whether the employee is interested in, and qualified for, those positions, if the employer can do so without undue hardship or if the employer offers similar assistance of benefit to other disabled or nondisabled employees or has a policy of offering such assistance or benefit to any other employees.
Id. at 950-51.
The court concluded that there was a "reasonable inference" that the employer simply placed plaintiff on medical disability "without exploring any other options with [him] in a meaningful way." Id. at 953 (internal quotation [*19]  marks omitted). The court further stated:
We also find without merit respondents' suggestion that the disabled employee must first come forward and request a specific accommodation before the employer has a duty to investigate such accommodation. In other words, respondents maintain that they reasonably accommodated Prilliman by offering him insured disability leave, and they had no duty to investigate other potential accommodations, such as alternative job positions with United, because Prilliman did not request an alternative position. However, respondents fail to cite applicable authority to support their contention.
Id. at 954 (emphasis added).
Courts have also noted that the disability statute "does not require the plaintiff to speak any magic words before he is subject to its protections." Schmidt v. Safeway, Inc., 864 F. Supp. 991, 997 (D. Or. 1994) (discussing the Americans with Disabilities Act) (cited by Prilliman, 53 Cal. App. 4th at 954). The Schmidt court went on to note that, "[o]f course, the employee can't expect the employer to read his mind and know he secretly wanted a particular accommodation and sue the employer for not providing it. Nor is an employer ordinarily liable for failing to accommodate a disability of which it had no knowledge." Id. Defendant relies on this [*20]  language to argue that Shell cannot be held liable for not providing a reassignment when Plaintiff did not request it. However, in Schmidt, the court granted partial summary judgment in favor of the employee, thus rejecting the employer's defense that the employee must expressly request accommodation in order for the employer's duty of reasonable accommodation to arise. Id. at 998. As stated in Schmidt, "The real issue is whether the employer had reason to believe the employee could continue to perform the job providing an accommodation was made." Id. at 997.
Spitzer v. The Good Guys, Inc., 80 Cal. App. 4th 1376, 96 Cal. Rptr. 2d 236 (2000) further supports Plaintiff's argument that she did not have to request reassignment expressly in order for Shell to be held liable. The question before the court was whether "the trial court properly determined on motion for summary judgment that appellant failed to provide respondent notice that reassignment was necessary to reasonably accommodate her limitations." Id. at 1385. The defendant claimed it "was unaware of the need for any such alternative accommodation." Id. at 1384. The court held "[t]he extent of [defendant]'s knowledge of the failure of job restructuring to reasonably accommodate [plaintiff], and the need to reassign her to another position, is unclear. [*21]  A triable issue of fact is therefore presented." Id. The court also pointed out that "an employer has a duty to reassign a disabled employee if an already funded, vacant position at the same level exists." Id. at 1389 (internal citation omitted). "Under the FEHA (and the ADA) an employer is relieved of the duty to reassign a disabled employee whose limitations cannot be reasonably accommodated in his or her current job only if reassignment would impose an 'undue hardship' on its operations or if there is no vacant position for which the employee is qualified." Id.
The Court notes that the holding in Prilliman regarding an employee's responsibility to request a specific accommodation is in slight conflict with another California case, King v. United Parcel Service, Inc., 152 Cal. App. 4th 426, 60 Cal. Rptr. 3d 359 (2007). In King, the court seized upon language used in Jensen, which held that "[i]t is an employee's responsibility to understand his or her own physical or mental condition well enough to present the employer at the earliest opportunity with a concise list of restrictions which must be met to accommodate the employee." Jensen, 85 Cal. App. 4th at 266 (cited at King, 152 Cal. App. 4th at 443).1 The King court held that summary judgment was appropriate where an employee "did not make a specific request for necessary accommodation [*22]  or a concise list of restrictions." 152 Cal. App. 4th at 443.
In King, the plaintiff's doctor had released him to perform his "regular duties and regular hours." Id. The employer expected, therefore, that plaintiff would perform the same duties he had performed prior to taking medical leave. Id. Plaintiff claimed that expectation was unreasonable because of his continuing disability, but the employer argued it was entitled to summary judgment because plaintiff did not request a more specific accommodation. Id. The court found the question was "a close one," but ultimately concluded that plaintiff did not communicate enough information about his disability to trigger the employer's duty to provide accommodation. Id. at 444. In sum, the employer was not liable because the defendant did not know about plaintiff's disability.
Shell relies upon King to support its argument that Plaintiff needed to request job reassignment before it could be held liable. As discussed, that position is in direct conflict with Prilliman, 53 Cal. App. 4th at 954 (holding no specific request for reassignment is necessary to trigger employer's duty). King can also be distinguished because there, the issue was whether the employer was on notice that any further accommodation [*23]  was necessary after the employee was released to work. Here, it was clear that Plaintiff continued to be disabled and required accommodations. Thus, Shell's affirmative duty to provide reasonable accommodation had not yet been discharged. To hold that Plaintiff need not request a specific reassignment before Shell can be held liable is therefore not inconsistent with King.
Ultimately, the law requiring "reasonable accommodation" means that employers have an affirmative duty to accommodate disabled workers. See Sargent v. Litton Systems, Inc., 841 F. Supp. 956, 961 (N.D. Cal. 1994). Therefore, the onus falls on the employer to take affirmative steps to ensure it reasonably accommodates an employee's disability. Moreover, "the hallmark of FEHA is the flexibility it requires of employers to work with its disabled employees to accommodate their needs." Id. at 962.
From the undisputed facts before this Court, it is not possible to tell whether the efforts that were taken met the employer's duty to provide reasonable accommodation. The Court agrees that, at the outset, it was reasonable for Shell to accommodate Plaintiff by extending her requested medical leave, particularly in light of Dr. Brandes's statement that she was "too depressed to work at all." See Chun Decl. [*24]  Ex. D. Each medical certification submitted by Dr. Brandes suggested that Plaintiff would return to work within a matter of weeks. Accordingly, Shell reasonably assumed that Plaintiff would be able to return as a machinist in the near future.
However, Dr. Fenner's IME arguably gave Shell reason to believe that Goos could be accommodated through reassignment. After Shell was put on notice in April 2007, by a report it requested, that alternative arrangements may be appropriate, a trier of fact could determine that Shell erred by taking no action to discuss with Plaintiff alternative job assignments — an accommodation that is explicitly contemplated by the statute. See Cal. Gov't Code § 12926(n)(2). The IME suggested reassignment would be appropriate, but Shell did not follow up on that suggestion. To be sure, neither did Plaintiff, and the IME made it clear that whether or not another position was appropriate was ultimately a question for Plaintiff and her treating physicians. Yet Shell did not even initiate the discussion, and it had the IME for a number of months before Plaintiff requested that Shell release it to Plaintiff's insurance provider. Whether this evidence leads to a conclusion that Shell met its statutory [*25]  duties is a question of fact for a jury.
The Court further notes, however, that after receiving the demand letter from Plaintiff's attorney in June 2007, it was reasonable for Shell to cease efforts to communicate with Plaintiff regarding further accommodations. Given Plaintiff's strong objections to Shell's attempts to communicate with Plaintiff regarding her return to work date, Shell cannot be expected to have ignored Plaintiff's implicit request to be left alone so as to discuss possible reassignment. At that point, Shell no longer could be reasonably expected to follow up on the accommodations suggested by the IME without Plaintiff first initiating the conversation.2
2. Whether Plaintiff is a "Qualified Individual"
Shell further contends that Plaintiff cannot make out a prima facie case for failure to accommodate because she is not a "qualified individual." A plaintiff proves "she is a qualified individual by establishing that . . . she can perform the essential functions of the position to which reassignment is sought, rather than the essential functions of the existing position." Jensen, 85 Cal. App. 4th at 256 (2000).
Plaintiff claims she is qualified for either a planner position or a human resources position. She [*26]  had previously served as a temporary planner, without criticism. She also held a bachelor's degree in human development, which could be relevant to a position in the human resources department. More importantly, Plaintiff had over sixteen years of successful performance at Shell, in various capacities. Shell has provided no evidence to dispute Plaintiff's fitness for an alternative position. Drawing all inferences in favor of Plaintiff, the Court concludes there is a material issue of fact as to whether is "qualified" to serve in either position.
Defendant points to Dr. Brandes's certifications of disability as conclusive evidence that Plaintiff was not qualified to perform any position at Shell. However, those forms were specific to Plaintiff's inability to return to work as a machinist at Shell, and did not address whether Plaintiff could return in another position. Shell never asked Dr. Brandes or Plaintiff whether reassignment would be an appropriate option. The evidence suggests that after receiving Dr. Fenner's report, Shell did not explore fully the possibility of reassigning Plaintiff to a different position to accommodate her disability. Again, whether it was reasonable for [*27]  Shell to refrain from discussing reassignment with Plaintiff after receiving the IME, given Dr. Brandes's certifications, is a question for the jury.
3. Whether Shell's Accommodation is Reasonable
Finally, Defendant contends that Plaintiff cannot sustain a failure to accommodate claim because she has been reasonably accommodated with a thirty-three month leave of absence. Again, the reasonableness of an accommodation is generally a factual question for a jury. Soldinger v. Northwest Airlines, Inc., 51 Cal. App. 4th 345, 370, 58 Cal. Rptr. 2d 747 (1996).
In Hanson v. Lucky Stores, Inc., 74 Cal. App. 4th 215, 87 Cal. Rptr. 2d 487 (1999), the court held that "a finite leave can be a reasonable accommodation under FEHA, provided it is likely that at the end of the leave, the employee would be able to perform his or her duties." Id. at 226. Defendant relies on Hanson to argue that Shell's accommodation of granting leave was per se reasonable. Such a finding would take Hanson too far, however. There, the employer prevailed on summary judgment where it provided a leave of absence and "endeavored to identify an alternate, vacant position" for the plaintiff. Id. at 227. Here, Shell has not made any such attempt. Of course, an employer need not choose the "best" accommodation for any employee; rather the law requires only that the accommodation be "reasonable." Id. at 228. Yet whether it was [*28]  "reasonable" simply to keep Plaintiff on medical leave rather consider reassigning her to a different position is an open question that should be left to a trier of fact. Summary judgment is premature.
B. Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process Claim
FEHA makes it unlawful for an employer to "fail to engage in a timely, good faith, interactive process with the employee or applicant to determine effective reasonable accommodations, if any, in response to a request for reasonable accommodation." Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(n). "Both sides must communicate directly, exchange essential information and neither side can delay or obstruct the process." Jensen, 85 Cal. App. 4th at 261 (internal quotations omitted). An employer should "meet with the employee who requests an accommodation, request information about the condition and what limitations the employee has, ask the employee what he or she specifically wants, show some sign of having considered employee's request, and offer and discuss available alternatives when the request is too burdensome." Barnett v. U.S. Air, Inc., 228 F.3d 1105, 1115 (2002), vacated and remanded on other grounds, 535 U.S. 391, 122 S. Ct. 1516, 152 L. Ed. 2d 589 (2002) (quoting Taylor v. Phoenixville School Dist., 184 F.3d 296, 317 (3d Cir. 1999)) . A failure to engage claim may be sustained even where the employer has reasonably accommodated the employee. Wysinger v. Auto. Club of S. California, 157 Cal. App. 4th 413, 424, 69 Cal. Rptr. 3d 1 (2007). Both parties seek summary judgment [*29]  in their favor on this claim.
This claim is rife with material issues of fact that preclude summary judgment. Each party points a finger at the other as to who is to blame for the breakdown in communications between the parties. Shell had some contact with Plaintiff and her treating doctor in the fall of 2006, but took no steps to follow up on the recommendations of Dr. Fenner's IME in April 2007. At the same time, Plaintiff did not take an active role in seeking out alternative placements with Shell, but she did submit to the IME and authorized her doctor to speak with Shell's representatives. On the record before the Court, summary judgment for either party is inappropriate on this claim.
C. Harassment Based on Disability Claim
To state a claim for harassment based on disability, a plaintiff must establish that the mistreatment was sufficiently severe or pervasive so as to alter the conditions of her employment and create an abusive working environment. Lyle v. Warner Bros. Television Prods., 38 Cal. 4th 264, 282-83, 42 Cal. Rptr. 3d 2, 132 P.3d 211 (2006). The conduct complained of must create an objectively hostile work environment. Id. at 283.
Plaintiff's harassment claim lacks merit. Plaintiff alleges that Defendant used "improper methods to obtain Plaintiff's medical information," failed to [*30]  follow Dr. Fenner's recommendations, and failed to engage in the interactive process. The evidence does not show that Plaintiff was a victim of pervasive harassment. Plaintiff's opposition brief offers no argument to support this claim. Accordingly, the Court grants judgment on this claim in favor of Defendant.
IV. Second Cause of Action - Retaliation
Under the California Family Rights Act ("CFRA"), an employer may not discriminate against any individual who exercises her right to medical leave. Cal. Gov't Code § 12945.2(l). In order to prevail on a retaliation claim, a plaintiff must establish that she suffered an adverse employment action because she exercised her right to take medical leave. Dudley v. Dep't of Trans., 90 Cal. App. 4th 255, 261, 108 Cal. Rptr. 2d 739 (2001); Cal. Gov't Code § 12945.2(l)(1). In Dudley, the court sustained a retaliation claim where the plaintiff employee alleged that because of her leave of absence, the employer required her to account for each and every day of her illness, served her with notices of adverse action, reduced her salary, and imposed a ten-day suspension. 90 Cal. App. 4th at 264.
Plaintiff bases her claim of retaliation primarily on allegations that Defendant failed to accommodate her disability and failed to engage in the interactive process. Plaintiff's retaliation claim must fail because [*31]  there is no evidence that she was subject to an adverse employment action on account of her on-going medical leave. Plaintiff's allegations regarding Defendant's failure to accommodate her disability may support her reasonable accommodation claim, but they simply do not support a claim of retaliation. The causal connection is missing. Shell has not terminated Plaintiff, but rather has allowed Plaintiff to remain on medical leave for over thirty-three months. Thus, the Court grants judgment in favor of Shell on Plaintiff's retaliation claim.
V. Punitive Damages Request
Plaintiff's claim for punitive damages is unavailing. Under California Civil Code § 3294(a), a plaintiff may recover punitive damages "where it is proven by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant has been guilty of oppression, fraud, or malice . . . ." The "mere carelessness or ignorance of the defendant does not justify the imposition of punitive damages." Tomaselli v. Transamerica Ins. Co., 25 Cal. App. 4th 1269, 1287, 31 Cal. Rptr. 2d 433 (1994). "Punitive damages are proper only when the tortious conduct rises to levels of extreme indifference to the plaintiff's rights, a level which decent citizens should not have to tolerate." Id. Here, any misconduct by Defendant did not rise to the level required for an award of punitive damages. [*32]  Thus, the request for punitive damages is dismissed.

Conclusion
Based on the foregoing, the Court hereby DENIES judgment for both parties on the claim for failure to accommodate, DENIES judgment for both parties on the claim for failure to engage in the interactive process, GRANTS judgment for Defendant on Plaintiff's claims for harassment and retaliation, and GRANTS dismissal of Plaintiff's request for punitive damages.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
Dated: July 1, 2009
/s/ Charles R. Breyer
CHARLES R. BREYER
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

