Griego v. Lennox Indus., Inc.
United States District Court for the Eastern District of Arkansas, Central Division
March 28, 2023, Decided; March 28, 2023, Filed
Case No. 4:20-CV-01309

Reporter
2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 53077 *; 2023 WL 2666145
STEPHEN GRIEGO, PLAINTIFF v. LENNOX INDUSTRIES, INC., DEFENDANT
Counsel:  [*1] For Stephen Griego, Plaintiff: Lucien R. Gillham, LEAD ATTORNEY, Sutter & Gillham, PLLC, Little Rock, AR; Luther Oneal Sutter, Sutter & Gillham, PLLC, Little Rock, AR.
For Lennox Industries Inc, Defendant: Eva C. Madison, LEAD ATTORNEY, Littler Mendelson, P.C., Fayetteville, AR; Jessica L. Craft, LEAD ATTORNEY, PRO HAC VICE, Littler Mendelson, P.C., Houston, TX; Kyle Kennedy, Littler Mendelson, P.C., Fayetteville, AR.
Judges: LEE P. RUDOFSKY, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: LEE P. RUDOFSKY
Opinion



ORDER
This case involves allegations of wrongful termination. Defendant Lennox Industries, Inc. fired Plaintiff Stephen Griego because, in Lennox's view, Mr. Griego missed work too frequently. Mr. Griego says many of his absences were caused by attending medical appointments for his mental and physical disabilities. Mr. Griego thus contends that Lennox violated the Family and Medical Leave Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act by firing him. Lennox has moved for summary judgment.1 For the reasons given below, the Court GRANTS Lennox's Motion.

BACKGROUND2
Mr. Griego worked in Lennox's Stuttgart, Arkansas, facility two separate times. His first stint of employment spanned from 2003 to 2017; Lennox [*2]  terminated Mr. Griego for excessive absences. After he was fired by Lennox for the first time, Mr. Griego spent a little over one year working various jobs. Then, at the end of 2018, Lennox found itself extremely short-staffed. So it rehired Mr. Griego. This second stint of employment lasted until October of 2019, when Mr. Griego was once again fired for (in Lennox's view) a lackluster attendance record. Mr. Griego's claims in this case are based solely on the second termination. But his first stint with Lennox and the interim period of time where he worked other jobs are nonetheless relevant. So the Court begins in 2003, when Mr. Griego first joined Lennox.

I. First Stint of Employment with Lennox
Lennox first hired Mr. Griego in 2003.3 When he joined the company, Mr. Griego had the option of working as a "brazer" or an "assembler."4 The record doesn't quite explain the specifics of each job. It appears that brazing involves using fire (i.e., torches) and is a more preferable assignment than assembling.5 Mr. Griego didn't have the benefit of that knowledge in 2003, however, and he chose to be an assembler.6 Assemblers and brazers each work on "lines," which the Court understands to be assembly [*3]  lines or something very similar to assembly lines. For the vast majority of his first stint of employment, Mr. Griego worked on one specific line and was primarily supervised by Phillip Bell.7 For the last few years of his first stint of employment, Mr. Griego was a "floater," meaning that he was not permanently assigned to one particular line.8 Instead, his assigned line would regularly change as each line's manpower needs fluctuated.9
Mr. Griego's time with Lennox got off to a rocky start. On one of his first days, Mr. Griego had a run-in with a line supervisor, Charles Brown.10 Mr. Brown saw Mr. Griego holding a brazing torch; Mr. Griego, an assembler, was not supposed to be using such torches.11 Mr. Brown tried to get Mr. Griego in trouble for improperly using the brazing torch.12 Mr. Griego explained that he had simply been handing the torch to a coworker who was a brazer and therefore needed the torch.13 Apparently, this interaction made Mr. Brown feel stupid and, as a result, Mr. Brown then held an approximately fourteen-year grudge against Mr. Griego.14 Whenever Mr. Griego was assigned to Mr. Brown's line (as a floater during the final years of Mr. Griego's first stint of [*4]  employment), Mr. Brown would berate Mr. Griego.15 Mr. Griego indicates that Mr. Brown's behavior was fairly typical of how other line supervisors treated Mr. Griego.16
Mr. Griego's displeasure with the way some of the line supervisors spoke to him did not impact the quality of his work. Mr. Griego says that he was a hard worker who got the job done.17 And there's nothing in the record to dispute that, when he was at work, Mr. Griego generally did his job well. What did cause problems, however, was the fact that Mr. Griego missed a lot of work.
Mr. Griego would frequently miss, or arrive late to, scheduled shifts. Mr. Griego says that his absences were largely related to attending medical appointments. Mr. Griego's medical conditions are both physical and mental. Physically, Mr. Griego has leg problems. A childhood surgery left a scar on Mr. Griego's leg that can tear open and bleed.18 This issue used to occur with such frequency that Mr. Griego had to be discharged from the United States Army.19 Additionally, Mr. Griego's leg causes him constant pain, makes him walk with a limp, and requires him to wear a leg brace.20 Mentally, Mr. Griego [*5]  suffers from Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder. Mr. Griego's PTSD is primarily the result of witnessing a serious car accident shortly after he began working for Lennox.21
Lennox's written attendance policy operated on a point system.22 Each point was recorded as an "occurrence."23 An employee who arrived late or left early, but still worked more than four hours of his or her shift, would receive 0.5 occurrences.24 If an employee missed a full day or showed up but worked less than four hours of his or her shift, then that employee would receive 1.0 occurrences.25 A multi-day span of absences would be consolidated into 1.0 occurrences so long as the absences were for medical reasons and the employee produced a doctor's note.26 An employee was expected to call in and notify Lennox of an absence at least thirty minutes before the start of his or her scheduled shift.27 An employee who missed a full day and failed to call in would receive 1.5 occurrences.28 An employee could be terminated for reaching 5.0 occurrences within a twelve-month period.29
The written attendance policy contained certain excuses that would allow employees [*6]  to avoid accruing occurrences. Chief among these excuses, for purposes of this case, was the twelve weeks of unpaid leave offered pursuant to the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA).30 If a Lennox employee was eligible for protection under the FMLA and could show that the absence or tardiness was due to the employee's relevant medical condition, then the absence or tardiness would not be counted in the occurrence calculation. An employee was "eligible" under the FMLA if he or she had worked at Lennox for more than a year (in total) and had worked 1,250 hours in the preceding twelve months.31
Because FMLA eligibility is tied to hours worked in the preceding twelve months, a long-term employee like Mr. Griego could undergo several FMLA-eligibility changes over the course of employment. Indeed, throughout Mr. Griego's fourteen-year first stint of employment, the record shows multiple eligibility changes.32 (To be clear, that means that at least at some points during Mr. Griego's first stint of employment, Mr. Griego asked for and received FMLA leave.33) FMLA eligibility was of particular importance for Mr. Griego, who missed a fair amount of work for doctor's appointments: A doctor's [*7]  note would completely excuse an employee's absence only if the employee was eligible for FMLA leave and the absence was related to the employee's FMLA-qualifying health condition.34 Otherwise, even with the benefit of a doctor's note, absences or late arrivals still factored into the occurrence calculation.35
Despite Lennox's fairly strict written attendance policy, the powers that be at Lennox's Stuttgart facility were quite lenient in their enforcement of the attendance policy. Mr. Griego testified that if an employee was a "good worker," then management would "work with" that employee to avoid terminating that employee.36 This leniency apparently arose from necessity—chronic employee-absenteeism issues meant that strict enforcement of the written policy would cause so many terminations that the business could not function properly.37
Even still, Lennox could reach, and did reach, a breaking point. In 2017 alone, Mr. Griego accrued 18.5 occurrences by July 13.38 Then, "after an unexcused absence on September 18, 2017, Lennox decided to terminate [Mr.] Griego's employment for excessive absenteeism."39

II. Non-Lennox Employment
During his hiatus from Lennox, [*8]  Mr. Griego worked a handful of different jobs and also obtained a certification in welding.40 For purposes of this case, his only relevant job was working for "Dish."41 On a visit to a customer's home, Mr. Griego and the customer were attacked by a random man.42 Mr. Griego was shaken by the experience, which only exacerbated his PTSD.43 Shortly after this incident, Mr. Griego quit his job with Dish and began looking for a new job.44 Meanwhile, Lennox's employee-absenteeism problems had worsened. The company found itself so shorthanded that Mr. Bell (one of Mr. Griego's supervisors the first time around) invited Mr. Griego back to the company.45 Mr. Griego took Mr. Bell up on the offer and rejoined Lennox on December 9, 2018.46 Mr. Griego's attendance issues from his first stint of employment did not come up in any conversations about rejoining the company.47

III. Second Stint of Employment with Lennox
Mr. Griego's second stint of employment with Lennox went much like the first. There were a few differences, of course. The second time around he chose to work as a brazer.48 He was no longer a "floater," instead consistently working on a few lines.49 But by and large, history repeated itself. [*9] 
The supervisors still largely lacked decorum when Mr. Griego came back to Lennox. Most, if not all, of his supervisors regularly berated Mr. Griego.50 One supervisor with whom Mr. Griego worked quite frequently, Phillip Prine, would try to instigate fights with Mr. Griego.51 Mr. Prine at one point went so far as to tell Mr. Griego, "The only disability you have is retardation."52 And Mr. Griego was still a hard worker. But his physical conditions made brazing difficult.
Part of Mr. Griego's job involved positioning heavy pieces of metal.53 Mr. Griego said the carts that the employees were given to push around the heavy pieces of metal were insufficient to do the job well.54 To make matters worse, Mr. Griego's leg brace would occasionally malfunction and, because Mr. Griego couldn't bend his leg well, make it difficult for Mr. Griego to do his job.55 Despite these issues, Mr. Griego never requested (and seemingly did not want) an alteration to his workstation or a lightening of his workload.56 He was also never given any physical work restrictions by a medical professional.57
Mr. Griego's biggest problem, however, was that he once again missed a lot of work. [*10]  Lennox's written attendance policy—including the provisions related to FMLA leave—had not changed in any material respect since Mr. Griego's first stint of employment.58 Multi-day medical absences were still consolidated.59 And, as far as Mr. Griego knew, Lennox managers were still willing "to work with" "a good worker" on attendance issues.60 Mr. Griego was generally familiar with those written and unwritten policies throughout his second stint of employment with Lennox.61 Mr. Griego was not familiar, however, with the intricacies of FMLA eligibility.
Everyone now agrees that Mr. Griego did not actually become FMLA eligible during his second stint of employment until June 19, 2019, when he reached the requisite 1,250 hours worked.62 But at the time, Mr. Griego thought that he was instantly FMLA eligible upon rejoining Lennox because he was FMLA eligible during his first stint of employment.63 It appears Mr. Griego was laboring under the mistaken assumption that once a person is FMLA eligible, that person remains FMLA eligible forever. He says that he asked either Lisa Keffer (Lennox's on-site nurse) or a supervisor about using FMLA leave every time he submitted a doctor's note. [*11] 64 Mr. Griego was told each time (for absences both before and after June 19, 2019) that he was not eligible for FMLA leave.65 Whatever Mr. Griego thought about the correctness of these responses, he never obtained, and therefore never submitted, the paperwork necessary to become certified as an FMLA eligible employee.66
Mr. Griego's attendance became a real issue for Lennox.67 Lennox's records showed that, by October of 2019, Mr. Griego had shown up late to work fourteen times and left early six times.68 Most eye-opening, however, was that Mr. Griego had racked up a total of twenty-four unexcused, full-day absences in 2019.69 Mr. Johnson summoned Mr. Griego to the Human Resources offices on October 7, 2019.70 Mr. Johnson told Mr. Griego that he was missing work too often.71 Mr. Griego asked to be told the specific days on which he was counted absent, claiming that his absences were largely due to attending medical appointments at the Veteran Affairs (VA) medical center.72 Mr. Johnson declined to detail the missed workdays for Mr. Griego.73 Instead, Mr. Johnson said that nobody cared that Mr. Griego had served in the military.74 Mr. Johnson also said that Mr. Griego "had no business having [*12]  [his] ass where [he] had it when [he] was attacked . . . ."75 With the benefit of hindsight, Mr. Griego thinks that Mr. Johnson mistakenly believed that one of Mr. Griego's absences, which was labeled in the attendance record as "Court," was due to Mr. Griego being in legal trouble.76 In reality, Mr. Griego had been subpoenaed to appear in court as a victim of and/or witness against the person who attacked him and a customer while he worked for Dish.77
Mr. Johnson suspended Mr. Griego.78 Shortly thereafter, Mr. Johnson got together with Ms. Keffer to conduct an in-depth review of Mr. Griego's attendance record and determine whether to terminate Mr. Griego's employment.79 Only ten of Mr. Griego's forty-four unexcused absences (nine full-day; one early departure) were recorded as being for medical purposes.80 Of those ten days, five took place before Mr. Griego was FMLA eligible at all.81 And while the other five took place after Mr. Griego became FMLA eligible, Lennox had never certified Mr. Griego as FMLA eligible during his second stint of employment. So, when Mr. Johnson and Ms. Keffer conducted their pre-termination review, Lennox's written policy did not require [*13]  excluding or otherwise ignoring any of these ten medical-related absences. Nevertheless, Mr. Johnson and Ms. Keffer "consolidated" all ten of Mr. Griego's medical-related absences into 2.0 occurrences.82 To effectuate this consolidation, Mr. Johnson and Ms. Keffer left unchanged two "Personal Illness" absences (January 18, 2019, and April 1, 2019) with 1.0 occurrences attributed to each absence.83 Occurrence points for the other eight absences for which Mr. Griego provided a doctor's note were removed from the system.84 Additionally, Mr. Johnson wrote off the remaining early departures, one of the late arrivals, and the one day that Mr. Griego missed for court proceedings.85
After Mr. Johnson and Ms. Keffer's consolidation and write-offs, Mr. Griego's attendance record still showed sixteen unexcused, full-day absences and thirteen late arrivals—for a total of 22.5 occurrences.86 And that was well above what Lennox was willing to deem acceptable, even when considering the Stuttgart facility's culture of leniency. So Mr. Johnson decided to terminate Mr. Griego.87 A little under one year later, on September 22, 2020, Mr. Griego filed this lawsuit [*14]  in Arkansas state court.88 Lennox removed the case to federal court on November 5, 2020.89

DISCUSSION
Mr. Griego's claims in this case arise only from his second stint of employment. He says that Lennox violated the FMLA and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). As discussed below, all of Mr. Griego's claims fail.

I. FMLA
Lennox presses two main arguments on summary judgment. First, Lennox says that the FMLA shouldn't apply to Mr. Griego's case at all because he didn't take the steps necessary to benefit from the statute. Second, Lennox contends that, even if the FMLA does apply to Mr. Griego's case, there was no FMLA violation because Mr. Griego's termination was not based on FMLA-protected absences. Lennox's first argument fails; the FMLA does apply to at least some of Mr. Griego's medical-related absences. Lennox's second argument, however, is a winning one. Mr. Griego's termination did not violate the FMLA.

A. Protected Absences
The FMLA entitles eligible employees to twelve workweeks of unpaid, job-protected leave throughout the year for, among other things, "a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform" [*15]  his or her job.90 An eligible employee is allowed to use FMLA leave to attend a doctor's appointment that is related to his or her serious health condition.91 Mr. Griego became an eligible employee on June 19, 2019.92 And he suffered from serious health conditions—his leg issues and PTSD.93 So there's really no disputing that Mr. Griego's post-June 19 doctor's appointments fall squarely within the scope of the FMLA.
Lennox argues that Mr. Griego didn't take his opportunity to benefit from the FMLA during his second stint of employment. Specifically, Lennox contends that Mr. Griego has no viable FMLA claims because he never submitted the paperwork necessary to have his absences excused by the FMLA.94 In Lennox's view, the FMLA therefore has no relevance to any of Mr. Griego's absences, whether for a doctor's appointment or something else. While Lennox is right that Mr. Griego never submitted the formal FMLA paperwork, Lennox is wrong to think that is the end of the matter. Mr. Griego did not have to "invoke the FMLA by name" or otherwise use some set of magic words to obtain the FMLA's protections.95 Lennox's FMLA duties were "triggered when [Mr. Griego] provide[d] enough information [*16]  to put [Lennox] on notice that [Mr. Griego] may be in need of FMLA leave."96
The record, taken in the light most favorable to Mr. Griego, shows that he asked Ms. Keffer or other supervisors about FMLA leave every time he submitted a doctor's note—which occurred numerous times before and after June 19, 2019.97 So, in both the time leading up to and the time after Mr. Griego officially became FMLA eligible, Lennox knew that Mr. Griego was taking time off to attend doctor's appointments. And by virtue of certifying Mr. Griego for FMLA leave during his first stint of employment, Lennox knew that Mr. Griego suffered from various chronic medical conditions. So a rational juror could conclude that Lennox knew the medical appointments during Mr. Griego's second stint of employment were related to those same conditions. That information is sufficient to have put Lennox on notice that Mr. Griego wanted to use FMLA leave during his second stint of employment to excuse his medical-related absences. At that point, Lennox "could have initiated the FMLA's certification process" if it wanted to protect itself from FMLA abuse, or it could have simply designated Mr. Griego's medical-related absences [*17]  as FMLA leave.98
Thus, at the summary-judgment stage, the Court proceeds as though Mr. Griego's five medical-related absences that occurred after June 19, 2019, were covered by the FMLA. Now, Mr. Griego has to show that there is a genuine dispute of material fact as to whether Lennox violated the FMLA.

B. FMLA Violation
29 U.S.C. § 2615(a)(1) makes it "unlawful for any employer to interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of or the attempt to exercise" any right provided by the FMLA.99 Mr. Griego says that Lennox violated this prohibition in a few different ways. Mr. Greigo's primary argument is that Lennox's decision to terminate him was improperly motivated by his medical-related absences. Mr. Griego's backup arguments are that Lennox gave him inaccurate information about his FMLA eligibility and that one of his supervisors made negative remarks about Mr. Griego's absences.

1. Wrongful Termination
The Eighth Circuit has recognized two ways for an employee to prove a violation of 29 U.S.C. § 2615(a)(1)—an "entitlement" claim and a "discrimination" claim.100 For an entitlement claim, the employee must show "the denial of a benefit to which he is entitled under" the FMLA.101 An entitlement claim does not require proving that [*18]  the employer acted with malicious intent.102 An FMLA discrimination claim, on the other hand, requires the employee to show that the employer took an adverse employment action against the employee and "that the employer was motivated by the employee's exercise of" FMLA rights.103 FMLA discrimination claims are generally subject to the burden-shifting framework used in Title VII discrimination claims.104
It is not clear to the Court whether Mr. Griego's wrongful-termination arguments are meant to advance an entitlement claim, a discrimination claim, or both. Lennox initially addressed Mr. Griego's wrongful-termination arguments under the FMLA discrimination framework.105 But then Mr. Griego's Response Brief and Lennox's Reply Brief seem to muddle the terminology and blend the relevant analyses.106 Complicating matters further is that the Eighth Circuit has addressed claims of wrongful termination under both the entitlement-claim and discrimination-claim rubrics.107 But the choice of framework is not a dispositive issue in this case. Under either framework, an employer is not liable if it would have made the same decision even if the employee never took FMLA leave.108 That means [*19]  the dispositive question, for summary-judgment purposes, is whether a rational juror could find that Lennox would have kept Mr. Griego as an employee if he did not have the five FMLA-protected absences on his attendance record.
A rational juror could find that Mr. Griego's five FMLA-protected absences "played a part" in Lennox's decision to terminate him.109 It is true that a surface-level review of Mr. Griego's attendance record indicates otherwise. That attendance record contains no occurrences for any medical-related absence that took place after Mr. Griego became FMLA eligible. But the surface-level review does not reveal the entire story. Mr. Johnson and Ms. Keffer "consolidated" all of Mr. Griego's medical-related absences into 2.0 occurrences. And while the 2.0 consolidated occurrences were facially attributed to two absences that took place months before Mr. Griego became FMLA eligible, Mr. Johnson and Ms. Keffer did not conduct an absence-by-absence determination and pick which particular absences should and should not count against Mr. Griego.
The most pro-plaintiff understanding of this consolidation is that Mr. Johnson and Ms. Keffer saw all ten medical-related [*20]  absences, totaling 9.5 occurrences, and decided to give Mr. Griego an across-the-board discount by lowering the medical-related occurrences to 2.0. So a rational juror could find that Mr. Griego's five FMLA-protected absences were a part of the 2.0 "consolidated" occurrences that remained on the attendance record. That means a rational juror could conclude that Mr. Griego's FMLA-protected absences were a part (albeit a heavily discounted part) of the 22.5 total occurrences that Mr. Johnson had before him when deciding to terminate Mr. Griego for excessive absences.110
But Mr. Griego's FMLA-protected absences playing a part in the termination decision isn't enough to get this case past summary judgment. Mr. Griego needs the FMLA-protected absences to have been determinative. Even without the remaining 2.0 medical-related occurrences, Mr. Griego's attendance record would have shown that he accrued 20.5 occurrences in a little over ten months. That is a staggering number, to say the least: An employee following Lennox's written attendance policy would not accrue that many occurrences over the course of four years. To be sure, the record is clear that Lennox's written policy was not strictly [*21]  enforced at the Stuttgart facility. But there is absolutely no basis for thinking that even the lenient Stuttgart facility would have retained an employee with 20.5 occurrences in less than a year. There is no evidence (aside from Mr. Griego's self-characterized "speculation") that other employees with that many absences were retained.111 In fact, the only evidence of any other specific termination-or-retention decisions is that, in 2017, Lennox fired Mr. Griego for accumulating (at least) 19.5 occurrences in a little over nine months.112
The record also shows that, even without any medical-related absences, Mr. Griego's attendance issues were becoming more pronounced in the time leading up to his suspension and termination. In the three weeks before he was suspended, Mr. Griego had three unexcused full-day absences and three late arrivals.113 One of those full-day absences and all three of the late arrivals happened within the five days before his suspension.114 And then, on the very day he was suspended, Mr. Griego added an additional late arrival into the mix.115 The only rational conclusion to be reached in this case is that Mr. Griego was absent or tardy with such frequency [*22]  that his (extremely lenient) employer ran out of patience.116
In short, a rational juror could only conclude that Lennox would have fired Mr. Griego whether his attendance record in October of 2019 contained no medical-related absences at all (i.e., 20.5 occurrences) or still contained the two "consolidated" medical-related absences (i.e., 22.5 occurrences). Lennox is entitled to summary judgment on Mr. Griego's wrongful-termination FMLA claims.117

2. Inaccurate Information and Negative Remarks
Mr. Griego's remaining two FMLA arguments are unavailing. Both arguments—that Lennox incorrectly told him that he was ineligible for FMLA leave after June 19, 2019, and that a supervisor made negative comments about his absences—are asserted as bases of entitlement claims.118 Assuming arguendo that either of these actions did deprive Mr. Griego of an FMLA benefit, summary judgment in favor of Lennox is still appropriate. That is because "[t]he FMLA 'provides no relief unless the employee has been prejudiced by the violation.'"119 So Mr. Griego must show that a rational juror could find, for example, that he was "denied compensation [*23]  or benefits," or that he was "deterred" from taking FMLA leave to which he was otherwise entitled.120 The only possible prejudices to Mr. Griego in this case would be either (1) he didn't take leave because he thought that he would be disciplined for the absences or (2) he did take leave but was then fired for being absent.
No rational juror could find that Mr. Griego was harmed by being given inaccurate information about his FMLA eligibility. There is no evidence that Mr. Griego canceled, rescheduled, or otherwise missed a doctor's appointment because he thought the absence would be used against him.121 (Indeed, Mr. Griego's case is premised, at least in significant part, on the fact that he went to his appointments with the thought that his absences were excused.) And, as discussed in the preceding subsection, no rational juror could find that Mr. Griego was terminated based on the relevant medical-related absences. So he wasn't prejudiced by the misinformation in that way either.
It is true that Mr. Griego contends that a supervisor made negative remarks about Mr. Griego's medical-related absences. Specifically, Mr. Griego says that Mr. Bell once threatened to fire Mr. Griego [*24]  if he missed work for a doctor's appointment.122 First, this particular instance seems to have occurred during Mr. Griego's first stint of employment and is therefore not relevant to the claims in this case.123 Second, even if this incident did occur during Mr. Griego's second stint of employment, it wouldn't get Mr. Griego past summary judgment. Mr. Griego concedes that he went to the very doctor's appointment that Mr. Bell threatened him over, and there's no evidence that this interaction with Mr. Bell (or any resulting occurrence on his attendance record) chilled Mr. Griego from going to future doctor's appointments.124 So Mr. Griego wasn't prejudiced by missing medical treatment. And, once again, Mr. Griego would have gotten fired even without consideration of any medical-related absences.

II. Americans with Disabilities Act
The ADA makes it unlawful for an employer to discriminate against a disabled employee.125 Sometimes, a disabled employee finds it necessary to approach his or her employer and say that, as things currently stand, the employee is unable to do his or her job; but if granted a "reasonable accommodation," the employee will be able to perform his or her job.126 When such a situation [*25]  occurs, and so long as the employee's disability can indeed be reasonably accommodated, the ADA obligates the employer to make such accommodations.127 If the employer rejects the request for an accommodation and later fires the employee because the employee is not adequately performing his or her job, then the employer has discriminated against the disabled employee.128
The ADA also makes it unlawful to retaliate "against any individual because such individual has opposed any act or practice made unlawful by" the ADA.129 Facially, this provision relates only to what are essentially whistleblower-retaliation claims, such as when an employer fires a person who "made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in" an investigation or proceeding against the employer.130 The Eighth Circuit has held, however, that this provision prohibits firing an employee who "ma[de] a goodfaith request for an accommodation . . . ."131 While very similar to the discrimination claim described in the preceding paragraph, there is an important difference: A discrimination claim focuses on the employer's refusal to make an accommodation, whereas a retaliation claim is based on the idea that the employer [*26]  punished the employee just for asking about an accommodation.
Mr. Griego brings both an ADA discrimination and an ADA retaliation claim. Both claims are premised on the argument that Mr. Griego's medical-related requests for time off (i.e., his submission of doctor's notes) were requests for Lennox to reasonably accommodate his physical and mental disabilities.132

A. Discrimination
ADA discrimination claims, including those premised on an employer's failure to accommodate, require the plaintiff to make out a prima facie case of disability discrimination.133 That means Mr. Griego must show that a rational juror could conclude that he "(1) has a disability within the meaning of the ADA, (2) is a qualified individual under the ADA, and (3) suffered an adverse employment action due to his disability."134 Mr. Griego is unable to carry his burden of establishing a prima facie case.
As to the disability prong, Lennox concedes (for purposes of summary judgment) that Mr. Griego is disabled within the meaning of the ADA.135 But that is as far as Mr. Griego gets. His case falters on the qualification prong of the prima facie test. The qualification prong requires Mr. Griego to show that [*27]  a rational juror could conclude that he "(1) possesses the skill, education, experience, and training the position requires, and (2) can perform the essential job functions, with or without a reasonable accommodation."136 Neither party seems concerned with Mr. Griego's skill, education, experience, or training. But there is significant disagreement about the essential-job-functions part of the qualifications prong.
Mr. Griego, by claiming that Lennox failed to accommodate him, is necessarily arguing that he would have been able to perform the essential functions of his job if Lennox had given him his requested accommodation of excused absences for medical appointments. Lennox contends that Mr. Griego cannot satisfy the qualification prong because regular, reliable attendance is an essential function of the job.137 Mr. Griego calls foul, arguing that his poor attendance record is Lennox's proffered nondiscriminatory reason for terminating him and, accordingly, he should not have to argue about his attendance record at the prima facie stage.138 But the Eighth Circuit has repeatedly considered an employee's poor attendance at the prima facie stage of ADA discrimination cases, notwithstanding that [*28]  poor attendance is the employer's stated reason for firing the employee.139 Indeed, the Eighth Circuit recently concluded that a plaintiff making arguments strikingly similar to those made by Mr. Griego failed to establish a prima facie case of discrimination. In Evans v. Cooperative Response Center, Inc., the plaintiff had requested additional FMLA leave as an accommodation to her disability.140 The Eighth Circuit concluded that the plaintiff had not made out a prima facie case of disability discrimination, specifically holding that "[i]f an accommodation would leave the employee unable to perform an essential job function—here, regular attendance—[the] accommodation claim fails."141
In the case at bar, Lennox's position (at least as the Court understands it) is actually less aggressive than the position approved of by the Eighth Circuit in Evans. Lennox is not saying that Mr. Griego's medical-related absences are what make Mr. Griego unable to perform the essential functions of the job. Instead, Lennox is saying that Mr. Griego was otherwise unable to perform the job (i.e., he was consistently absent or late for reasons entirely unrelated to his medical conditions) and that Mr. Griego's [*29]  requested accommodation would not in any way have changed that fact. That is, Lennox is arguing that even if Mr. Griego never missed work for medical-related absences, the 20.5 non-medical occurrences over ten months make it clear that Mr. Griego would still not have been able to attend work regularly and reliably. Lennox is correct. To put it in statutory terms: "[W]ith or without reasonable accommodation," a rational juror could only conclude (on this record) that Mr. Griego was never going to be able to "perform the essential functions of the employment position . . . ."142

B. Retaliation
Mr. Griego's ADA retaliation claim is out. To survive summary judgment, the record must allow a rational juror to conclude (1) Mr. Griego "engaged in statutorily protected activity," (2) Lennox "took an adverse action against" Mr. Griego, and (3) "there was a causal connection between the adverse action and the protected activity."143 In light of binding Eighth Circuit precedent, the Court concludes that Mr. Griego engaged in "statutorily protected activity" by submitting doctor's notes (which, in his view, was his method of requesting a reasonable accommodation).144 And there's no doubt that Lennox took [*30]  an adverse action against Mr. Griego by terminating him. But the record reveals absolutely no causal connection between the two. As the Court has already stated multiple times, a rational juror could not find that Mr. Griego's medical-related absences are what caused him to get fired. Given that conclusion, it would be an unimaginable stretch for a rational juror to find that Mr. Griego submitting doctor's notes is what spurred Lennox to fire him.
Mr. Griego had been submitting doctor's notes throughout both stints of employment. Yet, the adverse employment action didn't occur until Mr. Griego was about ten months into his second stint of employment. And this isn't a straw-that-broke-the-camel's-back situation, where Mr. Griego submitted one last doctor's note immediately before Mr. Johnson decided to fire Mr. Griego. Two weeks passed between Mr. Griego's final doctor's note and his last day on the job. The significant passage of time between the protected activity (with respect to Mr. Griego submitting doctor's notes, generally, and his final note, specifically) and the adverse action significantly undermines the idea that there was any causal connection between the two. And Mr. [*31]  Griego's attendance record during those two weeks doesn't help his case. He had one full-day, non-medical unexcused absence; he also had four non-medical, unexcused late arrivals in the five-day span leading up to his suspension.145 There's simply not sufficient evidence from which a rational juror could find that Lennox retaliated against Mr. Griego for requesting an accommodation.

CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated in this Order, Lennox's Motion for Summary Judgment is GRANTED. Judgment will be entered in favor of Lennox, and this case will be closed.
IT IS SO ORDERED this 28th day of March 2023.
/s/ Lee P. Rudofsky
LEE P. RUDOFSKY
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

JUDGMENT
Pursuant to the Order entered today, it is CONSIDERED, ORDERED, and ADJUDGED that Judgment is entered in favor of Defendant.
IT IS SO ADJUDGED this 28th day of March 2023.
/s/ Lee P. Rudofsky
LEE P. RUDOFSKY
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

