Harris v. PSP Indus.
United States District Court for the Western District of Texas, San Antonio Division
March 24, 2009, Decided; March 24, 2009, Filed
CIVIL ACTION NO. SA-07-CA-421-FB

Reporter
2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 142471 *; 2009 WL 10702512
DONALD E. HARRIS, Plaintiff, VS. PSP INDUSTRIES, INC., Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Donald E. Harris, Plaintiff: Jeffrey R. Davis, LEAD ATTORNEY, Davis Law Firm, San Antonio, TX USA; R. Chris Pittard, LEAD ATTORNEY, PITTARD LAW FIRM, San Antonio, TX USA.
For Psp Industries, Inc., Defendant: Daniel S. Lovett, LEAD ATTORNEY, Fairfax Station, VA USA; Douglas E. Pennebaker, LEAD ATTORNEY, Pennebaker Law Firm, San Antonio, TX USA; Jeff Weintraub, LEAD ATTORNEY, Weintraub, Stock & Grisham, PC, Memphis, TN USA.
Judges: FRED BIERY, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: FRED BIERY
Opinion



ORDER CONCERNING DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
Before the Court are Defendant's Opposed Motion for Summary Judgment (docket #28); Plaintiff's Response to Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment (docket #29), and Defendant's Reply to Plaintiff's Response to Defendant's Opposed Motion for Summary Judgment (docket #30). In the original complaint, plaintiff claims the defendant engaged in unlawful employment practices in terminating his employment, in violation of Section 102(a) of Title I of the American with Disabilities Act (ADA), 42 U.S. C. §12112(a), because plaintiff was a qualified individual with a perceived disability as defined by the ADA. Plaintiff asserts he was "regarded as disabled" by the defendant, was denied a reasonable accommodation, [*2]  and was wrongfully terminated. He also claims the defendant "did not go through the interactive process required for a reasonable accommodation request as required under the ADA, and terminated [him] for requesting such an accommodation." Defendant contends the plaintiff is not disabled nor did the defendant regard him as disabled. The defendant maintains the plaintiff cannot show he suffered from a condition that constitutes a substantial impairment of any major life activity, he cannot show PSP regarded him as having a substantial impairment of any major life activity, and the restrictions imposed by plaintiff's doctor rendered plaintiff unable to perform the essential functions of his job with or without a reasonable accommodation.

Factual Background
Defendant PSP Industries, Inc. (PSP) hired the plaintiff, Donald E. Harris, on December 15, 2006, as a helper in its shipping and receiving department. Plaintiff's job required him to work both indoors and out doing various tasks such as: picking up and distributing water coolers; retrieving and filing blueprints; ordering, receiving and stocking parts; retrieving and distributing mail; driving the water truck around the yard to hold [*3]  down the blowing sand; building crates; helping forklift operators load materials; pouring concrete, jackhammering asphalt, and painting parking poles. Plaintiff could perform all of his job functions without any problem.
In July of 2006, plaintiff noticed a rash on his arms, hands, and the back of his neck. He also was losing weight, losing approximately 20 to 25 pounds from working in the heat. Plaintiff sought the opinion of Dr. P.A. Locke on August 22, 2006, regarding the rash on his skin. Dr. Locke discussed with the plaintiff the skin rash and plaintiff's weight loss. Plaintiff attributed the weight loss to working outdoors during the hot weather and not eating properly. Plaintiff's long work hours interrupted his regular eating schedule. Dr. Locke advised plaintiff to stay home from work from August 22 through August 27. Plaintiff reported Dr. Locke told him the rash was the beginning stages of skin cancer or a pre-cancerous rash and recommended plaintiff see a dermatologist. Dr. Locke also advised plaintiff to use sunscreen and stay out of the sun as much as possible.
Plaintiff made a return visit to Dr. Locke on August 25, 2006. During that visit, Dr. Locke wrote plaintiff a [*4]  note which provided, "[the] above patient has medical condition that would benefit from reduced hours of work and sun exposure. Patient should not exceed 40 hours per week and not more than three hours of sun exposure per day." Plaintiff stated the work hour restriction was attributable to his weight loss due to exhaustion.1 Following his visits with Dr. Locke, plaintiff began wearing long sleeves, using SF-45 sunblock, and limiting his sun exposure. The skin rash disappeared after a couple of weeks and at the time of plaintiff's deposition in this case, had not returned.
On August 28, 2006, plaintiff returned to work at approximately 6 a.m. and gave Dr. Locke's note to Larry Koether, his supervisor, who in turn gave it to the Human Resources Director, Jana Lizama. At approximately 8:30 a.m., plaintiff met with Ms. Lizama, and later Mr. Koether joined the meeting. Plaintiff secretly taped the meeting and later transcribed the tape himself.2 At the meeting, Ms. Lizama, on behalf of the defendant, advised the plaintiff the defendant could not accommodate his request for a 40 hour work week because all employees were required to work 44 to 56 hour work weeks. Because the plaintiff could no longer fulfill the hours requirement for his job, he was terminated on August 28, 2006.

Summary [*6]  Judgment Standard
A motion for summary judgment should be granted when the "pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). A dispute concerning a material fact is considered "genuine" if the evidence "is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby. Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). It is not the Court's function to "weigh the evidence and determine the truth of the matter but to determine whether there is a genuine issue for trial." Id. at 249. The Court must determine if there are "any genuine factual issues that properly can be resolved only by a finder of fact because they may reasonably be resolved in favor of either party." Id. Of course, in ruling on a motion for summary judgment, all inferences drawn from the factual record are viewed in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio, 475 U.S. 574, 587, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986).
If the party moving for summary judgment carries its burden of producing evidence which tends to show there is "no genuine issue of material fact, the nonmovant must then direct the court's attention to evidence [*7]  in the record sufficient to establish the existence of a genuine issue of material fact for trial." Eason v. Thaler, 73 F.3d 1322, 1325 (5th Cir. 1996). The nonmoving party may not rely upon mere conclusory allegations to defeat a motion because allegations of that type are not competent summary judgment evidence and are insufficient to defeat a proper motion. Id. In fact, if the "nonmoving party rests merely upon conclusory allegations, improbable inferences, and unsupported speculation," a motion for summary judgment may be granted even in cases "where elusive concepts such as motive or intent are at issue." Forsyth v. Barr, 19 F.3d 1527, 1533 (5th Cir.), cert. denied. 513 U.S. 871, 115 S. Ct. 195, 130 L. Ed. 2d 127 (1994).
The party opposing the motion also may not rest on the allegations contained in the pleadings but "must set forth and support by summary judgment evidence specific facts showing the existence of a genuine issue for trial." Ragas v. Tennessee Gas Pipeline Co., 136 F.3d 455, 458 (5th Cir. 1998). In meeting this requirement, the party must "identify specific evidence in the record" and "articulate the precise manner in which that evidence supports his or her claim." Id. Rule 56 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure does not impose upon this Court the "duty to sift through the record in search of evidence to support a party's opposition to summary judgment." Id. (quoting Skotak v. Tenneco Resins, Inc., 953 F.2d 909. 915-16 & n.7 (5th Cir.), cert. denied. 506 U.S. 832, 113 S. Ct. 98, 121 L. Ed. 2d 59 (1992)). A summary judgment will only be precluded [*8]  by disputed facts which are material, i.e. "might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby. Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). Factual disputes which are irrelevant or unnecessary to the issue will not preclude summary judgment. Id.

Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment
In its motion for summary judgment, defendant contends plaintiff has failed to produce sufficient facts to establish a case of discrimination under the ADA on the basis of being considered a qualified individual with a disability. Plaintiff in his complaint and during his deposition conceded he was not disabled, and his testimony establishes the restrictions he submitted to management are insufficient to constitute a substantial impairment of a major life activity because his ability to work is not substantially impaired. Plaintiff has not pointed to any other major life activity that was impaired by his condition, and plaintiff has not produced facts showing the defendant regarded his restrictions as a substantial limitation to the major life activity of working. Defendant also maintains that even if the plaintiff could establish he was regarded as disabled, he still is not a qualified individual with a disability because he cannot [*9]  produce sufficient facts to show he could perform the essential functions of his job with or without a reasonable accommodation.
In response to defendant's motion, plaintiff claims he was a qualified individual with a disability under the ADA under the "regarded as" prong. Plaintiff states he was able to perform all of the essential functions of his job and his only restriction was the number of hours he could work and the number of hours he could be exposed to the sun. Plaintiff argues his job duties do not state an "essential" function of his job is to work a 48-56 hour work week but defendant artificially created this essential function. The defendant regarded him as disabled because they believed his medical condition was worse than it was and that it substantially impaired his ability to perform the major life activity of working. Not only did the defendant perceive him to be unable to perform his job, the defendant also perceived the plaintiff as unable to do any job within the company. Plaintiff also contends he requested a reasonable accommodation, i.e. to reduce his work hours to 40 and to limit his sun exposure hours to 3 a day. Plaintiff specifically invoked the ADA in his [*10]  request for a reasonable accommodation but the defendant refused to consider any accommodation. The direct evidence shows plaintiff requested an accommodation and the defendant regarded him as unable to perform a broad range of jobs and that his condition was permanent.
In reply to plaintiff's response, the defendant again reminds the Court that plaintiff cannot establish he was a "Qualified Individual with a Disability" as defined by the ADA and construed by caselaw. Without any legal or factual foundation, plaintiff asserts the defendant regarded him as disabled, but the undisputed facts show the only notice the defendant had was the restrictions placed on the plaintiff by his physician from working in excess of 40 hours per week. This restriction in and of itself is insufficient as a matter of law to establish plaintiff was regarded as unable to perform the broad range of tasks for which he was otherwise qualified to perform.
Defendant also asserts there are no facts which show either Jana Lizama or Larry Koether ever considered the plaintiff as incapable of performing his job duties until the hours limitation was imposed by plaintiff's doctor. This, defendant argues, is insufficient [*11]  as a matter of law to constitute a substantial limitation of a major life activity. Despite plaintiff's attempt to characterize defendant's work hours requirement as "artificially created," defendant maintains the plaintiff has failed to produce any facts to support this claim and the undisputed facts show to the contrary. Not only did Ms. Lizama tell the plaintiff his hours could not be reduced because other employees were dependent upon him to accomplish their tasks, defendant produced its time and attendance records during discovery to show none of the existing hourly employees consistently worked only a 40-hour-per-week schedule. Not only has plaintiff failed to show he was regarded as disabled, plaintiff also cannot meet his burden to show he was a qualified individual with a disability.
Even if plaintiff could prove his regarded as disabled claim, he cannot show the defendant failed to accommodate his requests under the ADA. An employer is not required to created a new "light duty" position or to accommodate the plaintiff by requiring other employees to work harder or longer. Defendant distinguishes the case of Liner v. Hospital Serv. Dist., 230 F. App'x 361 (5th Cir. 2007), cited by the plaintiff in support of requiring a 40-hour per week [*12]  position, by explaining the defendant in Liner had 40 hour per week positions available whereas the defendant here has no jobs, clerical or otherwise, that are 40 hour-per-week positions.

Analysis
In order for plaintiff to establish a prima facie discrimination claim under the ADA, he must show he "was disabled, was qualified for the job, and was the subject of an adverse employment action because of [his] disability." Dupre v. Charter Behavioral Health Sys., 242 F.3d 610, 613 (5th Cir. 2001). A disability under the ADA may be shown in one of three ways: "(A) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such individual; (B) a record of such impairment; or (C) being regarded as having such an impairment." Id. Plaintiff asserts he was a qualified individual with a disability under the ADA under the "regarded as" prong. In order to fit into the "regarded as disabled" category, plaintiff must "have a physical or mental impairment that does not substantially limit major life activities, but be treated as such by an employer." Id. at 616. Plaintiff states Ms. Lizama and Mr. Koether regarded him as being disabled because they believed his medical condition was worse than it was and that it substantially impaired his [*13]  ability to perform the major life activity of working.
A prima facie showing of being "regarded as" disabled requires sufficient proof "for a reasonable trier of fact to conclude that the employer perceived [the plaintiff], however, erroneously, as having an impairment that substantially limited one or more of his major life activities." Eber v. Harris County Hosp. Dist., 130 F. Supp. 2d 847, 862 (S.D. Tex. 2001). The court also explained:
"For an employer to regard an impairment as substantially limiting work, the employer must regard an individual as significantly restricted in his ability to perform a class or broad range of jobs." "'[A]n employer does not necessarily regard an employee as having a substantially limiting impairment simply because it believes [he] is incapable of performing a particular job. . . .'" Furthermore, if the employer's belief corresponds to the employees' or his physician's description of his limitations, the employer cannot be viewed as improperly regarding him as disabled.
Id. at 862-63 (citations omitted). Plaintiff states he presented the doctor's note containing a 40 hour work week restriction along with a 3 hour sun exposure limit to Ms. Lizama and Mr. Koether and thereafter they regarded him as "significantly restricted in his ability [*14]  to not only perform his job, but any job within the company." Plaintiff's Response to Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment. docket #29 at page 10 (emphasis in original). This, plaintiff contends, is "the very definition of "regarded as " disabled and as a result, Plaintiff was a qualified individual under the ADA." Id.
The Fifth Circuit, however, quoting in part from the Eber decision, has explained that the receipt of a doctor's note would not support a "regarded as" claim:
Further, SWBT cannot be considered to have regarded Miller as being disabled simply because of its receipt of the note from Miller's physician. Significantly, Miller forgets that the standard for regarded disability hinges on the mistaken belief of impairment. "[I]f the employer's belief [about the employee's condition] corresponds to the employee's or his physician's description of his limitations, the employer cannot be viewed as improperly regarding him as disabled." Even assuming arguendo that this evidence satisfactorily raises the issue of SWBT's belief of his impairment, Miller's introduction of the doctor's note is ultimately counterproductive to his cause because it suggests that SWBT was correct, i.e., [*15]  not mistaken, to assume some sort of impairment.
Miller v. Southwestern Bell, 51 Fed. Appx. 928, 2002 WL 31415083 at *5 (5th Cir. 2002). Likewise based on the doctor's note in this case, the only belief the defendant formed was that the plaintiff could no longer work overtime.3 The plaintiff contends this restriction is not an essential function of his job, and the defendant perceived his medical condition to be worse than it was and substantially impaired his ability to perform the major life activity of working. Defendant contends plaintiff was not substantially limited in his ability to work because courts have uniformly held the inability to work overtime is not a substantial limitation on the ability to work. In addition, the plaintiff cannot establish that his inability to work overtime precluded him from performing a broad range of jobs. The Court agrees.
As set forth in Cotter v. Ajilon Servs., Inc., 287 F.3d 593, 598-99 (6th Cir. 2002), the substantial limit on working means:
significantly restricted in the ability to perform either a class of jobs or a broad range of jobs in various classes as compared to the average person having comparable training, skills and abilities. The inability to perform a single, particular job does not constitute a substantial limitation in the major life activity of working.
The Court below also found [*16]  that the physician's restrictions on working overtime did not create a disability under the ADA. We have held that an inability to work overtime is not a substantial limitation on the ability to work.
(Citations omitted.) Relying on a First Circuit opinion as persuasive authority, the court in Herman v. Kvaerner, 461 F. Supp. 2d 332, 338 (E.D. Pa. 2006), also noted the inability to work overtime did not substantially limit a major life activity:
Herman contends that the defendants knew of his diabetic condition and fired him because they perceived him as "precluded [] from a wide range of jobs because of [his] professed inability tow work beyond 3:30 p.m. However, Kvaerner cites persuasive authority for the proposition that the inability to work overtime is, on its own, insufficient to constitute a "substantial limitation" on a major life activity. The Tardie [v. Rehabilitation Hosp., 168 F.3d 538, 542 (1st Cir. 1999)] Court reasoned that the inability to work overtime is not substantially limiting, because a number of jobs do not require more than a 40-hour work week. Accordingly, even if Kvaerner (mis)perceived Herman as unable to work overtime, this would not constitute Kvaerner "regarding" Herman as disabled, i.e. substantially limited in a major life activity. Fundamentally, Herman fails to grasp [*17]  that an adverse action by Kvaerner based on the company's erroneous perception that Herman was unable to work longer hours or after 3:30 p.m. is not actionable because the limitations his employer allegedly perceived, i.e., limitations on one's ability to work late or work extra hours, do not substantially limit any major life activity. An employer may legitimately prefer an employee who can work longer hours over one who cannot.
(Emphasis in original.) Although the opinion is not published, the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals seems to concur in this analysis by stating, "When evaluating the traditional forty-hour work week, courts have determined that the inability to work overtime is not a substantial limitation on the ability to work under the ADA." Miller v. Southwestern Bell, 51 Fed. Appx. 928, 2002 WL 31415083 at *5 (5th Cir. 2002) (citing Cotter v. Ajilon Servs., Inc., 287 F.3d 593, 598-99 (6th Cir. 2002)). Accordingly, the Court agrees the plaintiff has not met his burden to show he was a "regarded as disabled" in his ability to work.
Defendant contends that even if plaintiff could established he was "regarded as" disabled, his claims should still be dismissed because he is not a qualified individual with a disability because he could not perform the essential functions of his job with or without a reasonable accommodation. A "qualified [*18]  individual with a disability" is defined under the ADA as "an individual with a disability who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment positions that such individual holds or desires." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). Defendant maintains an essential function of plaintiff s position, as well as every other position in the facility, is the overtime requirement. Plaintiff argues his job duties did not state an essential function of his job was to work a 48-56 hour work week, and this requirement was artificially created by defendant as "demonstrated by the altered Employee Handbook." Plaintiff's Response to Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment, docket #29 at page 9.
In support of his "altered" handbook theory plaintiff relies on his deposition testimony, a copy of the Employee Handbook, and the deposition testimony of Jana Lizama. Plaintiff testified that the general work hours were Monday through Thursday 6:30 a.m. through 4 p.m., Friday 6:30 a.m. through 3 p.m. and then some Saturdays. This appears to be corroborated by a copy of the Employee Handbook itself with these hours handwritten in the Employment, Compensation and Salary Administration page under [*19]  the heading Work Hours on page 5 as well as the deposition testimony of Ms. Lizama who testified as follows:
Q: Did you have any input into this employee handbook?
A: The only input that I had was the changes that I'd make on an ongoing basis to the work hours.
Q: Okay. So in looking —
A: The basic handbook was developed in 2000.
Q: Okay. So this was actually issued prior to your arrival at PSP?
A: Yes.
Q: In looking at Page 5, the handwritten work hours, that appear on that page, is that your handwriting?
A: Yes, it is.
Q: And when was this workweek schedule implemented?
A: I don't recall.
Q: Do you recall if it was sometime before December of 2005?
A: I believe so, but I do not recall a specific date.
In addition, defendant produced the time records of its employees which additionally corroborates its assertion that all of its employees worked overtime. Therefore, the plaintiff has failed to support his conclusory assertion the overtime was not an essential function of his job.
As such, the inability to meet such a requirement renders plaintiff unqualified for ADA protection. Tjernagel v. Gates Corp., 533 F.3d 666, 673 (8th Cir. 2008). In Tjernagel, the plaintiff's work restrictions, based upon her doctor's report, prohibited overtime. The court provided [*20]  the following analysis:
Tjernagel's job description states, "[o]vertime is required to meet production demands and can include Saturdays and Sundays when necessary." It is undisputed that, in 2005, Boone employees worked twenty-two Saturdays. An employer's mandatory overtime requirement has been recognized as an essential job function. When Tjernagel's restriction barred overtime, she was unable to perform an essential requirement of her job, being in attendance at work when needed, thereby rendering her unqualified for ADA protection.
Not only did Tjernagel's job require overtime, but so did all other production positions at Gates, a fact which is not disputed by Tjernagel. Tjernagel could not be reasonably accommodated by moving her to a different production position without an overtime requirement because no such production positions existed. Tjernagel, "must show that a reasonable accommodation was available," but Tjernagel fails to show a reasonable accommodation existed because all of Gate's production jobs require overtime. Thus, Tjernagel's inability to work overtime, a requirement of all of Gate's production positions, renders Tjernagel unqualified not only for her production [*21]  job, but also for all other production jobs.
Id. at 673 (citations omitted). Similarly, in Rios v. Indiana Bayer Corp., 965 F. Supp. 919, 923-24 (S.D. Tex. 1997), the court found the plaintiff was not qualified for a production technician position because one of his medical restrictions barred him from working overtime. The technician position there required a twelve-hour shift and "overtime one day a week." Id. at 924. The court explained:
Defendant did not base its denial of the position on myths or stereotypes, as Plaintiff claims, but rather relied on the medical restrictions imposed by Plaintiff's own doctor. The Court has no choice but to find that this reliance was proper and that because of these medical restrictions, Plaintiff could not perform the essential functions of the production technician position.
Id. After concluding plaintiff could not perform the essential functions of his job, the court next discussed whether a reasonable accommodation would allow plaintiff to perform the essential functions. In concluding to the contrary, the court noted, "the ADA does not require the elimination or reallocation of essential functions and neither will this Court." Id.; see Amos v. Wheelabrator Coal Servs., Inc., 47 F. Supp. 2d 798, 803 (N.D. Tex. 1998) ("ADA does not require an employer to accommodate a disabled employee by creating a new job position, [*22]  promoting an individual with a disability ... or assigning existing employees or hiring new employees to perform abandoned essential functions of a position"; an employer is "not required by the ADA to assign less desirable aspects of a job or less desirable schedules or work times to other employees or to hire new employees to perform abandoned functions"). Accordingly, the Court finds that even if plaintiff was "regarded as" disabled, he cannot meet his burden to show he was a qualified individual with a disability under the ADA.
Based on the foregoing discussion, the record as presented, and the arguments and authorities presented by the defendant in its motion and reply, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that Defendant's Opposed Motion for Summary Judgment (docket #28) is GRANTED and this case is DISMISSED. Motions pending, if any, are also DISMISSED.
It is so ORDERED.
SIGNED this 24th day of March, 2009.
/s/ Fred Biery
FRED BIERY
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

JUDGMENT
On this date came on to be considered the Judgment to be entered in the above-styled and numbered cause.
Consistent with the Order Concerning Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment filed in this cause on this same date,
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, [*23]  ADJUDGED and DECREED that the Defendant's Opposed Motion for Summary Judgment (docket #28) is GRANTED, and this case is DISMISSED. Motions pending, if any, are also DISMISSED.
It is so ORDERED.
SIGNED this 24th day of March, 2009.
/s/ Fred Biery
FRED BIERY
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

