Hernandez v. Starbucks Coffee Co.
United States District Court for the Central District of California
August 27, 2018, Decided; August 27, 2018, Filed
CV 17-6927 DSF (GJSx)

Reporter
2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 232034 *
ERICA HERNANDEZ, Plaintiff, v. STARBUCKS COFFEE COMPANY, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Erica Hernandez, an Individual, Plaintiff: Jason C Ming, Sa'id Vakili, Vakili and Leus LLP, Los Angeles, CA; Robert Stanford Brown, Robert Stanford Brown APC, Los Angeles, CA.
For Starbucks Coffee Company, a Washington Corporation, Defendant: Julie M Capell, LEAD ATTORNEY, Davis Wright Tremaine LLP, Los Angeles, CA; Richard P Lopez, Starbucks Coffee Company, Fountain Valley, CA.
For Starbucks Corporation, Erroneously Sued As Starbucks Coffee Company, Defendant: Danielle R Gerson, Davis Wright Tremaine LLP, Los Angeles, CA; Richard P Lopez, Starbucks Coffee Company, Fountain Valley, CA; Julie M Capell, LEAD ATTORNEY, Davis Wright Tremaine LLP, Los Angeles, CA.
Judges: Dale S. Fischer, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Dale S. Fischer
Opinion


Order GRANTING IN PART and DENYING IN PART Motion for Summary Judgment (Dkt. 22)
Defendant Starbucks Coffee Company has moved for summary judgment on all of Plaintiff Erica Hernandez's claims. The Court deems this matter appropriate for decision without oral argument. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 78; Local Rule 7-15.
"A party may move for summary judgment, identifying each claim or defense — or the part of each claim or defense — on which summary judgment is sought. The court shall grant summary judgment if the [*2]  movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). "This burden is not a light one." In re Oracle Corp. Sec. Litig., 627 F.3d 376, 387 (9th Cir. 2010). But the moving party need not disprove the opposing party's case. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). Rather, if the moving party satisfies this burden, the party opposing the motion must set forth specific facts, through affidavits or admissible discovery materials, showing that there exists a genuine issue for trial. Id. at 323-24; Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(1). A non-moving party who bears the burden of proof at trial as to an element essential to her case must make a showing sufficient to establish a genuine dispute of fact with respect to the existence of that element of the case or be subject to summary judgment. See Celotex Corp., 477 U.S. at 322.
The "mere existence of some alleged factual dispute between the parties will not defeat an otherwise properly supported motion for summary judgment; the requirement is that there be no genuine issue of material fact." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 247-48, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). An issue of fact is a genuine issue if it reasonably can be resolved in favor of either party. Id. at 250-51.
"[A] district court is not entitled to weigh the evidence and resolve disputed underlying factual issues." Chevron Corp. v. Pennzoil Co., 974 F.2d 1156, 1161 (9th Cir. 1992). Rather, "the inferences to be drawn from the underlying [*3]  facts must be viewed in the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion." Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co., Ltd. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 587-88, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986) (internal quotation marks and ellipsis omitted).
Plaintiff concedes that Defendant is entitled to summary judgment on punitive damages and the CFRA retaliation claim. The motion fails in all other respects.
The Court rejects Defendant's attempt in its reply to place a burden on Plaintiff to demonstrate her prima facie discrimination case where Defendant did not make the lack of a prima facie case part of its motion. While it is Plaintiff's ultimate burden to establish a prima facie case, it is not a non-moving party's burden to counter every argument that the moving party could have raised, but did not. Defendant did not raise any issues about the prima facie case in its moving papers and Plaintiff was not required to rebut a nonexistent argument.
There are many disputed issues of material fact on the discrimination, failure to accommodate, failure to engage in the interactive process, and unlawful termination claims and even more dispute as to what inferences should be drawn from the facts.
As for discrimination and unlawful termination, Plaintiff has provided significant circumstantial evidence that [*4]  Defendant's stated reason for termination was pretextual. Defendant claims that Plaintiff was terminated for her mishandling of a store location she oversaw in Glendale. While Plaintiff does not dispute that her management of the store in question was flawed, Plaintiff presented evidence that (1) she had an exemplary employment record prior to firing; (2) she was initially told that her mistakes did not warrant firing; (3) her firing was shortly after a request for accommodation; (4) she was fired, in large part, for failing to visit the store within six work days after being told that her failure to visit was a problem, but Plaintiff was away from work due to illness1 for two days of that time; and (5) Plaintiff's supervisor denied that Plaintiff had made a request for accommodation when Plaintiff raised her need for accommodation during the investigation that led to Plaintiff's termination. These alleged facts — and certainly inferences that can be drawn in favor of Plaintiff from these facts — lead to the conclusion that summary judgment must be denied.
The failure to accommodate and failure to engage in the interactive process claims survive summary judgment for similar reasons. [*5]  Plaintiff has a back-related disability that is aggravated by long periods in a car. Because of this, in early 2016, Plaintiff requested that her supervisor realign or reduce the number of stores Plaintiff supervised in order to reduce the amount of driving Plaintiff was required to do. There is no dispute that Defendant did not provide this accommodation. There is also apparently no dispute that Plaintiff's supervisor told Plaintiff to attempt to work out a store trading plan with her fellow District Managers, even though none of them had the power, necessary information, or incentive to reorganize the districts. A jury could reasonably conclude that this response was an insufficient attempt to accommodate and a failure to engage in the interactive process. Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, she presented her need for an accommodation and was asked to work it out for herself rather than being provided with an accommodation or even a proposal for an accommodation consistent with an interactive process. And viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, it can be disputed whether Plaintiff or Defendant abandoned the interactive process. It [*6]  is undisputed that Plaintiff did not return to her supervisor after receiving the response that she should work with the other District Managers on a solution, but it also was not clearly unreasonable for Plaintiff to conclude that (1) that suggestion was not even a valid start to the interactive process and/or (2) Plaintiff's supervisor's response — sending Plaintiff to work out her own accommodation in a way that was likely to fail — indicated a lack of interest in providing the kind of accommodation Plaintiff was seeking.
The motion for summary judgment is GRANTED with respect to punitive damages and the CFRA retaliation claim. The motion is DENIED in all other respects.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
Date: 8/27/18
/s/ Dale S. Fischer
Dale S. Fischer
United States District Judge


End of Document

