Herrera v. Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co.
United States District Court for the Central District of California
June 9, 2017, Decided
LA CV15-09023 JAK (JEMx)

Reporter
2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 236097 *; 2017 WL 11628157
Salvador Herrera v. Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company, et al.
Prior History: Herrera v. Nationwide Mut. Ins., 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 236095 (C.D. Cal., June 9, 2017)
Counsel:  [*1] Attorneys for Plaintiffs: Not Present.
Attorneys for Defendants: Not Present.
Judges: JOHN A. KRONSTADT, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: JOHN A. KRONSTADT
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES — GENERAL

Proceedings: DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT OR, IN THE ALTERNATIVE, PARTIAL SUMMARY JUDGMENT (DKT. 35).

I. Introduction
On August 18, 2015, Salvador Herrera ("Plaintiff") brought this action against his former employer, Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company ("Defendant"). Complaint, Dkt. 2-2 at 10. The Complaint also named Pamela Lodge ("Lodge") as a defendant. Id. She was later dismissed without prejudice. Dkt. 17. The Complaint advances the following causes of action: (1) Wrongful Termination in Violation of Public Policy; (2) Disability Discrimination; (3) Failure to Provide Reasonable Accommodations; (4) Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process; (5) Harassment Based on Disability; (6) Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress ("IIED"); (7) Failure to Prevent Harassment Based on Disability; and (8) Discrimination Based on Age.
On July 25, 2016, Defendant filed a motion for summary judgment ("Motion" (Dkt. 35)). Defendant argues that Plaintiff has failed to establish a genuine issue of fact as to whether any [*2]  adverse employment actions taken were the result of his age or his alleged disability. On October 31, 2016, Plaintiff filed an opposition ("Opposition" (Dkt. 58)). On November 7, 2016, Defendant replied ("Reply" (Dkt. 59)).
A hearing on the Motion was held on November 14, 2016. Dkt. 61. At the hearing, Plaintiff was granted leave to depose Lindsay Knudson and Scott Carmichael pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(d). Id. The parties subsequently submitted a joint report setting forth the schedule for these depositions. Dkt. 62. Thereafter, an Order issued continuing certain dates to allow time for the depositions and supplemental briefing on the Motion. Dkt. 63. It also provided that, upon the submission of the supplemental briefing, the Motion would be taken under submission. Id. Plaintiff submitted his supplemental brief in opposition to the Motion on December 12, 2016 (Dkt. 65). Defendant responded on December 19, 2016. Dkt. 67.
For the reasons stated in this Order, the Motion is GRANTED.

II. Factual Background

A. Events Preceding Termination
Defendant provides insurance and financial services. Defendant hired plaintiff on January 16, 2013 as a "Property Claims Specialist II." Defendant's Statement of Uncontroverted [*3]  Facts ("SUF") 1, Dkt. 35-2. In that position, he worked as a field insurance adjuster. Id. Plaintiff's primary duties included the investigation and evaluation of property damage claims made by Defendant's insureds. SUF 3. Plaintiff also was responsible to try to settle such claims with the insureds by negotiating agreements with them. Id. Due to the nature of his responsibilities, Plaintiff worked out of his home; his managers did the same. As a result, Plaintiff did not have in-person interactions with his managers on a daily basis. Instead, most of their interactions were by e-mail or telephone. SUF 7.
For the first six months of his employment, Plaintiff was supervised by Field Claims Manager Valerie Peterson ("Peterson"). SUF 8. Plaintiff asserts that he had a good working relationship with Peterson, and she generally approved his claim handling recommendations and requests without making substantial corrections. Dkt. 55 at 9. In August 2013, Plaintiff received his first employee evaluation by Peterson. Her review was generally positive, and included ratings of "good," as well as encouraging comments. Plaintiff's Statement of Additional Material Facts ("AMF") 81, Dkt. 56.
In October [*4]  2016, Lodge, who was a Field Claims Manager, became Plaintiff's new direct supervisor. SUF 9. In this position, Lodge was responsible for reviewing and then either approving or rejecting Plaintiff's proposals as to the handling of claims by insureds. These proposals included proposed payments for claims or denials of them. Plaintiff's proposals were presented for review on Defendant's electronic claim processing system. AMF 84. Lodge declares that on the first day that she supervised Plaintiff, she reviewed some of the claims files he had prepared, and determined that they were incomplete. Lodge Decl., Dkt. 35-3 ¶ 5. Thereafter, Lodge advised Plaintiff she would not approve approximately 14 requests for the payment of claims that Plaintiff had made. SUF 11. The concerns Lodge had about Plaintiff's submissions were to be addressed by additional investigations or amendments to Plaintiff's work product. SUF 14.
On October 14, 2013, Plaintiff sent an email to Lodge expressing concern over the length of time that it would take him to redo his work. AMF 88. Lodge responded, suggesting that a previously scheduled "getting to know you" meeting be moved from October 29, 2013 to October 21, 2013. [*5]  Her response added that Peterson would also attend the meeting. AMF 90. Plaintiff understood that this meeting was to be an informal lunch so that he and Lodge could become better acquainted. AMF 91.
The lunch on October 21 proceeded as planned. During the lunch, Lodge read a long list of criticisms and concerns about Plaintiff and his work. AMF 92. Plaintiff states that he felt "ambushed" by this presentation. SUF 20-21. About 80 minutes after the lunch started, Plaintiff asked to end it because he was not feeling well. SUF 23. The meeting then ended. Id. Plaintiff states that he was uncomfortable with the "tone of the meeting," and left concerned about his job. SUF 24. Plaintiff also inferred that Lodge and Peterson were not interested in his responses to the criticisms of his performance. Id.
After the meeting, Plaintiff alleges that he began developing symptoms of severe anxiety and emotional distress. AMF 95-97. The morning after the meeting, Plaintiff sent an email to Lodge. It stated that he was "rattled" by the meeting, had "high anxiety levels," and had been unable to sleep. AMF 98. Plaintiff also stated that he had contacted the Office of Associate Relations and "asked that [*6]  they assist us in resolving this problem." AMF 99. The email also stated that Plaintiff was unable to work because of his depression and anxiety. SUF 62.
On October 24, 2013, Plaintiff sent an email to Lodge and Peterson. It stated that Plaintiff was "looking into taking a leave of absence or some other avenue to address my health concerns." AMF 100. Plaintiff also informed Lodge and Peterson that he had 24 emails and many phone calls to return, did not know where to start, and could not focus on his job. SUF 65. In response, Peterson provided Plaintiff with the contact information for a Human Resources partner and a disability nurse. SUF 66, 67. Peterson also requested that Plaintiff provide to her and Lodge access information for his company email and voicemail accounts so that other employees could cover his assignments while Plaintiff was unable to work. AMF 101. Plaintiff did so. AMF 102. Later that same day, Plaintiff sent another email to Peterson. It stated that Plaintiff had been informed by a representative of Defendant that "my likely course of action will include a period of disability." AMF 103. On the same day, Peterson sent Plaintiff a responsive email. It chastised Plaintiff [*7]  for using the company email system while not working, and stated that he must be either fully on or off work, and that "there cannot be an 'in between.'" AMF 136.
On October 25, 2013, Plaintiff was examined by his physician. He was diagnosed with depression and anxiety, prescribed medications and advised not to return to work until November 4, 2013. AMF 104; SUF 71. Plaintiff relayed this information to Defendant by email. AMF 106-107. During a November 1, 2013 follow-up appointment, the physician extended Plaintiff's medical time off by a week, clearing him to return to work on November 11, 2016. AMF 108. Defendant approved Plaintiff's short-term disability leave from October 22, 2013 until November 11, 2013. SUF 72. Plaintiff resumed work on November 11, 2013. AMF 109. Upon his return, Plaintiff filed a worker's compensation claim for his work-related anxiety. SUF 73.
On November 12 and 13, 2016, Plaintiff joined other claim adjusters, as well as Peterson and Lodge, at an offsite training event. AMF 111. Plaintiff states that he had "cordial interactions" with Peterson and Lodge during this training. Dkt. 55 at 12. At the conclusion of the event on November 13, Peterson and Lodge invited [*8]  Plaintiff to lunch. AMF 113; SUF 26. At this lunch, Lodge repeated the same criticisms that had been read at the October 21 meeting. AMF 114. Peterson also explained to Plaintiff that his prior claim requests had been approved without scrutiny was because she had been managing 11 adjusters, who collectively made many submissions. SUF 30.
The following day, Lodge sent an email to Plaintiff that included a three page "Action Plan." It also provided written notice to Plaintiff of the list of criticisms and complaints that previously were communicated to him. AMF 115. The Action Plan raised specific issues about requests for approval or authority as to certain claims, poor customer service, and the need to obtain prior approval before working overtime or taking time off. Dkt. 35-4 at 93. Plaintiff declares that he was "stunned" by this list, in part because it stated that he had prematurely ended the October 21 meeting. AMF 116. Plaintiff believes that this statement was a mischaracterization of what had happened.
Following these communications, Plaintiff alleges that his emotional state became worse. AMF 117-118. Consequently he stopped reporting to work. Id. On November 18, 2013, Plaintiff [*9]  informed Lodge by text message that he was again unable to work and stated that he did not intend to return to work until their "situation [was] properly resolved and upper management is involved." AMF 118; SUF 34. On November 18, 2013, Plaintiff also spoke to a Human Resources representative about his situation and its effect on his health. AMF 120. That representative advised Plaintiff to tell manager Jeff Garretson ("Garretson") about the issues, thereby elevating the matter to the next managerial level. AMF 120. Later, the representative called Plaintiff again and said that, having communicated with Lodge, it was now advised that rather than elevate his complaint, Plaintiff should simply return to work. AMF 121. Plaintiff advised the representative that he was sick and could not do so. AMF 121.
On November 21, Lodge sent an email titled "Sal," which is Plaintiff's nickname, to Lindsay Knudson, who was her supervisor, Aco Petrovich, who was Defendant's HR representative and Jennifer Owens, who worked in Defendant's Office of Associate Relations. AMF 134. The email included as attachments emails from Plaintiff's account, which are discussed below. Id. Soon after Lodge sent the email, [*10]  she received a phone call from Knudson, who instructed Lodge to terminate Plaintiff immediately. AMF 135.
Plaintiff returned to his physician on November 22, 2013. He formally removed Plaintiff from work due to his mental stress and anxiety. AMF 124. Plaintiff also prepared and sent a detailed summary of his experiences, which was sent to Garretson. AMF 125. Within two hours of sending this summary to Garretson, Plaintiff was called by Scott Carmichael, to whom Garretson reported. Carmichael informed Plaintiff that he was being terminated, effective immediately. AMF 126. At the time, Plaintiff was not given an explanation for his termination.

B. Reasons for Termination
Defendant states that Plaintiff's termination was due to information identified in a review by Lodge of Plaintiff's past emails. Specifically, Defendant asserts that during Plaintiff's absence, Lodge had been monitoring Plaintiff's emails to make sure that Plaintiff's assigned claims were being properly serviced. SUF 36. Lodge testified at her deposition that on the evening of November 20, 2016, she had reviewed Plaintiff's email account with Defendant looking for "inappropriate relationships with contractors." AMF 123. [*11]  In this review, Lodge found several emails that she found "concerning." In one, Plaintiff wrote to a vendor and stated that Plaintiff had come very close to telling a customer to "F*ck off." SUF 38; Dkt. 35-4 at 107. In the same email, Plaintiff referred to the same customer as "b*tch." SUF 40; Dkt. 35-4 at 107.
A second email reflected communications with an "unapproved vendor whom [Plaintiff] had been specifically instructed not to utilize." SUF 41; Dkt. 35-4 at 111. Defendant states that its approved vendors, which provide repair and related services to insureds, are carefully screened, and vetted for quality control. Dkt. 35-1 at 16. Defendant states that Peterson had specifically instructed Plaintiff not to use any vendor who was not in Defendant's "Preferred Vendor Network" ("PRN"). SUF 47, 48.
A third email from Plaintiff suggested that he might have made a misrepresentation to an insured as to how Plaintiff intended to arrange for the payment of necessary repairs to her damaged property, for which she had made a claim. SUF 50. At his deposition, Plaintiff testified that he could not recall whether he had or had not misrepresented to this insured how insurance funds were going [*12]  to be paid to her. Dkt. 35-4 (Herrera Depo.).
In a fourth email, Plaintiff asked a vendor to look at its billing to see if it could reduce the total below a certain amount "so that there are no other eyes on the file." SUF 52. Defendant states that this email showed that Plaintiff improperly attempted to get billing by this vendor "pushed through." Dkt. 35-1 at 17.
Plaintiff was unable to provide any explanation for these emails during his deposition. However, in his declaration filed in opposition to the Motion, Plaintiff proffers some additional information regarding these emails. As to the use of profanity, Plaintiff declares that, although he "was letting off a bit of steam with the approved PRN contractor," he was never rude to the insured, and . . . did not use profane language in her presence." Plaintiff Decl., Dkt. 55-5 ¶ 22. Plaintiff also denies that he engaged in any improper behavior, and states that the allegedly objectionable statements were actually innocuous ones that were taken out of context. Id. ¶¶ 22-25.
Carmichael testified at his deposition that he did not recall the meeting or discussions regarding Plaintiff's termination, which are discussed above. Both Carmichael [*13]  and Knudson testified that Plaintiff had been terminated because he sent inappropriate emails to third parties, which violated Defendant's policies.1 Carmichael Depo., Dkt. 67-2 at 36-79; Knudson Decl., Dkt. 67-2 at 81-148. They stated that of the five emails, three of them would not have been a sufficient basis for the termination of Plaintiff. Supplemental AMF (Dkt. 66) 151-53. They also identified individual passages in each email that were in conflict with Defendant's policies, and testified that these statements, when viewed collectively, were sufficient grounds for Plaintiff's termination. Dkt. 67-2 at 36-79, 81-148.

III. Analysis

A. Legal Standards
A motion for summary judgment will be granted where "the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). The party seeking summary judgment bears the initial burden to show the basis for its motion and to identify those portions of the pleadings and discovery responses that demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact. [*14]  See Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). Where the moving party will have the burden of proof on an issue at trial, the movant must affirmatively demonstrate that no reasonable trier of fact could find other than for the moving party. Where the nonmoving party will have the burden of proof on an issue, however, the movant need only demonstrate that there is an absence of evidence to support the claims of the nonmoving party. See id. If the moving party meets its initial burden, the nonmoving party must set forth "specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 250, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986); Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e).
Only admissible evidence may be considered in connection with a motion for summary judgment. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e). In considering a motion for summary judgment, a court is not to make any credibility determinations or weigh conflicting evidence. Further, all inferences are to be drawn in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. See T.W. Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Pac. Elec. Contractors Ass'n, 809 F.2d 626, 630-31 (9th Cir. 1987). In the employment discrimination context, the Ninth Circuit has set "a high standard for the granting of summary judgment." Nidds v. Schindler Elevator Corp., 113 F. 3d 912, 921 (9th Cir. 1996) (internal citations omitted). However, conclusory, speculative testimony in declarations or other evidentiary materials is insufficient to raise genuine issues of fact and defeat summary judgment. See [*15]  Thornhill Publ'g Co., Inc. v. GTE Corp., 594 F.2d 730, 738 (9th Cir. 1979).

B. Analysis
1. First Cause of Action: Wrongful Termination in Violation of Public Policy
a) Legal Standards
Under California law, absent a contrary agreement, employment is at will. Cal. Lab. Code § 2922. "California courts, however, have carved out a specific exception to this general rule: an employer will be liable if it terminates an employee in violation of public policy." Xin Liu v. Amway Corp., 347 F.3d 1125, 1137 (9th Cir. 2003). To support a claim for wrongful termination, the policy must: (i) be supported by either the constitution or statute; (ii) "inure[] to the benefit of the public" rather than serving merely the interests of the individual; (iii) have been established at the time of the discharge; and (iv) be "fundamental" and "substantial." Id. (citing Stevenson v. Super. Ct., 16 Cal.4th 880, 889-90, 66 Cal. Rptr. 2d 888, 941 P.2d 1157 (1997)) (internal quotations omitted). California courts have recognized that a violation of the policies of FEHA can support a claim for wrongful termination in violation of public policy. Stevenson, 16 Cal.4th 880 (recognizing wrongful termination claim for violation of FEHA); Xin Liu, 347 F.3d at 1137 (recognizing wrongful termination claim for violation of the California Family Rights Act, Cal. Gov't Code § 12945.2(a)).
A plaintiff must also establish a causal nexus between the public policy and his termination. Casenas v. Fujisawa USA, Inc., 58 Cal. App. 4th 101, 118 n.19, 67 Cal. Rptr. 2d 827 (1996). A plaintiff can do so "by producing evidence of nothing more than [*16]  the employer's knowledge that the employee engaged in protected activities and the proximity in time between the protected action and the allegedly retaliatory employment decision." McRae v. Dep't of Corr. & Rehab., 142 Cal. App. 4th 377, 388, 48 Cal. Rptr. 3d 313 (2006).
b) Application
The Complaint alleges that Plaintiff was wrongfully terminated in violation of FEHA, which prohibits employment discrimination based on physical and/or mental disability. Plaintiff argues that Defendant's decision to terminate his employment "was based solely on his physical disabilities," i.e. that he suffered from extreme anxiety, which led to panic attacks, hypertension, and clinical depression. Dkt. 2-2 ¶ 32. Plaintiff argues that this cause of action gives rise to a common law tort claim for termination in violation of a fundamental public policy. Id. ¶ 31.
Plaintiff's first cause of action is based on the alleged violations of FEHA addressed in the second cause of action. Accordingly, the first cause of action is dependent on the viability of that claim. Because, for the reasons stated below, the Motion is granted as to the second cause of action, the first cause of action necessarily fails. Therefore, the Motion is GRANTED as to the first cause of action.
2. Second Cause of Action: Disability [*17]  Discrimination in Violation of FEHA
a) Legal Standards
It is unlawful "[f]or an employer, because of the . . . physical disability . . . of any person . . . to bar or to discharge the person from employment . . . or to discriminate against the person in compensation or in terms, conditions, or privileges of employment." Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(a). "California has adopted the three-stage burden-shifting test established by the United States Supreme Court [in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973)] for trying claims of discrimination." Guz v. Bechtel Nat'l Inc., 24 Cal. 4th 317, 354, 100 Cal. Rptr. 2d 352, 8 P.3d 1089 (2000). At trial, the plaintiff must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802. Then, the defendant must provide a "legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its employment decision." Id. If the defendant does so, the plaintiff must then demonstrate that this reason is a pretext and that the defendant did engage in discrimination. Id.
b) Application
(1) Prima Facie Case of Discrimination
To establish a prima facie case of discrimination under FEHA, "[g]enerally, the plaintiff must provide evidence that (1) he was a member of a protected class, (2) he was qualified for the position he sought or was performing competently in the position he held, (3) he suffered an adverse employment action, such as termination, demotion, [*18]  or denial of an available job, and (4) some other circumstance suggests discriminatory motive." Guz, 24 Cal. 4th at 355. These elements are considered in this sequence.
(a) Membership in a Protected Class
Those who have physical disabilities qualify as members of a class protected under FEHA. Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(a). FEHA defines physical disability as "any physiological disease, disorder, condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss" that (i) affects a "body system[]" such as the "musculoskeletal" system and (ii) "limits a major life activity" such as "physical, mental, and social activities and working." Id. § 12926(m)(1). Physical disability may be demonstrated by a "record or history" of such a condition, provided that information is "known to the employer." Id. § 12926(m)(3). Clinical depression is recognized as a physical disability under FEHA. Cal. Gov. Code § 12926.1(c). Both hypertension and panic attacks also have been recognized as physical disabilities under FEHA. See Roby v. McKesson Corp. 47 Ca1.4th 686, 694-95 (2009) (finding of disability when plaintiff experienced panic attacks that caused "heart palpitations, shortness of breath, dizziness, trembling, and excessive sweating"); American Nat'1 Ins. Co. v. Fair Emp.& Housing Comm'n 32 Cal.3d 603, 610, 186 Cal. Rptr. 345, 651 P.2d 1151 (1982) (finding hypertension can be a physical disability).
Plaintiff has presented evidence that he suffered from panic attacks and extreme [*19]  nervousness, and that these conditions prevented him from performing his job. Plaintiff has testified that he missed substantial time at work due these conditions. He has also presented evidence that his treating physician diagnosed and verified these conditions and their effect on his ability to work. This evidence is sufficient to establish this element of a prima facie showing that Plaintiff is a member of a protected class under FEHA. Defendant does not argue that Plaintiff has not made the required prima facie showing as to this element.
(b) Competent Performance
Plaintiff has presented sufficient evidence to support a prima facie showing that he was capable of fulfilling the requirements of a Property Claims Specialist II. The supporting evidence includes that he had been employed for nine months in the position prior to when the health issues arose. During that time, he received positive reviews. Plaintiff has also presented evidence that he successfully returned to work on November 11, 2013. Although he remained for only a short time period, this adds some further support for the required prima facie showing as to ability to perform. Dkt. 55 at 22.
Defendant responds that the [*20]  evidence shows that Plaintiff could not perform in his position. Part of the ability to perform is to be able to accept and respond to negative performance reviews. Defendant argues that the evidence shows that Plaintiff could not do so. When Plaintiff received certain negative reviews, it triggered the mental health issues that led to his claimed disability. Plaintiff replies that his disability was triggered by the substantial and unexpected criticism of his performance as well as the manner in which it was presented, i.e., without any prior warning and through a series of lengthy meetings. Plaintiff has testified that he understood that the purpose of those lunch meetings was not to present criticism of his job performance, but to introduce him to his new supervisor. Plaintiff also testified that the three-page Action Letter was unexpected. Plaintiff also testified that he was surprised about the communications during the second lunch on November 13, 2013.
Defendant also argues that Plaintiff was not performing his job duties satisfactorily prior to his termination. It cites the evidence discussed above as to the emails that Plaintiff sent to an insured and a contractor that violated [*21]  Defendant's policies and practices. However, a jury could reasonably find that despite this conduct, Plaintiff was generally able to perform his duties satisfactorily prior to his termination.
These facts, viewed collectively, are sufficient to meet the prima facie standard as to ability to perform.
(c) Adverse Employment Action
Plaintiff has identified several occasions when he was criticized by his superiors, including the two lengthy sessions that are discussed above. Further, Plaintiff was terminated. Defendant does not dispute that termination is an adverse employment action under FEHA. Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(a). Therefore, this element of the prima facie test is met.
(d) Circumstances Suggesting Discriminatory Motive
In considering the discriminatory motive element of the prima facie test, the burden in connection with a motion for summary judgment motion is low:
We have repeatedly held that it should not take much for a plaintiff in a discrimination case to overcome a summary judgment motion. See, e.g., Nigro v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 784 F.3d 495, 499 (9th Cir.2015); Diaz v. Eagle Produce Ltd. P'ship, 521 F.3d 1201, 1207 (9th Cir. 2008); Davis v. Team Elec. Co., 520 F.3d 1080, 1089 (9th Cir.2008); Metoyer v. Chassman, 504 F.3d 919, 939 (9th Cir.2007); Dominguez-Curry v. Nev. Transp. Dep't, 424 F.3d 1027, 1042 (9th Cir.2005); Chuang v. Univ. of Cal. Davis, Bd. of Trustees, 225 F.3d 1115, 1124 (9th Cir.2000). "This is because the ultimate question is one that can only be resolved through a searching inquiry—one that is most appropriately conducted by a factfinder, upon a full record." Chuang v. Univ. of California Davis, Bd. of Trustees, 225 F.3d 1115, 1124 (9th Cir. 2000) (internal quotation [*22]  marks omitted).
France v. Johnson, 795 F.3d 1170, 1175 (9th Cir. 2015), as amended on reh'g (Oct. 14, 2015).
Although the burden to show prima facie evidence of a discriminatory motive is "not onerous," a plaintiff must show "actions taken by the employer from which one can infer, if such actions remain unexplained, that it is more likely than not that such actions were based on a [prohibited] discriminatory criterion." Guz v. Bechtel Nat'l Inc., 24 Cal. 4th 317, 355, 100 Cal. Rptr. 2d 352, 8 P.3d 1089 (2000) (quotations omitted). "The causal link may be established by an inference derived from circumstantial evidence, such as the employer's knowledge that the employee engaged in protected activities and the proximity in time between the protected action and the allegedly retaliatory employment decision." Jordan v. Clark, 847 F.2d 1368, 1376 (9th Cir. 1988) (internal quotation and alteration omitted).
At the October 21, 2013 lunch when Plaintiff and his supervisors met, Plaintiff had not yet notified Defendant of his susceptibility to panic attacks, depression, or emotional distress in response to criticism. Indeed, Plaintiff states that these symptoms were caused by this meeting. However, Plaintiff asked to end the meeting before Defendant's representatives had completed their presentation to Plaintiff about his shortcomings. This is evidence that can support their being given [*23]  some notice of his disability. It is unusual for a subordinate to make such a request in the context of meeting at which he is seeking to establish a positive relationship with his new supervisor.
At the second meeting, which was held on November 13, 2013 meeting, and where the presentation resumed, Plaintiff contends that Defendant was reasonably on notice of his disability based on the prior meeting and his actions taken in response, including Plaintiff's period of medical leave. Nevertheless, Plaintiff argues that Lodge and Peterson
replicated the same event that had triggered [Plaintiff's] first disabling reaction at their second meeting on November 13, 2013, and compounded the problem with the written document transmitted to [Plaintiff] on November 14, 2013. After this second episode, [Defendant] made no effort to determine why [Plaintiff] was having such a reaction, nor to provide any kind of accommodation for it.
Dkt. 55 at 21.
Although Defendant was aware that Plaintiff had suffered a negative emotional reaction after receiving past criticism, it was also informed that Plaintiff's physician had declared him fit to return to work. Therefore, Lodge and Peterson may have concluded [*24]  that Plaintiff could meet his job responsibilities, including receiving a negative performance review. Plaintiff did not expressly inform Defendant about any ongoing health problems, although he had told this to his physician, who directed that he not return to work. Defendant was aware of that directive prior to the second meeting. Further, Plaintiff informed a human resources representative on November 18, 2013 that he intended to take another leave of absence until his conflicts with his superiors could be addressed by a more senior official. Plaintiff states that he informed Defendant that this second leave of absence was motivated by his strong emotional reaction to the criticism of his performance. Shortly after receiving this notice, Lodge commenced an investigation about Plaintiff, which included a review of emails that he had sent to insureds and contactors. When Defendant notified Plaintiff of his termination, no reasons for the decision were provided. For purposes of the Motion, the temporal proximity between these events supports an inference that Plaintiff's termination was the result of his disability.
Viewing this evidence collectively, and in light of the low standard [*25]  that applies as to a prima facie showing, it is sufficient for purposes of the consideration of the Motion to support a claim that the termination was motivated by Plaintiff's alleged disability.
* * *
For the foregoing reasons, Plaintiff has met the requirements for a prima facie showing as to discrimination in connection with his termination by Defendant.
(2) Whether a Legitimate, Nondiscriminatory Reason Existed
In assessing a proffered reason for terminating an employee, courts "only require that an employer honestly believed its reason for its actions, even if its reason is 'foolish or trivial or even baseless.'" Villiarimo v. Aloha Island Air, Inc., 281 F.3d 1054, 1063 (9th Cir. 2002) (citing Johnson v. Nordstrom, Inc., 260 F.3d 727, 733 (7th Cir. 2001)). "The employer may fire an employee for a good reason, a bad reason, a reason based on erroneous facts, or for no reason at all, as long as its action is not for a discriminatory reason. . . . While an employer's judgment or course of action may seem poor or erroneous to outsiders, the relevant question is . . . whether the given reason was a pretext for illegal discrimination." Arteaga v. Brink's, Inc., 163 Cal. App. 4th 327, 77 Cal. Rptr. 3d 654, 668 (2008) (citations omitted). Like the plaintiff's burden to make out a prima facie case, the employer's burden to articulate a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for its decision is "not an onerous [*26]  burden," and is "generally met by presenting admissible evidence showing the defendant's reason for its employment decision." Wills v. Superior Court, 195 Cal. App. 4th 143, 125 Cal. Rptr. 3d 1, 15 (2011).
The information in the emails sent by Plaintiff, together with Plaintiff's negative performance reviews, provided a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for his termination. Dkt. 35-1 at 19. Defendant has described this evidence:
Peterson had counseled Plaintiff on engaging only approved vendors, but he blatantly failed to follow that direction by expressly telling a contractor he had a new manager who would not have a bias against him (referring to the vendor). SUF 41-48. Moreover, Plaintiff knew it was not acceptable to refer to insured/customers as a "b**ch" or tell them to "f**k off," yet made such references in writing to an external third party. SUF 38-40. He also documented in writing his intent to misrepresent the manner in which the claim was being paid and documented his intent to improperly "push through" some billing issues. SUF 52.
Dkt. 35-1 at 19. The deposition testimony of Carmichael and Knudson, who reviewed the emails and participated in the decision to terminate Plaintiff, is consistent with this analysis.
Defendant has also submitted the Declaration [*27]  of Aleksander Petrovich, a Senior Human Resources Consultant for Nationwide. His declaration includes the following statements:
On November 21, 2013, I received an e-mail from Ms. Lodge containing copies of very problematic emails that Ms. Lodge discovered while monitoring Plaintiff's email in his absence.
On or about the [sic] November 21, 2013, Ms. Knudsen, myself, Scott Carmichael (Claims Director), and Jennifer Owens (Office of Associate Relations Senior Consultant) began to have a conversation regarding Plaintiff's emails. We reviewed the emails sent by Ms. Lodge and determined that Plaintiff's behavior was unethical and that he had engaged in misconduct in violation Nationwide's Attendance, Performance Behavioral Policy, Section's 12.3, which addresses "Unacceptable Behavior," and 12.4, which "Addresses Inappropriate behavior.
As a result of Plaintiff's unethical behavior/engagement in misconduct, we believed Plaintiff's actions warranted immediate termination and not further progressive discipline.
Petrovich Decl., Dkt. 35-6 ¶¶ 9-11 (paragraph numbering omitted).
This evidence, when viewed with Defendant's corresponding behavioral policy, sufficiently establishes for purposes of [*28]  the analysis required in connection with the Motion, that Plaintiff could have been seen to have violated Defendant's policies. Section 12.3 of the written policy, which is the Unacceptable Behavior requirement identified above, provides that "[i]inappropriate conduct includes, but is not limited to: . . . profane and/or harassing actions . . . inappropriate customer interactions or failure to adhere to departmental call/customer service policies, practices, and processes . . . defiance of authority . . . [and] [d]ishonest or fraudulent acts." Dkt. 35-6 at 12. Section 12.4 states that "violations of policy can result in an immediate issuance of a one-time notice or termination of employment." Id. at 13. This information is sufficient plausibly to show that Plaintiff's email communications were "unacceptable behavior" within Section 12.4.
Further, Defendant provided Plaintiff with extensive information about issues concerning his job performance. SUF 24. This adds support to the determination that, for purposes of the present Motion, Defendant has met its burden to show that there were legitimate, nondiscriminatory grounds for his termination.
Plaintiff contends that he should have been [*29]  disciplined, rather than terminated. That Plaintiff disagrees with the termination decision does not rebut the prior evidence for purposes of the Motion. See Arteaga v. Brink's, Inc., 163 Cal. App. 4th 327, 344, 77 Cal. Rptr. 3d 654 (2008) ("The FEHA does 'not guarantee employees 'a stress-free working environment. [The Act] does not take away an employer's right to interpret its rules as it chooses, and to make determinations as it sees fit under those rules." (citations omitted)).
For the foregoing reasons, Defendant has met its burden to demonstrate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for Plaintiff's termination.
(3) Whether Defendant's Explanation for Termination is a Pretext
"At the third step of the McDonnell Douglas scheme, the plaintiff must show that the articulated reason is pretextual either directly by persuading the court that a discriminatory reason more likely motivated the employer or indirectly by showing that the employer's proffered explanation is unworthy of credence." Nicholson v. Hyannis Air Service, Inc., 580 F.3d 1116, 1126 (9th Cir. 2009) (internal quotations omitted).
"To avoid summary judgment at this step, however, the plaintiff must only demonstrate that there is a genuine dispute of material fact regarding pretext." Id. "The difference between the first and third steps of the McDonnell Douglas framework is not without some consequence. Among [*30]  other things, a plaintiff's burden is much less at the prima facie stage than at the pretext stage." Hawn v. Executive Jet Mgmt., Inc., 615 F.3d 1151, 1158 (9th Cir. 2010). To demonstrate a genuine dispute of material fact regarding pretext using circumstantial evidence, Plaintiff must provide "specific and substantial [evidence] in order to create a triable issue with respect to whether the employer intended to discriminate." Blue v. Widnall, 162 F.3d 541, 546 (9th Cir. 1998) (citing Godwin v. Hunt Wesson, Inc., 150 F.3d 1217, 1222 (9th Cir. 1998)).
Lodge declares that her purpose in reviewing Plaintiff's emails was to confirm that no outstanding claims or proposed resolutions with insureds had been overlooked during the recent period when Plaintiff was absent from work. Dkt. 35-3 ¶ 11. However, Plaintiff contends that the timing of the review of the emails by Lodge is suspect. Lodge did not review the emails until November 20, 2013. This was immediately after Lodge was informed that Plaintiff intended to take another leave of absence and present his employment issues to a more senior official. On November 18, 2013, Plaintiff states that he informed a human resources representative about his extreme anxiety. This timing is relevant to whether the review of Plaintiff's emails by Lodge was motivated by Plaintiff's claimed disability. However, this evidence is quite [*31]  limited in that regard. There is no direct evidence that Lodge was informed on or after November 18, 2014, that Plaintiff's claimed anxiety was the cause of his absence from work. Instead, Plaintiff informed Lodge by text message that he intended to stay away from work until he could discuss his performance review with more senior management. SUF 34. Furthermore, Lindsay Knudson, who supervised Lodge, testified at her deposition that she instructed Lodge to look through Plaintiff's emails on Monday, November 18, 2013, and was in regular contact with Lodge regarding the process.2 Supp. AMF 55. This evidence supports Defendant's denial of Plaintiff's claim of pretext.
Plaintiff also argues that he was terminated when he had started to seek to address his performance reviews with higher management and [*32]  sought additional medical leave. However, according to Plaintiff's declaration, he did not consult with his physician until November 22, 2013. This was after the decision to terminate him had been made. Dkt. No. 55-5 ¶ 16. Therefore, at the time of his termination, the only evidence as to Defendant's knowledge of Plaintiff's disability were: (1) his prior period of medical leave which had been concluded with support of his treating physician; and (2) he allegedly informed an HR representative on November 18, 2013 that he was suffering from anxiety related to negative feedback on his job performance.3
Temporal proximity is relevant to a determination whether an adverse employment action was motivated by unlawful intent. See Passantino v. Johnson & Johnson Consumer Prod., Inc., 212 F.3d 493, 507 (9th Cir. 2000) ("[W]hen adverse employment decisions are taken within a reasonable period of time after complaints of discrimination have been made, retaliatory intent may be inferred."). However, timing alone is inadequate to establish that a defendant's legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons for terminating a plaintiff were pretextual. As a California Court of Appeal has explained:
[T]emporal proximity alone is not sufficient to raise a triable issue as to pretext once the employer [*33]  has offered evidence of a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the termination. . . This is especially so where the employer raised questions about the employee's performance before he disclosed his symptoms, and the subsequent termination was based on those performance issues. . .It follows that temporal proximity, by itself, does not support a finding of pretext here. Standing alone against Defendant's strongly supported legitimate reason for terminating [Plaintiff], temporal proximity does not amount to more than a scintilla of evidence of [discrimination].
Arteaga v. Brink's, Inc., 163 Cal. App. 4th 327, 353, 77 Cal. Rptr. 3d 654 (2008) (quotations and citations omitted).
Plaintiff also claims that there is a triable issue as to pretext based on certain deposition testimony by Lodge. She testified that she did not recommend Plaintiff's termination after she discovered the emails he had written. Dkt. 55-3 at 19 (Lodge Depo.). Instead, Lodge testified that she thought her superiors "should be notified" of these emails, because "the behavior and the items of the emails . . . were just egregious in nature." Id. Peterson also testified that she did not believe that her prior criticism of Plaintiff justified his termination. AMF 130. Plaintiff notes that he was [*34]  never shown the emails, asked to explain them, or given any prior notice that his termination was imminent. AMF 127. However, neither Lodge nor Peterson made the decision to terminate Plaintiff. Nor is there any evidence that either participated in the discussion among more senior management about the potential termination. Nor has either stated any disagreement with the factual basis for the termination decision.
Under the governing standards, Plaintiff has not shown a triable issue of fact through substantial evidence of pretext. Therefore, the Motion is GRANTED as to the second cause of action.
3. Third Cause of Action: Failure to Provide Reasonable Accommodations
a) Legal Standards
Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(m) makes it unlawful for employers to "fail to engage in a timely, good faith, interactive process with the employee or applicant to determine effective reasonable accommodations, if any, in response to a request for reasonable accommodation by an employee or applicant with a known physical or mental disability or known medical condition." A reasonable accommodation includes "making existing facilities used by employees readily accessible to, and usable by, individuals with disabilities" and "job restructuring, [*35]  part-time or modified work schedules, reassignment to a vacant position [and] acquisition or modification of equipment or devices . . . ." Cal. Gov. Code § 12926(p).
An employer is required to make reasonable accommodations to a disabled employee unless the employer can show that such an accommodation would impose "undue hardship." Prilliman v. United Air Lines, Inc., 53 Cal. App. 4th 935, 62 Cal. Rptr. 2d 142, 147 (Cal. Ct. App. 1997). Undue hardship means an action "requiring significant disability or expense" in light of the following factors: "(1) the nature and cost of the accommodation"; "(2) the overall financial resources of the facilities involved in the provision of the reasonable accommodation, the number of persons employed at the facility, and the effect on expenses and resources or the impact otherwise of these accommodations on the operation of the facility"; (3) "the overall financial resources of the covered entity, the overall size of the business of a covered entity with respect to the number of employees, and the number, type, and location of its facilities." Id. at 148. However, employers are not obligated to create new positions to accommodate an employee under § 12940(m). See, e.g., Watkins v. Ameripride Servs., 375 F.3d 821, 828 (9th Cir. 2004); Furtado, 151 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 310.
In general, an employee is responsible to notify his or her employer of a disability. Prilliman, 62 Cal. Rptr. 2d at 149. Once notice is provided, an employer [*36]  has an initial burden to take "positive steps" to accommodate the employee. Id. This includes the "affirmative duty to make known to the employee other suitable job opportunities with the employer and to determine whether the employee is interested in, and qualified for, those positions, if the employer can do so without undue hardship or if the employer offers similar assistance to or benefit to other disabled or nondisabled employees or has a policy of offering such assistance or benefit to any other employees." Id. at 150. An employer is not required to "choose the best accommodation or the specific accommodation a disabled employee or applicant seeks." Raine v. City of Burbank, 135 Cal. App. 4th 1215, 37 Cal. Rptr. 3d 899, 904 (Cal. Ct. App. 2006). "The responsibility to reassign a disabled employee who cannot otherwise be accommodated does not require creating a new job, moving another employee, promoting the disabled employee or violating another employee's rights." Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). Once this is done, the employee must cooperate with the employer's efforts. Id. at 150.
b) Application
Plaintiff's only requests for accommodation were his requests for leave. SUF 56, 58-72, 74-56. All of these requests were granted except the final one. Other requests for assistance, or for [*37]  access to help, were also granted. Thus, after the October Meeting, Plaintiff emailed both Lodge and Peterson and informed them that he wished to take a leave of absence and requested that they put him in contact with someone from human resources. SUF 58-68. Peterson responded on the same day, and provided the necessary information about the human resources department and a disability nurse. SUF 67. When Plaintiff was diagnosed as having depression and anxiety, he was placed on short-term disability leave. Defendant approved that leave starting October 22, 2013 through November 11, 2013. SUF 72. Plaintiff returned to work without restrictions on November 12, 2013.
The only accommodation that was denied was Plaintiff's last request for a leave of absence, which he submitted on November 21, 2013. Defendant denied this request because it had decided to terminate Plaintiff. As noted, the facts support a finding that Plaintiff was terminated on November 22, 2013, for a legitimate nondiscriminatory purpose. Therefore, the failure to grant Plaintiff's final request for leave was not in violation of Section 12940(m). See Humphrey v. Memorial Hospitals Ass'n, 239 F.3d 1128, 1136 n.13 (9th Cir. 2001)("[t]he requirement to grant a leave where there are plausible reasons to believe that [*38]  it would accommodate the employee's disability cannot be repeatedly invoked, thus permitting an unqualified employee to avoid termination by requesting a leave of absence each time he is about to be fired.").
Plaintiff has not shown that additional reasonable accommodations were available or should have been provided to him. As Plaintiff notes, "[h]olding a job open for a disabled employee who needs time to recuperate or heal is in itself a form of reasonable accommodation and may be all that is required where it appears likely that the employee will be able to return to an existing position at some time in the foreseeable future." Jensen v. Wells Fargo bank, 85 Cal. App. 4th 245, 263 n. 13, 102 Cal. Rptr. 2d 55 (2000). See also Nunes v. Wal-Mart Stores, 164 F.3d 1243, 1248 (9th Cir. 1999) ("Even an extended medical leave, or an extension of an existing leave period, may be a reasonable accommodation if it does not pose an undue hardship on the employer."). Once again, Plaintiff was terminated for a legitimate reason. Therefore, there was no basis for an additional period of medical leave.
The Opposition also notes that "Plaintiff was specifically told by his management that he could not work a reduced schedule; he was fully 'on' or fully 'off.'" Dkt. 55 at 23 n. 4; AMF 136. However, this comment was made as to Plaintiff's request [*39]  for leave, which was granted. Plaintiff did not request part-time work accommodations when he returned from his medical leave.
For the foregoing reasons, there is no genuine issue of fact as to whether Plaintiff was denied reasonable accommodations. Therefore, the Motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's third cause of action.
4. Fourth Cause of Action: Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process
a) Legal Standards
Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(n) prohibits an employer "to fail to engage in a timely, good faith, interactive process with the employee or applicant to determine effective reasonable accommodations, if any, in response to a request for reasonable accommodation by an employee or applicant with a known physical or mental disability or known medical condition."
b) Application
For the same reasons stated as to Plaintiff's claim for failure to provide reasonable accommodations, this claim also fails. There were no reasonable accommodations to discuss given the basis for the termination of Plaintiff's employment. Therefore, the Motion is GRANTED as to the fourth cause of action.
5. Fifth Cause of Action: Harassment Based on Disability
a) Legal Standards
Under Government Code Section 12940(j)(1), an employer may not harass an employee on the basis of known [*40]  physical disabilities. FEHA "harassment focuses on situations in which the social environment of the workplace becomes intolerable because the harassment (whether verbal, physical, or visual) communicates an offensive message to the harassed employee." Roby v. McKesson Corp., 47 Cal.4th 686, 706, 101 Cal. Rptr. 3d 773, 219 P.3d 749 (2009). "'[M]anagerial actions' typically form the basis of a discrimination claim under FEHA, not a harassment claim." Landucci v. State Farm Ins. Co., 65 F. Supp. 3d 694, 706 (N.D. Cal. 2014). (citing Reno, 18 Cal.4th at 646-47); see also Janken v. GM Hughes Elecs. 46 Cal. App. 4th 55, 63, 53 Cal. Rptr. 2d 741 (1996) ("Harassment is not conduct of a type necessary for management of the employer's business or performance of the supervisory employee's job."). However, official employment actions, such as performance evaluations or terminations, can be considered as part of the conduct supporting a harassment claim when the actions convey an offensive and hostile message to the employee, are taken in an "unnecessarily demeaning manner," or demonstrate a "widespread pattern of bias." Roby, 47 Cal.4th at 708. Furthermore, if the supervisory employment actions were motivated by discrimination, those actions can be used to establish "discriminatory animus on the part of the manager responsible for the discrimination, thereby permitting the inference that rude comments or behavior by that same manager was similarly motivated by discriminatory [*41]  animus." Id. at 709. Thus, "discrimination and harassment claims can overlap as an evidentiary matter." Id.
b) Application
Plaintiff has neither alleged nor presented evidence about any incident of workplace harassment. The Complaint alleges:
Though Defendants knew of Plaintiffs disabilities, they engaged in a pattern of harassment, which included, but was not limited to, cornering him at training conferences to harangue him over an "Action Plan", repetitively insisting he repair his purported inadequacies at work, and telling him he had "no job security" if he exercised STD leave.
Dkt. 2-2 ¶ 57.
Plaintiff's harassment claim appears to be based entirely on his objections to his performance reviews. As noted, no evidence has been alleged to support the claim that these performance reviews were undertaken for an improper purpose, or that the criticisms were meritless. Acts as to ordinary work-related criticism do not support a claim for harassment, even where such criticism was delivered in an unprofessional manner. See King v. AC & R Advertising, 65 F.3d 764, 768 (9th Cir. 1995) ("[E]very job has its frustrations, challenges, and disappointments; these inhere in the nature of work. An employee is protected from unreasonably harsh conditions, in excess of those [*42]  faced by his or her co-workers. He or she is not, however, guaranteed a working environment free of stress." (citing Turner v. Anheuser-Busch, Inc., 7 Cal. 4th 1238, 1026 (1994))).
For the foregoing reasons, the Motion is GRANTED as to the fifth cause of action.
6. Seventh Cause of Action: Failure to Prevent Harassment
a) Legal Standard
Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(k) provides that it is unlawful "[f]or an employer, labor organization, employment agency, apprenticeship training program, or any training program leading to employment, to fail to take all reasonable steps necessary to prevent discrimination and harassment from occurring." Id.
b) Application
Plaintiff has presented no evidence that he experienced discrimination or harassment. Therefore, the Motion is GRANTED as to the Seventh cause of action.
7. Punitive Damages
a) Legal Standard
Under California law, a plaintiff may receive punitive damages if "it is proven by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant has been guilty of oppression, fraud, or malice" in an action for the breach of another obligation. Cal. Civ. Code § 3294(a). Where the defendant is a corporation, punitive damages may be awarded only if there is "malice [or fraud or oppression] among corporate leaders: the officers, directors, or managing agents." Cruz v. HomeBase, 83 Cal. App.4th 160, 167, 99 Cal. Rptr. 2d 435 (2000); Cal. Civ. Code § 3294(b).
"Malice" is defined [*43]  as "conduct which is intended by the defendant to cause injury to the plaintiff or despicable conduct which is carried on by the defendant with a willful and conscious disregard of the rights or safety of others" and "oppression" as "despicable conduct that subjects a person to cruel and unjust hardship in conscious disregard of that person's rights." Cal. Civ. Code § 3294(c).
b) Application
Because all of Plaintiff's causes of action fail, there is no basis for an award of any damages, including punitive damages. Therefore, the Motion is GRANTED as to Plaintiff's claim for punitive damages.
8. Claims for Harassment Based on Disability, IIED, and Individual Claims against Lodge
Plaintiff has agreed that he will not pursue the claims alleged in the Complaint for harassment based on disability and IIED, or the individual claims against Lodge. Dkt. 55 at 27. Therefore, the Motion is GRANTED as to these claims, which include the Sixth Cause of Action.

IV. Conclusion
For the foregoing reasons, the Motion is GRANTED. By June 14, 2017, Defendant shall provide to Plaintiff's counsel a proposed judgment consistent with this Order. On or before June 19, 2017, Defendant shall lodge a proposed judgment, together with a statement [*44]  as to whether its form is disputed by Plaintiff. If Plaintiff disputes the form of the proposed judgment, he shall timely file any objections on or before June 26, 2017.
IT IS SO ORDERED.


End of Document

