Hill v. Learning Experience
United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia, Alexandria Division
July 29, 2017, Decided
Case No.: 1:15-cv-01593 (GBL/TCB)

Reporter
2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 175566 *
BRIEN O. HILL, Plaintiff, v. THE LEARNING EXPERIENCE, Defendant.
Subsequent History: Affirmed by Hill v. Learning Experience, 699 Fed. Appx. 202, 2017 U.S. App. LEXIS 20481 (4th Cir. Va., Oct. 19, 2017)
Prior History: Hill v. Learning Experience, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 191492 (D.D.C., Oct. 27, 2015)
Counsel:  [*1] Brien O. Hill, Plaintiff, Pro se, Washington, DC USA.
For Learning Experience, Defendant: Richard Maxwell Volin, LEAD ATTORNEY, Rezvani Volin PC, Falls Church, VA USA.
Judges: Gerald Bruce Lee, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Gerald Bruce Lee
Opinion



MEMORANDUM OPINION AND ORDER
THIS MATTER is before the Court on pro se Plaintiff Brien Hill's Motion for Summary Judgment (Dkt. No. 35) and on Defendant The Learning Experience's Motion for Summary Judgment (Dkt. No. 38). This case concerns Plaintiff's claims against Defendant seeking monetary damages for alleged discrimination and retaliation in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
The issue is whether either party is entitled to summary judgment, where Plaintiff has not offered evidence to support his allegations and where Defendant argues that Plaintiff's claims are untimely, barred by the doctrine of res judicata, and fail on the merits. The Court denies Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment because Plaintiff has not come forward with any evidence to raise a triable factual dispute or to show that he is entitled to judgment as a matter of law on his ADA claims. The Court grants Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment not based [*2]  on procedural grounds, but instead because Defendant has offered uncontested evidence to show Plaintiff was terminated for non-discriminatory, non-retaliatory reasons.

I. BACKGROUND

A. Factual Background
Plaintiff began employment with SJV as a "prep cook" and after eight months of purportedly receiving excellent reviews, Plaintiff became an aftercare bus operator and program aide. (Dkt. No. 36 ¶¶ 5-6). It appears that SJV is one of the childcare centers that falls under the umbrella of The Learning Experience (i.e., TLE). Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment asserts that in January 2015, he made a "light duty accommodation request," and on February 25, 2015, he petitioned SJV Center Director Judy McClimans and Co-owner Jennifer Vieira for (1) a pay increase, (2) a fulltime schedule with overtime pay, and (3) his own aftercare class. (Dkt. No. 36 ¶¶ 8, 12-13). Ms. Vieira informed Plaintiff that his pay request was being taken into consideration, but that SJV would not allow Plaintiff to hold his own aftercare class because of safety risks associated with his "lack of mobility." (Dkt. No. 36 ¶ 15). It appears that in September 1999, Plaintiff underwent surgery causing the amputation [*3]  of his leg below the knee.
On February 26, 2015, Plaintiff was informed about sexual harassment claims filed against him. (Dkt. No. 39 ¶¶ 1-8,14). Plaintiff provided a written statement in response to these claims, and management for Defendant placed Plaintiff on unpaid suspension until an investigation could be completed. (Dkt. No. 39 ¶¶ 7-8). The next day, on February 27, 2015, Plaintiff received an official termination email from Ms. Vieira, citing the sexual harassment allegations as the reason for dismissal. (Dkt. No. 39 ¶¶ 25-28).
In his seven-count Complaint, Plaintiff alleges that Defendant violated the ADA by: (1) firing him for attempting to meet with SJV human resources manager to address his hostile work environment allegations; (2) failing to provide reasonable accommodations for his disability; (3) failing to engage in the interactive process as required by the ADA; and (4) facilitating the filing of sexual harassment charges against him for exercising his ADA rights. (Dkt. No. 1).

B. Procedural Background
On November 24, 2015, the United States District Court for the District of Columbia entered an order transferring this case to the United States District Court for the [*4]  Eastern District of Virginia. (Dkt. No. 4). On March 13, 2015, Plaintiff filed a Charge of Discrimination with the EEOC. (Dkt. No. 39-2 at 28). The EEOC mailed Plaintiff a right to sue letter on March 17, 2015. (Dkt. No. 1 at 33). The record reflects that on or about October 14, 2015, the District Court for the District of Columbia received Plaintiff's Complaint and Motion for Leave to Proceed In Forma Pauperis ("IFP Motion"). (See Dkt. No. 1-2).1
This Court entered an order granting Plaintiff's IFP Motion on April 5, 2016. (Dkt. No. 6). On August 16, 2016, the Complaint was served on Defendant. (Dkt. No. 18). On December 1, 2016, me Court entered an order setting the discovery period, which ended on April 14, 2017. (Dkt. No. 22). There is no indication that Plaintiff gathered any evidence during the discovery period. The Court held a Final Pretrial Conference on April 20, 2017. (See Dkt. No. 33). Defense counsel attended, but Plaintiff did not. (See id. at 1).
On May 8, 2017, Plaintiff and Defendant filed cross-Motions for Summary Judgment, along with supporting memorandums. (Dkt. Nos. 35, 36, 38, 39). Defendant timely filed a response to Plaintiff's Motion [*5]  for Summary Judgment, but initially Plaintiff did not file a response to Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment. The Court held a hearing to consider the cross-Motions for Summary Judgment on June 16,2016. During the hearing, Plaintiff stated he had lost the paperwork that showed when he originally filed a lawsuit in the District Court for the District of Columbia. The Court gave Plaintiff an additional week to file a certified copy of a complaint timely filed in the District of Columbia. Within one week, on June 23, 2017, Plaintiff provided a complaint that he attempted to file in the District of Columbia, and the date (June 15, 2015) had been crossed out. (Dkt. No. 44-1 at 13).2

II. DISCUSSION

A. Standard of Review
Under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56, the Court must grant summary judgment "if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). In reviewing a motion for summary judgment, the Court views the facts in a light most favorable to die non-moving party. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986); Askew v. HRFC, LLC, 810 F.3d 263, 266 (4th Cir. 2016). When parties file cross-motions for summary judgment, courts consider "each motion separately on its own merits to determine whether either of the parties deserves [*6]  judgment as a matter of law." Defenders of Wildlife v. N.C. DOT, 762 F.3d 374, 392-93 (4th Cir. 2014) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
Once a motion for summary judgment is properly made and supported, the opposing party has the burden of showing that a genuine dispute exists. Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586-87, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986); Dash v. Mayweather, 731 F.3d 303, 311 (4th Cir. 2013). "[T]he mere existence of some alleged factual dispute between the parties will not defeat an otherwise properly supported motion for summary judgment; the requirement is that there be no genuine issue of material fact." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 247-48. A fact is "material" if it "might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law." Id.; Libertarian Party of Va. v. Judd, 718 F.3d 308, 313 (4th Cir. 2013) (citations omitted). A dispute is "genuine" if "a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party." Libertarian Party of Va., 718 F.3d at 313 (citation omitted). If a party fails to properly address another party's assertion of fact as required by Rule 56(c), the court may "consider the fact undisputed for purposes of the motion." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e)(2).

B. Analysis
The Court denies Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment because Plaintiff has not come forward with any evidence to raise a triable factual dispute or to show that he is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. The Court grants Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment because Defendant has offered uncontested evidence to show that Plaintiff was [*7]  terminated for non-discriminatory, non-retaliatory reasons.

1. Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment
The first reason the Court denies Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment is because he has failed to raise a triable factual dispute. Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56(c) provides:
A party asserting that a fact cannot be or is genuinely disputed must support the assertion by:
(A) citing to particular parts of materials in the record, including depositions, documents, electronically stored information, affidavits or declarations, stipulations (including those made for purposes of the motion only), admissions, interrogatory answers, or other materials: or
(B) showing that the materials cited do not establish the absence or presence of a genuine dispute, or that an adverse party cannot produce admissible evidence to support the fact.
Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(1). Among other things, an affidavit or declaration used to support a motion must be made on personal knowledge and set out facts that would be admissible in evidence. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(4). "A party may object that the material cited to support or dispute a fact cannot be presented in a form that would be admissible in evidence." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(2). "The court need consider only the cited materials, but it may consider other materials [*8]  in the record." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(3).
Here, Plaintiff's Motion states that it "is supported by the following Memorandum of Points and Authorities, the pleadings and papers on file, [and] the affidavits and exhibits attached hereto . . . ." (Dkt. No. 36 at 1.) Although Plaintiff attaches a memorandum to his Motion, Plaintiff has not provided any affidavit or exhibits, nor has Plaintiff cited any part of the court record in papers or during the motion hearing. Plaintiff's memorandum in support of his Motion essentially restates the allegations asserted in the Complaint. In addition, many of the factual allegations in Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment are not based on his personal knowledge and are heavily based upon hearsay statements from Michelle Lucas and Jennifer Vieira that are unsupported by evidence that would be admissible at trial. Because Plaintiff fails to raise a triable factual dispute, the Court denies Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment.
The second reason the Court denies Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment is because Plaintiff fails to show why he is entitled to judgment as a matter law based on his theories for how Defendant violated the ADA. First, to establish a claim for [*9]  disability discrimination under the ADA, Plaintiff must show that: (1) he has a disability, (2) he is a "qualified individual" for the employment in question, and (3) Defendant discharged him (or took other adverse employment action) because of his disability. See Jacobs v. N.C. Admin. Office of the Courts, 780 F.3d 562, 572 (4th Cir. 2015). Here, Plaintiff is not entitled to judgment as a matter of law on his claim for disability discrimination because he has not shown that Defendant discharged him because of his disability (as opposed to his alleged violations of the employer's code of conduct).
Second, to establish a claim for failure to accommodate under the ADA, Plaintiff must show that (1) he was an individual who had a disability, (2) employer had notice of his disability, (3) with reasonable accommodation he could perform the essential functions of the position, and (4) Defendant refused to make such accommodations. See Wilson v. Dollar Gen. Corp., 717 F.3d 337, 345 (4th Cir. 2013). Here, Plaintiff has not established a claim for failure to accommodate because Plaintiff has not shown that with a reasonable accommodation he could perform his job at the childcare center, nor has Plaintiff offered evidence to show that Defendant refused to make such accommodation. Plaintiff only alleges that he "made a light duty [*10]  accommodation request" but offers no details regarding what this request entailed or who he made the request to. (See Dkt. No. 36 ¶ 8).
Third, to establish a claim of retaliation under the ADA, Plaintiff must either offer sufficient direct and indirect evidence of retaliation, or proceed under a burden-shifting method. See Rhoads v. F.D.I.C, 257 F.3d 373, 391 (4th Cir. 2001). Under the burden-shifting method of proof, to establish a prima facie case Plaintiff must show that (1) he engaged in a protected activity, (2) his employer acted adversely against him, and (3) his "protected activity" was causally connected to Defendant's adverse action. See id. at 392. "The employer then has the burden to rebut the presumption of retaliation by articulating a legitimate nonretaliatory reason for its actions." Id. (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). "If the employer does so, the plaintiff must demonstrate that the proffered reason is a pre-test for forbidden retaliation." Id. Here, Plaintiff has not established a claim for retaliation because he has not provided any direct or indirect evidence to support the claim, nor has Plaintiff offered evidence to show his termination was causally connected to "protected activity" under the burden-shifting [*11]  framework. Once Defendant offered a legitimate, non-discriminatory explanation for terminating Plaintiff, he had an obligation to demonstrate that proffered reason (i.e., alleged sexual harassment) was a pre-text for firing him. Plaintiff has not come forward with any evidence to show that Defendant used sexual harassment allegations as a pre-text for firing Plaintiff.
In sum, Plaintiff fails to raise a triable dispute of fact because he has not sufficiently supported his allegations, and Plaintiff fails to show that he is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.

2. Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment
The Court grants Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment because Defendant has offered uncontested evidence to show that Plaintiff was terminated for non-discriminatory, non-retaliatory reasons.
Defendant contends that Plaintiff's claims are (1) untimely, (2) barred by the doctrine of res judicata, and (3) fail on the merits. Because Plaintiff disputes whether he timely filed the Complaint on June 15, 2015, the Court will assume, without deciding, that either Plaintiff timely filed the Complaint or the Court should equitably toll the ninety-day limitations period to bring a lawsuit after [*12]  receiving a notice of the right to sue. Further, because Plaintiff appears to try to distinguish his allegations against SJV from allegations against TLE, the Court will assume, without deciding, that the doctrine of res judicata is inapplicable. In ruling on Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment, the Court will address the merits of Defendant's alleged violations of the ADA stemming from disability discrimination and retaliation.
As stated above, the Court must grant summary judgment if Defendant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and Defendant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). Once Defendant properly makes and supports its Motion for Summary Judgment, Plaintiff has the burden of showing that a genuine dispute exists. See Matsushita, 475 U.S. at 586-87 (1986). If Plaintiff fails to properly address Defendant's assertion of fact as required by Rule 56(c), the Court may "consider the fact undisputed for purposes of the motion." See Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e)(2). To survive summary judgment, Plaintiff cannot "rest on his allegations . . . without 'any significant probative evidence tending to support the complaint.'" Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249 (1986) (quoting First Nat'l Bank of Arizona v. Cities Serv. Co., 391 U.S. 253, 290, 88 S. Ct. 1575, 20 L. Ed. 2d 569 (1968)).
Here, Defendant's memorandum in support of its Motion for Summary Judgment sets forth what [*13]  Defendant believes are undisputed facts. (See Dkt. No. 39). Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment also is supported by the affidavit of Jennifer Vieira, the deposition transcript of Sean Vieira, the Employee Handbook, a termination email, a termination report, a sexual harassment investigation report, and handwritten allegations of sexual harassment from employees. (Dkt. Nos. 39-1, 39-2). According to Defendant's version of events, Defendant terminated Plaintiff because employees complained that Plaintiff violated the sexual harassment policy. Defendant also asserts that Plaintiff never requested a reasonable accommodation relating to his disability.
Prior to the Court holding a motion hearing, Plaintiff did not file a response to Defendant's assertions of fact, even though Defendant provided Plaintiff with a notice pursuant to Roseboro v. Garrison, 528 F.2d 309 (4th Cir. 1975). After the Court permitted Plaintiff to supplement the record with a timely filed complaint, and subsequent to the motion hearing, Plaintiff filed an untimely response to Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment, which exceeded the scope of how the Court permitted Plaintiff to supplement the record. Even if the substantive arguments in Plaintiff's response [*14]  were properly before the Court, he did not respond to the material facts asserted by Defendant, did not offer any probative evidence tending to support the Complaint, and did not address Defendant's legal arguments for why the ADA claims fail as a matter of law.
Because there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact regarding Plaintiff's termination, and because Defendant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, the Court grants Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment.

III. CONCLUSION
First, because Plaintiff has not come forward with any evidence to raise a triable factual dispute or to show that he is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, the Court denies Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment. Second, because Defendant offered evidence to show that it terminated Plaintiff for non-discriminatory, non-retaliatory reasons, and because Plaintiff failed to come forward with any evidence demonstrating a genuine dispute of material fact as to whether Defendant's stated reason was a pre-text for firing Plaintiff, the Court grants Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment.
Accordingly, it is hereby
ORDERED that the Motion for Summary Judgment filed by Defendant The Learning Experience's [*15]  Motion for Summary Judgment (Dkt. No. 38) is GRANTED; and it is further
ORDERED that Plaintiff Brien Hill's Motion for Summary Judgment (Dkt. No. 35) is DENIED.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
ENTERED this 29th day of July, 2017.
Alexandria, Virginia
/s/ Gerald Bruce Leo
United States District Judge

ORDER AND FINAL JUDGMENT
Plaintiff, Brien Hill, brought this suit against The Learning Experience under the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
For the reasons stated in the accompanying Memorandum Opinion and Order, it is hereby
ORDERED that, pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 58, judgment be and is entered in favor of Defendant The Learning Experience and against Plaintiff Brien Hill.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
ENTERED this 28th day of July, 2017.
Alexandria, Virginia
/s/ Gerald Bruce Lee
United States District Judge


End of Document

