Hill v. Wal-Mart Stores
United States District Court for the District of Nevada
February 11, 2010, Decided; February 12, 2010, Filed
3:08-CV-00498-ECR-VPC

Reporter
2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 160304 *
GUY LEWIS HILL, Plaintiff, vs. WAL-MART STORES, INC., Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Guy Lewis Hill, Plaintiff: Treva J. Hearne, Treva J. Hearne, Reno, NV.
For Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., Defendant: Brenda H Entzminger, Sang I Reid, Phillips, Spallas & Angstadt LLC, Las Vegas, NV; Kristin L. Oliveira, Phillips, Spallas & Angstadt LLP, San Francisco, CA; Treva J. Hearne, Treva J. Hearne, Reno, NV.
Judges: Edward C. Reed, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: Edward C. Reed
Opinion



Order
This case arises out of an injury sustained by Plaintiff Guy Hill after lifting car batteries. Defendant Wal-Mart Stores Inc. ("Wal-Mart") is Plaintiff's former employer. Now pending before the Court is Defendant's "Motion for Summary Judgment or, in the Alternative, Motion for Summary Adjudication" (#31). Plaintiff opposed (#34) the motion, and Defendant replied (#38). For the reasons stated below, the motion (#31) will be granted.

I. Factual and Procedural Background
Plaintiff suffers from asthma and other health problems. (Am. Compl. ¶ 11 (#12).) Wal-Mart had knowledge of Plaintiff's health problems when Wal-Mart hired Plaintiff in March 2003 to work in its Reno, Nevada store as a greeter/service writer. (Am. Compl. ¶¶ 8, 11 (#12).) On June 12, 2008, Plaintiff was asked by his supervisors to move some used car batteries, [*2]  which were leaking. (Am. Compl. ¶ 17 (#12).) Plaintiff alleges that as a result of lifting the batteries he went into acute respiratory arrest and respiratory failure and was in a coma and on life support for 9 days. (Am. Compl. ¶ 19 (#12).) Plaintiff began a one-year leave of absence from Wal-Mart on or about June 29, 2006. (Aff. of Gwen Vigil, Ex. 2, ¶ 2 (#31).) Shortly before Plaintiff's leave of absence was scheduled to expire, Personnel Manager Gwen Vigil wrote Plaintiff to ascertain whether Plaintiff intended on returning to work at Wal-Mart. (Id. ¶ 8.) Plaintiff responded that he was unable to work. (Id. ¶ 9.) Wal-Mart then terminated Plaintiff. (Id. ¶ 11.)
On September 15, 2008, Plaintiff filed the complaint (#1) in the current lawsuit. On December 23, 2008, Plaintiff filed an amended complaint (#12). The amended complaint asserts the following causes of action: (1) discrimination and harassment because of disability and age, against Defendant Wal-Mart; (2) retaliation for protected activity against all Defendants; (3) wrongful termination in violation of public policy, whistleblowing; (4)bad faith by Hartford; (5) negligence; and (6) intentional infliction of emotional distress. [*3] 
On September 25, 2009, the parties stipulated (#29) to the dismissal of Plaintiff's first cause of action to the extent it alleged discrimination and harassment on account of Plaintiff's age. The parties also stipulated (#29) to the dismissal of Plaintiff's third cause of action. We filed an Order (#30) approving of the stipulations on September 28, 2009. On October 9, 2009, Defendant filed the pending motion for summary judgment (#31). Plaintiff opposed (#34) the motion, and Defendant replied (#38).

II. Motion for Summary Judgment Standard
Summary judgment allows courts to avoid unnecessary trials where no material factual dispute exists. N.W. Motorcycle Ass'n v. U.S. Dep't of Agric., 18 F.3d 1468, 1471 (9th Cir. 1994). The court must view the evidence and the inferences arising therefrom in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party, Bagdadi v. Nazar, 84 F.3d 1194, 1197 (9th Cir. 1996), and should award summary judgment where no genuine issues of material fact remain in dispute and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). Judgment as a matter of law is appropriate where there is no legally sufficient evidentiary basis for a reasonable jury to find for the nonmoving party. FED. R. CIV. P. 50(a). Where reasonable minds could differ on the material facts at issue, however, summary judgment should not be granted. [*4]  Warren v. City of Carlsbad, 58 F.3d 439, 441 (9th Cir. 1995), cert. denied, 116 S.Ct. 1261 (1996).
The moving party bears the burden of informing the court of the basis for its motion, together with evidence demonstrating the absence of any genuine issue of material fact. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). Once the moving party has met its burden, the party opposing the motion may not rest upon mere allegations or denials in the pleadings, but must set forth specific facts showing that there exists a genuine issue for trial. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). Although the parties may submit evidence in an inadmissible form - namely, depositions, admissions, interrogatory answers, and affidavits-only evidence which might be admissible at trial may be considered by a trial court in ruling on a motion for summary judgment. FED. R. CIV. P. 56(c); Beyene v. Coleman Sec. Servs., Inc., 854 F.2d 1179, 1181 (9th Cir. 1988).
In deciding whether to grant summary judgment, a court must take three necessary steps: (1) it must determine whether a fact is material; (2) it must determine whether there exists a genuine issue for the trier of fact, as determined by the documents submitted to the court; and (3) it must consider that evidence in light of the appropriate standard of proof. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248. Summary judgment is not proper if material factual issues exist for trial. B.C. v. Plumas Unified Sch. Dist., 192 F.3d 1260, 1264 (9th Cir. 1999). "As to materiality, only disputes over facts that might affect the outcome [*5]  of the suit under the governing law will properly preclude the entry of summary judgment." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248. Disputes over irrelevant or unnecessary facts should not be considered. Id. Where there is a complete failure of proof on an essential element of the nonmoving party's case, all other facts become immaterial, and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Celotex, 477 U.S. at 323. Summary judgment is not a disfavored procedural shortcut, but rather an integral part of the federal rules as a whole. Id.

III. Discussion
Defendant seeks summary judgment on all of Plaintiff's remaining claims. We will address each of these claims separately.

A. Discrimination and Harassment Because of Disability and Age
Plaintiff's first claim is entitled "Discrimination and Harassment because of Disability and Age." This claim was dismissed to the extent that it alleged discrimination and harassment on the basis of age. (See Order (#30).) Wal-Mart addresses Plaintiff's first claim for relief as alleging only a violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101-12213, and Plaintiff does not dispute Wal-Mart's characterization of his first claim for relief as an allegation of only an ADA violation.
Therefore, we will treat [*6]  Plaintiff's first claim for relief as a claim for relief under the ADA. We note, however, that throughout Plaintiff's first claim, Plaintiff uses language suggesting that Wal-Mart subjected him to various Constitutional violations. For example, Plaintiff alleges that "Plaintiff is entitled to equal protection of the laws," "Plaintiff has been deprived of his property interest," "Plaintiff was entitled to protection from retaliation against him that affected his liberty interests in his reputation as an honest public employee" and Plaintiff was deprived of certain benefits "without due process." (Am. Compl. ¶¶ 31, 33, 36 and 34 (#12).) The Constitution and its Amendments do not, in and of themselves, create private rights of action. The vehicle for asserting constitutional violations is 42 U.S.C. § 1983. Section 1983 imposes liability on anyone who, under color of state law, deprives a person "of any rights, privileges, or immunities secured by the Constitution and laws." 42 U.S.C. § 1983. Wal-Mart, however, is a private actor, and to state a claim for relief in an action brought under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, a party must establish that an alleged constitutional deprivation was committed under color of state law. Am. Mfrs. Mut. Ins. Co. v. Sullivan, 526 U.S. 40, 50, 119 S. Ct. 977, 143 L. Ed. 2d 130 (1999). Plaintiff has not done so. Therefore, [*7]  to the extent Plaintiff intended to assert a claim for relief under section 1983, that claim fails.

1. Reasonable Accommodation
The ADA's definition of discrimination includes "not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability . . . unless such covered entity can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). Plaintiff has the "burden of showing the existence of a reasonable accommodation that would have enabled him to perform the essential functions of an available job." Dark v. Curry County, 451 F.3d 1078, 1088 (9th Cir. 2006).
Plaintiff alleges, inter alia, that Wal-Mart discriminated against him by placing him in an area where toxic vapors were present. (Am. Compl. ¶ 32 (#12).) In Plaintiff's opposition (#34), it becomes clear that Plaintiff is referring to his supervisor's request that he lift a leaking car battery. (P.'s Opp. at 6 (#34).) Wal-Mart argues that it provided Plaintiff with all requested accommodations for his chronic asthma, and that it was under no obligation to provide Plaintiff with further accommodations in the absence of a request of some kind. Thus, since Plaintiff never mentioned that he could not lift [*8]  batteries, Wal-Mart did not discriminate against him by asking that he do so. Wal-Mart submits evidence that it granted Plaintiff leaves of absence when requested for appointments and hospitalizations related to the treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. (See Dep. of Guy Hill, Ex. B, 155:2-19; 155:23-156:8 (#31). Wal-Mart additionally allowed Plaintiff to take a year-long continuous leave of absence for a medical reason from June 2006 to June 2007. (Aff. of Gwen Vigil, Ex. 2, ¶¶ 4-7 (#31).) When one of Plaintiff's managers, Cynthia Willis, received information during Plaintiff's leave of absence that plaintiff might have been able to return to work with modified work duties, she wrote to Plaintiff and offered him two positions at the store under Wal-Mart's Temporary Alternative Duty policy. (Aff. of Cynthia Willis, Ex. 3, ¶¶ 4-5, (#31).) Cynthia Willis understood Plaintiff could perform these positions in view of his physicians workplace restrictions. (Id. ¶ 5.) Plaintiff declined the offers and advised her he wished to remain on his leave of absence. (Id. ¶ 6.) Wal-Mart, in response, continued Plaintiff's leave of absence. (Id. ¶ 7.)
Plaintiff argues that he [*9]  did not ask for any accommodations because his role as a greeter did not include "moving old and leaking batteries." (P.'s Opp. at 4 (#34).) Plaintiff also argues that, with respect to Cynthia Willis's offer, those positions would "endanger his health further" and he was "unclear as to whether any job was offered to him." (Id. at 5.)
The Ninth Circuit has held that once an employee gives notice of the employee's disability and the desire for accommodation, an employer has a mandatory obligation under the ADA to engage in an "interactive process" to identify possible reasonable accommodations. Barnett v. U.S. Air, Inc., 228 F.3d 1105, 1114 (9th Cir. 2000) (overruled on other grounds). "In circumstances in which an employee is unable to make such a request, if the company knows of the existence of the employee's disability, the employer must assist in initiating the interactive process." Id. In this case, the accommodation at issue was not lifting car batteries. It is undisputed that Plaintiff did not inform Wal-Mart that he had problems lifting batteries due to his asthma. Moreover, Plaintiff does not argue, nor provide any evidence suggesting, that he was somehow unable to express to Wal-Mart he could not lift car batteries. Plaintiff's argument that he did not need [*10]  to tell Wal-Mart that he could not lift car batteries because lifting car batteries was not expressly included in his job description is insufficient to create a genuine issue of material fact. Therefore, we will grant summary judgment to Defendant with respect to Plaintiff's ADA claim to the extent it is based on Wal-Mart's failure to provide reasonable accommodations.

2. Plaintiff was not a qualified person with a disability from June 12, 2006 to the present
It is not clear from either the Amended Complaint or Plaintiff's opposition to the present motion whether Plaintiff alleges that Wal-Mart's termination was motivated by his disability, and thus violated the ADA. Nevertheless, Wal-Mart asks for summary judgment on this issue. Wal-Mart contends that it terminated Plaintiff because he was unable to work in any capacity for them. Thus, at the time he was terminated, Plaintiff was not a qualified individual with a disability under the ADA and could not avail himself of its protections. Plaintiff does not address this argument in his opposition to the present motion.
The ADA provides that no covered employer "shall discriminate against a qualified individual with a disability because [*11]  of the disability of such individual in regard to job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, condition, and privileges of employment." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). To establish a prima facie case of employment discrimination under the ADA, the plaintiff must prove three elements: (1) the plaintiff is disabled within the meaning of the ADA; (2) the plaintiff is a qualified individual able to perform the essential functions of the job, with reasonable accommodations; and (3) the plaintiff suffered an adverse employment action because of her disability. Allen v. Pac. Bell, 348 F.3d 1113, 1114 (9th Cir. 2003) (per curiam). The ADA defines qualified individual as "an individual who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds or desires." 42 U.S.C.A. § 12111(8). A person who is totally disabled and not able to perform the essential functions of the job is not a qualified person with a disability. Kennedy v. Applause, Inc., 90 F.3d 1477, 1482 (9th Cir. 1996). In this case, it is undisputed that at the time Plaintiff was terminated he was unable to work for Wal-Mart in any capacity. (See Dep. Of Guy Hill, Ex. 1, 209:17-211:2 (#31).) Indeed, Plaintiff testified that he is still [*12]  unable to work today. (Dep. Of Guy Hill, Ex. 1, 288:10-12 (#31).) Thus, to the extent that Plaintiff's ADA claim is based on the allegation that Wal-Mart terminated him because of his disability, summary judgment in favor of Defendant is appropriate.

3. Harassment
Plaintiff alleges that "Defendants intimidated and harassed" him "by requiring him to work in hazardous conditions under threat of losing his position . . . ." (Am. Compl. ¶ 40 (#12).) Plaintiff also alleges that Wal-Mart failed to train or reprimand the supervisors Rick Burns or John Powell sufficiently to deter their discriminatory harassing, retaliatory and threatening acts against persons similarly situated to the Plaintiff . . . ." (Am. Compl. ¶ 41 (#12).) Defendant argues that Plaintiff has produced no evidence in support of this allegation. Specifically, Wal-Mart contends that, though there is some evidence that Plaintiff found certain comments made by his supervisor to be insulting, there is no evidence that any comment was related to or motivated by Plaintiff's disability. (See Dep. of Guy Hill, Ex. B, 256:8-278:25 (#31).)
The Ninth Circuit has not recognized a hostile work environment claim under the ADA and has declined [*13]  to decide whether such a claim exists. Brown v. City of Tucson, 336 F.3d 1181, 1190 (9th Cir. 2003). At least one district court in the Ninth Circuit, however, has held that the ADA permits a claim for hostile work environment based on a plaintiff's disability. See Rood v. Umatilla County, 526 F. Supp. 2d 1164, 1176 (D. Or. 2007). "A hostile work environment claim under the ADA would be governed by the same legal standards as hostile work environment claim under Title VII." Id. at 667. Thus, in order for a plaintiff establish a prima facie case of hostile work environment based upon disability, that plaintiff must show "(1) she is a qualified individual with a disability, (2) she was subject to verbal or physical harassment because of her disability, (3) the conduct was unwelcome, and (4) the conduct was sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of employment and to create an abusive working environment." Id.
In this case, there is no evidence that any of the comments made by Plaintiff's supervisor were motivated by Plaintiff's disability. Moreover, no incident described by Plaintiff would be found by a reasonable individual to be hostile or abusive. See id. ("For the court to determine whether the conduct was sufficiently severe or pervasive, plaintiff must prove she subjectively felt the conduct was [*14]  abusive, and that a reasonable person would also find the conduct was hostile or abusive." Thus, in light of the scant evidence and lack of argument in support of this claim, we will grant summary judgment in favor of defendant on Plaintiff's hostile work environment claim.

B. Retaliation
Plaintiff's second claim for relief is entitled "retaliation for protected activity against all Defendants." Plaintiff alleges that he "has suffered retaliation for making claims against the Defendants for discriminatory acts and hostile work environment and for filing with the EEOC and for requesting that a workmen's compensation claim be filed on his behalf and for requesting his long-term disability." (Am. Compl. ¶ 45 (#12).) In his opposition, Plaintiff clarifies that his retaliation claim is based on his filing of a worker's compensation claim. (P.'s Opp. at 10 (#34).)
Plaintiff does not identify the statute or legal theory upon which he seeks relief. Defendant presumes that Plaintiff is asserting a retaliation claim under the ADA, and Plaintiff has not objected to the characterization. Under the ADA a Plaintiff can establish a prima facie case of retaliation by showing "(1) involvement in a protected activity, [*15]  (2) an adverse employment action and (3) a causal link between the two." Brown, 336 F.3d at 1187.
Defendant argues that there is no evidence suggesting that there is any causal connection between Plaintiff filing a claim for a workplace injury with Sedgwick Claims Management Insurance in November 2006 and his discharge in June 2007. (MSJ at 17 (#31).) We agree. Plaintiff, moreover, in his opposition, offers no argument or evidence in defense of this claim. He merely asserts that "he was retaliated against for attempting to file a worker's compensation claim. Retaliatory discharge by an employer is actionable in tort." (P.'s Opp at 10 (#34).) This conclusory statement is insufficient to defeat summary judgment. We will therefore grant summary judgment in favor of Defendant on Plaintiff's second cause of action.

C. Wrongful Termination in Violation of Public Policy, Whistleblowing
Plaintiff's third claim is entitled "Wrongful Termination in Violation of Public Policy, Whistleblowing." This claim has been dismissed with prejudice (#30) pursuant to a stipulation (#29) by the parties.

D. Bad Faith by Hartford
Plaintiff's fourth claim is entitled "Bad Faith by Hartford." This claim is alleged only against a former defendant, who has already [*16]  been dismissed from this lawsuit. This claim, therefore, has already been disposed of, and is no longer a part of the case.

E. Negligence
Plaintiff's fifth claim for relief is negligence. Plaintiff alleges that Wal-Mart breached its duties to Plaintiff to (1) provide a safe workplace; (2) train his supervisors and to train him in handling materials that contained toxic vapors; (3) notify Plaintiff that he had been exposed to a toxic material or harmful physical agent in concentrations which exceeded those prescribed by an applicable occupational safety and health standard in the workplace; and (4) train his supervisors to manage employees without discrimination against those employees because of their age or disability. (Am. Compl. ¶¶ 70-73 (#12).) Plaintiff alleges Defendant violated those duties resulting in the "injuries sustained by the Plaintiff that caused him to have respiratory failure, be hospitalized for more than a month in critical condition and now remain permanently disabled." (Am. Compl. ¶ 75 (#12).)
Defendant argues that Plaintiff's negligence claim, which is based on his inhalation of battery fumes on June 12, 2006, is barred by Nevada's two year statute of limitations [*17]  on negligence actions because Plaintiff did not file the complaint in the present lawsuit until September 2008.1 Defendant also argues that Nevada Revised Statute 616A.020(1) bars Plaintiff's common law negligence claim because the statute provides that workers compensation is the exclusive remedy for "injury by accident sustained arising out of and in the course of the employment . . . ." NEV. REV. STAT. 616A.020(1). Plaintiff does not address Defendant's statute of limitations argument. Instead he alleges that Wal-Mart "failed to avail itself of the protection offered [assumedly by Nev. Rev. Stat. 616A.020(1)] by having filed the notice of an industrial accident." (P.'s Opp. at 11 (#34).) Plaintiff also argues that he bases his negligence claim not only on Wal-Mart's failure to maintain a safe workplace, but Wal-Mart's failure to file his claim for worker's compensation. (P.'s Opp. at 4 (#34).)

1. Failure to File Worker's Compensation Claim
Nevada Revised Statute 616A.020 immunizes employers who provide workers' compensation insurance for their employees from lawsuits connected with employees' industrial injuries. Richards v. Republic Silver State Disposal, Inc., 122 Nev. 1213, 148 P.3d 684, 687 (Nev. 2006). Plaintiff apparently concedes that the statute bars his claim, but argues that Wal-Mart cannot avail itself of its immunity because Wal-Mart failed to report Plaintiff's injury in a timely matter in violation of [*18]  Nevada Revenue Statute 616C.045, which provides as follows:
Except as otherwise provided in NRS 616B.727, within 6 working days after the receipt of a claim for compensation from a physician or chiropractor, or a medical facility if the duty to file the claim for compensation has been delegated to the medical facility pursuant to NRS 616C.040, an employer shall complete and file with his insurer or third-party administrator an employer's report of industrial injury or occupational disease.
Nev. Rev. Stat. § 616C.045(1). Plaintiff fails to cite, nor have we discovered, any authority in support of the position that an employer waives the protections of section 616A.020 by failing to properly follow workers compensation procedures. We therefore reject Plaintiff's argument and find that section 616A.020 provides Defendant with a complete defense to Plaintiff's negligence claim insofar as the negligence claim is based on Plaintiff's inhalation of battery fumes.
To the extent that Plaintiff's negligence claim is based on failure to file a workers compensation claim in a timely manner, Plaintiff's claim likewise fails. Nevada's workers compensation scheme is comprehensive and exclusive with respect to the rights and remedies of those subject to its terms. Nev. Rev. Stat. 616A.020(1). If Plaintiff's workers compensation claim was denied, [*19]  Plaintiff's recourse does not lie with the district court. The proper procedures for workers' compensation appeals are set forth in Nev. Rev. Stat. §§ 616C.305, 616C.345 and 616C.385.

2. Statute of Limitations
Defendant also argues that, to the extent Plaintiff's negligence claim is based on his June 12, 2006 injury, it is barred by Nevada's two year statute of limitations. We agree. Under Nev. Rev. Stat. 11.190, there is a two year statute of limitations for "actions to recover damages for injuries to a person or for the death of a person caused by the wrongful act or neglect of another." Nev. Rev. Stat. 11.190(4)(e). Plaintiff did not file the present lawsuit until September 15, 2008, more than two years after his injury. Plaintiff presents no appropriate reason why the statute of limitations should be tolled. Thus, we will grant summary judgment to Defendant with respect to Plaintiff's negligence claim.

F. Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress
Plaintiffs' fifth claim for relief alleges intentional infliction of emotional distress. The elements of a cause of action for intentional infliction of emotional distress are "(1) extreme and outrageous conduct with either the intention of, or reckless disregard for, causing emotional distress, (2) the plaintiff's having suffered [*20]  severe or extreme emotional distress and (3) actual or proximate causation." Dillard Dept. Stores, Inc. v. Beckwith, 989 P.2d 882, 886 (Nev. 1999). Defendant argues that there is no evidence to substantiate this claim. We agree. Moreover, Plaintiff provides no evidence or argument in support of this claim in his opposition. Indeed, he does not so much as address this claim. Therefore, we will grant summary judgment in favor of Defendant with respect to this claim.

IV. Conclusion
The evidence demonstrates that Plaintiff has not been discriminated against in violation of the ADA, has not been retaliated against for engaging in a protected activity and was not the victim of intentional infliction of emotional distress. Plaintiff's negligence claim is barred by the applicable statute of limitations and by Nevada Revised Statute 616A.020(1). Plaintiff's third and fourth claims for relief have already been disposed of. (See ## 22, 30).
IT IS, THEREFORE, HEREBY ORDERED that Defendant's "Motion for Summary Judgment or, in the Alternative, Motion for Summary Adjudication" (#31) is GRANTED.
The Clerk shall enter judgment accordingly.
DATED: February 11, 2010.
/s/ Edward C. Reed
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

