Hoctor v. Kittitas County
United States District Court for the Eastern District of Washington
December 18, 2020, Decided; December 18, 2020, Filed
No. 1:19-CV-03201-SAB

Reporter
2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 261276 *; 2020 WL 12815159
PAULA HOCTOR, Plaintiff, v. KITTITAS COUNTY, a municipal corporation, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Paula Hoctor, Plaintiff: Stephen P Connor, LEAD ATTORNEY, Anne-Marie E Sargent, Connor & Sargent PLLC, Seattle, WA.
For Kittitas County, a municipal corporation, Defendant: Nathaniel Bailey, Fisher & Phillips LLP - SEA, Seattle, WA; Suzanne Kelly Michael, Fisher Phillips LLP, Seattle, WA.
Judges: Stanley A. Bastian, Chief United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Stanley A. Bastian
Opinion



ORDER GRANTING IN PART AND DENYING IN PART DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT; SETTING STATUS CONFERENCE
Before the Court is Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment, ECF No. 18. The Court held a videoconference hearing on the motion on December 16, 2020. Stephen Connor appeared for Plaintiff, and Nate Bailey appeared for Defendant. Defendant requests the Court enter summary judgment in its favor on Plaintiff's employment discrimination, retaliation, and failure to accommodate claims because they fail as a matter of law. In response, Plaintiff argues that there are genuine disputes of material fact that preclude entry of summary judgment and that, even if there were no factual disputes, her claims should survive summary judgment. The Court took the motion under advisement. Having reviewed the briefing, the parties' oral arguments, [*2]  and the relevant caselaw, the Court grants in part and denies in part Defendant's motion. As discussed below, the motion is denied as to the employment discrimination and retaliation claim and is granted as to the failure to accommodate claim.

Facts
The following facts are pulled from Plaintiff's Complaint, ECF No. 1, the parties' respective statements of facts, ECF Nos. 19 and 29, and the affidavits in support of each party's briefing. All facts are construed in Plaintiff's favor as the non-moving party. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 250, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986); Dominguez-Curry v. Nev. Transp. Dep't, 424 F.3d 1027, 1034-35 (9th Cir. 2005). Except where stated, the following facts are not disputed.
Plaintiff was employed with the Kittitas County Sheriff's Office for twenty-six years, working her way up the ranks from Corrections Officer to, ultimately, Corrections Commander. Plaintiff was the Corrections Commander of the Kittitas County Corrections Center for approximately ten years, from January 2009 until October 15, 2018, when she was demoted to Corrections Sergeant. Plaintiff was promoted to Corrections Commander after she reported sexual harassment by her direct supervisor and then-leader of the corrections center. Although Defendant insinuates that Plaintiff was directly and immediately promoted to replace her [*3]  harasser, Plaintiff points out that she was not promoted until the Corrections Commander position was created in January 2009, and that she was selected for the position from among a pool of applicants. This new position was part of the Sheriff's command staff and was not covered by any collective bargaining agreements, and Plaintiff served at the pleasure of Sheriff Gene Dana.1

1. Complaints about Plaintiff's Leadership in the Corrections Center
Defendant alleges that Plaintiff micromanaged employees in the Corrections Center and had a disciplinarian leadership style that led seven employees to leave the jail in 2015 and four to leave in 2016. Throughout 2017, Sheriff Dana solicited feedback from various people working in the jail about the working environment there. Several reported fears of retaliation by Plaintiff and her second-in-command, Lieutenant Buntin. In response to these concerns, Sheriff Dana and the Human Resources Department conducted an anonymous survey of jail employees to assess their levels of job satisfaction. Fourteen employees responded to the survey, with three reporting they were not satisfied with their job. ECF No. 31-20. A total of six respondents said the [*4]  jail was not a positive work environment both because of Plaintiff's leadership and chronic issues such as understaffing and lack of recruitment. Sheriff Dana shared the results with Plaintiff and asked her to develop a plan to address the concerns raised by the survey. Although Defendant points to the survey as another reason to demote Plaintiff, Sheriff Dana told Plaintiff that "the good comments outweighed the few bad ones," and that her plan to address the issues was "great work." ECF No. 31-2, 31-3. He also noted that most of the complaints were about issues such as low pay for jail employees and the impact that had on retaining employees long-term. ECF No. 31-3.
In September 2017, Lieutenant Buntin and Sergeants Holt and Barnsley met to discuss what they saw as problems with Plaintiff's leadership and discipline style. They alleged they met in secret because they were concerned that Plaintiff would retaliate against them for raising their concerns. In October 2017, they decided to use a trip to Burien, Washington, to raise their concerns. Put bluntly, it did not go well. Defendant characterized their discussion as calm, but described Plaintiff as emotional and overreacting. Plaintiff [*5]  details a much different course of events, alleging that Lieutenant Buntin berated and yelled at her and encouraged his direct reports to also yell at her. After the trip was over, Plaintiff issued Lieutenant Buntin a written counseling form for his part in the discussion, saying that it was disrespectful.
Complaints about Plaintiff continued in 2018. Sheriff Dana and Undersheriff Myers received complaints from the Washington State Patrol and Kittitas County Sheriff's officers due to Plaintiff's insistence that arrested people involved in car accidents—even minor ones—be checked at a hospital before being admitted to the jail. However, Plaintiff maintains that she was only following County policy in so insisting. Undersheriff Myers and Sheriff Dana also blamed Plaintiff for the jail's struggle to find a medical provider, claiming that Plaintiff did not want to hire providers who could prescribe anti-addiction medications. This stands in contrast with Plaintiff's version of events. She says that Undersheriff Myers took this responsibility away from her, and that she was happy to provide anti-addiction medications in the jail, but that the provider they contracted with previously withdrew [*6]  due to their own staffing issues and because other providers were not authorized to prescribe the medication.
In June 2018, Plaintiff had what would be her final performance evaluation by Undersheriff Myers. ECF No. 31-1 The performance review was glowing and made no mention of any concerns about Plaintiff's leadership of the jail. Indeed, the review said that Plaintiff was "one of the Sheriff's top assets" and said she had been "instrumental in developing and maintaining one of the top facilities in the state." The review also encouraged Plaintiff to "[continue] to empower and develop the employees under your command." ECF No. 31-1 at 5. This performance review largely mirrored the positive performance evaluations Plaintiff had received in the past. ECF Nos. 31-14, 31-15, 31-16, 31-17, 31-18.
In August 2018, Sheriff Dana directed Plaintiff to work with the Criminal Justice Training Commission and Corporal Contreras and Deputy Berg to develop a new training procedure on pepper spray exposure. Prior trainings involved spraying trainees in the face and eyes with pepper spray, but after that resulted in two trainees suffering injuries, it was determined that other options needed to be considered. [*7]  Plaintiff allegedly emailed Contreras and Berg saying there would no longer be training that involved officers being sprayed in the eyes and that she looked forward to hearing their proposals for new training programs. Berg and Contreras reported this to their direct superior, Sergeant Holt. Sergeant Holt then confronted Plaintiff about her directive. According to Plaintiff, Sergeant Holt said that he would have followed her order, and would have directed Contreras and Berg to follow her order, if he knew that the directive to change the training program came from Sheriff Dana and insinuated that he would not have followed the order if it came only from her. Plaintiff requested that all three officers be investigated by Internal Affairs for their failure to follow her directive and what she perceived as disrespect for her position, and all three were cleared of wrongdoing. However, Plaintiff alleges she told Undersheriff Myers after these events that she felt that Sergeant Holt treated her and other women in the jail differently because they were women. Neither party raised this issue again, though Plaintiff alleges that this exchange was a report of discrimination that Undersheriff [*8]  Myers ignored.
Things dramatically escalated in October 2018. On October 1, Lieutenant Buntin asked Sergeant Holt to address a violation of jail policy at the next shift-change meeting. Instead, Sergeant Holt decided to address the issue with each officer individually because he did not want to embarrass the officer who violated the policy. Despite this, Lieutenant Buntin then addressed the same issue with the officers as a group, and singled out the offending officer in front of the entire team. In response, Sergeant Holt submitted a letter asking to be demoted to Corrections Officer because he felt that Lieutenant Buntin and Plaintiff treated him poorly and impaired his ability to perform his duties. That same day, another officer, Corporal Foreman, asked to be demoted to Corrections Officer because he felt his health was declining due to the stress of working in the jail. He said he did not come forward with his concerns earlier because he feared retaliation by Lieutenant Buntin and Plaintiff. A few days later, Contreras and Berg also submitted letters withdrawing from their roles as defensive tactical instructors.
Concerned with this course of events, Sheriff Dana directed Undersheriff [*9]  Myers to look into why these four officers requested demotions. Commander Higashiyama interviewed all four officers, and each explained they felt that Plaintiff and Lieutenant Buntin micromanaged them, were inflexible with regard to jail policies, and were hypercritical of their work. They also indicated they did not come forward earlier because of fears of retaliation.

2. Sheriff Dana's Decision to Demote Plaintiff
Sheriff Dana testified that his vision for the future of the Corrections Center was one motivated by "growth mentorship." He believed this would lead to better job satisfaction in the jail and therefore reduce turnover and improve retention rates. Sheriff Dana asked Undersheriff Myers whether he thought Plaintiff could lead the Corrections Center towards this vision. Undersheriff Myers responded that he did not think she could do so. Based on Plaintiff's perceived inability to work collaboratively with third parties, poor recruiting and retention at the Jail compared to other departments, reports of poor morale among jail staff, and four officers asking for demotions or seeking to give up their trainer responsibilities, Sheriff Dana decided to demote Plaintiff on October [*10]  15, 2018. He did not consider the demotion to be for disciplinary reasons, and instead wanted a change in leadership style. Sheriff Dana and Undersheriff Myers were also displeased with Lieutenant Buntin's leadership, but ultimately decided his performance was a result of trying to conform with Plaintiff's style of leadership. The Interim Corrections Commander, Steve Panattoni, decided to retain Buntin as his lieutenant because he thought he could "rehabilitate" him.
On October 15, 2018, Plaintiff met with Sheriff Dana and Undersheriff Myers to object to her demotion. Sheriff Dana told her that his decision was final. Plaintiff then asked for two weeks off, and Sheriff Dana granted the request. On October 31, 2018, Plaintiff submitted a letter asking to be reinstated and again met with Sheriff Dana and Undersheriff Myers to contest her demotion. She said that she could not perform the duties of her new role—Corrections Sergeant—because of physical limitations related to her fibromyalgia. Sheriff Dana asked how the County could accommodate her limitations; she responded that if she were reinstated to Commander, her needs would be accommodated. Sheriff Dana said he would not reinstate [*11]  her. Plaintiff then submitted a doctor's note, requesting three months of FMLA leave. The leave was approved, and Plaintiff went out on FMLA leave immediately. On November 9, 2018, Sheriff Dana formally denied Plaintiff's request for reinstatement and reiterated that he would help make reasonable accommodations for her new position if she requested them. Plaintiff did not respond.
In early January 2019, Defendant again offered to engage in the interactive process to find accommodations for Plaintiff. In response, on January 21, 2019, Plaintiff submitted a letter of resignation, stating that her fibromyalgia prohibited her from performing the duties of Sergeant. She characterized her departure as a "forced" resignation. Plaintiff's resignation was accepted on February 11, 2019.

Procedural History
Plaintiff filed her Complaint on August 29, 2019. ECF No. 1. She alleged three causes of action: gender discrimination in violation of Title VII and the Washington Law Against Discrimination ("WLAD"); retaliation in violation of Title VII and the WLAD; and a disability discrimination/failure to accommodate claim. ECF No. 1 at 4. She seeks damages under Title VII and the WLAD, attorney's fees and [*12]  costs, and compensatory and punitive damages.

Summary Judgment Standard
Summary judgment is appropriate "if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). There is no genuine issue for trial unless there is sufficient evidence favoring the non-moving party for a jury to return a verdict in that party's favor. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 250. The moving party has the initial burden of showing the absence of a genuine issue of fact for trial. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 325, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). If the moving party meets its initial burden, the non-moving party must go beyond the pleadings and "set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248.
In addition to showing there are no questions of material fact, the moving party must also show it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Smith v. Univ. of Wash. Law Sch., 233 F.3d 1188, 1193 (9th Cir. 2000). The moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law when the non-moving party fails to make a sufficient showing on an essential element of a claim on which the non-moving party has the burden of proof. Celotex, 477 U.S. at 323. The non-moving party cannot rely on conclusory allegations alone to create an issue of material fact. Hansen v. United States, 7 F.3d 137, 138 (9th Cir. 1993). When considering a motion for summary judgment, a court may [*13]  neither weigh the evidence nor assess credibility; instead, "the evidence of the non-movant is to be believed, and all justifiable inferences are to be drawn in his favor." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 255.
In reviewing motions for summary judgment in the employment discrimination context, the court must "zealously guard an employee's right to a full trial, since discrimination claims are frequently difficult to prove without a full airing of the evidence and an opportunity to evaluate the credibility of the witness." McGinest v. GTE Serv. Corp., 360 F.3d 1103, 1112 (9th Cir. 2004). This is because, as the Supreme Court has stated, the real impact of workplace behavior "depends on a constellation of surrounding circumstances, expectations, and relationships which are not fully captured by a simple recitation of the words used or the physical acts performed." Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Serv., Inc., 523 U.S. 75, 81-82 (1998). Thus, very little evidence is necessary to raise a genuine issue of fact regarding an employer's motive; any indication of discriminatory motive may suffice to raise a question that can only be resolved by a factfinder. Schnidrig v. Columbia Mach., Inc., 80 F.3d 1406, 1409 (9th Cir. 1996).

McDonnell Douglas Standard

1. Sex Discrimination Claims
Title VII prevents employment discrimination against any person on account of their race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. Discrimination claims [*14]  may be based on either direct or circumstantial evidence; where a plaintiff relies on circumstantial evidence, courts utilize the burden-shifting analysis set forth in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). Claims brought under the WLAD also apply the McDonnell Douglas framework. Mikkelsen v. Pub. Utility Dist. No. 1 of Kittitas Cty., 189 Wash.2d 516, 528-29, 404 P.3d 464 (2017).
The plaintiff must first establish a prima facie discrimination claim. The plaintiff must show (1) that she is a member of a protected class; (2) she was doing her job satisfactorily; (3) she was nevertheless subjected to actionable adverse employment action; and (4) the circumstances give rise to a reasonable inference that her protected class was a substantial or motivating factor for the adverse employment action. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802. The requisite level of proof at this stage is "minimal and does not even need to rise to the level of preponderance of the evidence," though the plaintiff must still produce some evidence. Weil v. Citizens Telecom. Servs. Co., LLC, 9922 F.3d 993, 1003 (9th Cir. 2019). A plaintiff can show that her protected status was a motivating factor in her termination or demotion if a similarly situated employee not of the protected class was treated differently. Weil, 922 F.3d at 1003. The comparator employee must be "similarly situated...in all material respects." Moran v. Selig, 447 F.3d 748, 755 (9th Cir. 2006). Employees are similarly situated if they have "similar jobs and display similar conduct." [*15]  Vasquez v. Cty. of Los Angeles, 349 F.3d 634, 6441 (9th Cir. 2003).
If the plaintiff meets her burden, the burden then shifts to the employer to rebut the presumption of discrimination by showing that the plaintiff was demoted or terminated for a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason. Texas Dep't of Comm. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 254-55, 101 S. Ct. 1089, 67 L. Ed. 2d 207 (1981). This is not a burden of persuasion, and it is sufficient if the employer introduces admissible evidence that raises a genuine issue of fact as to whether it discriminated against the plaintiff. Id.
If the employer meets its burden of production, the burden then shifts back again to the plaintiff to show that the employer's proffered reasons are mere pretext or are otherwise not worthy of belief. Id. at 256; Coghlan v. Am. Seafoods Co., LLC, 413 F.3d 1090, 1094-95 (9th Cir. 2005). When a plaintiff relies only on circumstantial evidence, the evidence offered to rebut the employer must be "specific and substantial" to defeat an employer's motion for summary judgment. Coghlan, 413 F.3d at 1095.

2. Retaliation Claims
To establish a prima facie case of retaliation, the plaintiff must demonstrate (1) a protected activity; (2) an adverse employment action; and (3) a causal link between the protected activity and the adverse employment action. Cornwell v. Electra Cent. Credit Union, 439 F.3d 1018, 1034-35 (9th Cir. 2006). An employee who makes a formal or informal claim of discriminatory treatment engages in a protected activity. Ray v. Henderson, 217 F.3d 1234, 1240 (9th Cir. 2000). Causation may be inferred from [*16]  the proximity in time between the protected action and the allegedly retaliatory employment decision. Cornwell, 439 F.3d at 1035 (quoting Yartzoff v. Thomas, 809 F.2d 1371, 1376 (9th Cir. 1987)). Once a prima facie case of retaliation is established, the McDonnell Douglas framework applies. Cornwell, 439 F.3d at 1035.

Discussion
Defendant requests the Court enter summary judgment in its favor on all three of Plaintiff's claims because she fails to state claims as a matter of law. In response, Plaintiff argues that there are genuine disputes of material fact. She also argues that she has presented enough evidence to survive a motion for summary judgment. For the reasons discussed below, the motion is granted in part and denied in part.

1. Sex Discrimination Claim
Plaintiff alleges that she was discriminated against on the basis of her sex when she was demoted from Corrections Commander to Sergeant. Defendant argues that Plaintiff's claim fails as a matter of law because it had legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons to demote her and Plaintiff cannot show they are pretextual or otherwise unworthy of belief.

a. Prima Facie Discrimination Claim
Plaintiff establishes a prima facie case of sex discrimination. She is a woman and is therefore a member of a protected class. In all performance reviews and in the one four [*17]  months before her demotion, Plaintiff's superior officers commended her as a valuable asset to the County and the Sheriff's Office. This suggests she was doing her job satisfactorily. Her demotion from Corrections Commander is an adverse employment action.
The only element the parties dispute is whether the circumstances of Plaintiff's demotion lead to a reasonable inference that her sex a substantial or motivating factor for the adverse employment action.
Plaintiff has introduced sufficient evidence that her sex was a substantial or motivating factor in her demotion. Plaintiff was only one of two women in law enforcement positions in the jail, and the only other woman officer was an entry level corrections officer. ECF No. 31 at ¶ 33. She was also the only woman law enforcement supervisor in the entire County. Id. at ¶ 34. Statistical evidence of demographic disparities of this kind is evidence from which a jury could infer a culture of discrimination. See Davis v. Teal Elec. Co., 520 F.3d 1080, 1092-93 (9th Cir. 2008). Defendant argues this is a red herring and that Plaintiff was responsible for recruiting in the jail, so the lack of other women employees is her fault. However, Defendant does not introduce evidence to support this argument and, [*18]  viewing the evidence in the record in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, a jury could find that this evidence supports an inference that Plaintiff was demoted because of her sex.
Plaintiff's interactions with Undersheriff Myers could also give rise to the inference that her sex was a motivating factor for her demotion. Plaintiff argues that although Sheriff Dana made the final decision to demote her, that decision was based on Undersheriff Myers's opinion that she could not execute the Sheriff's vision for the jail. A subordinate's discriminatory animus can satisfy this prong so long as the plaintiff can establish a casual link by showing the subordinate influenced or was involved in the decision-making process. France v. Johnson, 795 F.3d 1170, 1175-76 (9th Cir. 2015). Furthermore, Plaintiff testified that Undersheriff Myers treated her differently than her male counterparts—he was dismissive of her concerns, denied her requests unless she was supported by a male supervisor, and took action with regards to the jail without consulting her or telling her that action had been taken. He also demoted one of her best sergeants without any discussion with her after he was arrested for DUI although he consulted with male supervisors before making [*19]  decisions of this nature. Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, this evidence gives rise to an inference that sex was a motivating or substantial factor in her demotion.
Accordingly, Plaintiff has satisfied the first prong of the McDonnell Douglas test by establishing a prima face sex discrimination claim. The burden now shifts to Defendant.

b. Evidence of Legitimate, Nondiscriminatory Reason for Demotion
Defendant argues that it properly used its business judgment to determine that Plaintiff should be demoted. Sheriff Dana considered the following facts in determining that Plaintiff should be demoted:
• Six employees left the jail in 2015;
• Four employees left the jail in 2016;
• Seven employees left the jail in 2018 through the week of Plaintiff's demotion;
• Reports in 2017 that there was a poor working environment in the jail;
• Complaints about Plaintiff's leadership and high turnover in an anonymous employee survey in 2017;
• Issues with securing a jail medical provider that could provide anti-addiction medication in the jail;
• Issues with enforcement of County policy regarding arrestees involved in car accidents;
• Corporal Foreman asked to be demoted based on alleged mistreatment [*20]  by Plaintiff and Lieutenant Buntin;
• Sergeant Holt asked to be demoted based on alleged mistreatment by Plaintiff and Lieutenant Buntin; and
• Corporal Contreras and Deputy Berg withdrew from their Defensive Tactics
Training roles based on Plaintiff's handling of the pepper spray policy. Defendant also emphasizes that Sheriff Dana did not view Plaintiff's demotion as disciplinary in nature. Rather, he wanted a different leadership style in charge of the jail, and he did not believe Plaintiff could execute this vision. Because Defendant's burden is one of production and not persuasion, Defendant has satisfied its burden and it now shifts back to Plaintiff.

c. Evidence of Pretext
Plaintiff argues that there are several grounds on which a jury could determine that Defendant's proffered reasons are pretext or otherwise unworthy of belief: (1) the circumstances and manner of her demotion; (2) Lieutenant Buntin faced similar complaints but was not demoted; and (3) there is substantial evidence from which a jury could reasonably determine that Defendant's reasons for her demotion are false, including the 2017 survey, chronic issues with recruitment and retention at the jail, and Defendant's belief [*21]  that Plaintiff could not improve her allegedly deficient performance but men in the Sherriff's Office could.
There are genuine disputes of material fact as to whether Defendant's proffered reasons for demoting Plaintiff are mere pretext. Whether Defendant's explanations should be believed would require a jury to weigh the witnesses' credibility, the legitimacy of the reasons given for Plaintiff's demotion, and make important decisions about Sheriff Dana and Undersheriff Myers' intent. See Wallis J.R. Simplot Co., 26 F.3d 885, 890 (9th Cir. 1994); Chaung v. Univ. of Cal. Davis, Bd. of Trs., 225 F.3d 1115, 1127 (9th Cir. 2000) (a plaintiff can survive summary judgment if evidence of discrimination raises a genuine issue of material fact regarding the truth of the employer's proffered reasons). For example, the parties dispute whether Plaintiff's demotion was disciplinary in nature, whether Plaintiff's leadership was the reason the jail had problems hiring and retaining officers, and whether Defendant's stated reasons for demoting her—like retention and work environment complaints—were actually Plaintiff's fault. Because there are genuine disputes of material fact as to whether Defendant's proffered reasons are pretextual, Defendant's motion for summary judgment on Plaintiff's sex discrimination claim is denied.

2. Retaliation [*22]  Claim
Defendant also requests the Court grant summary judgment in its favor on Plaintiff's retaliation claim. Plaintiff alleges she was retaliated against in violation of state and federal law for reporting sex discrimination by Sergeant Holt to Undersheriff Myers.
Plaintiff complained to Undersheriff Myers about what she characterized as unfair treatment from Sergeant Holt to her and to another woman employee in the jail on the basis of their sex. This report was six weeks prior to her demotion. This satisfies the prima facie case of retaliation.
Defendant argues that its legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for demoting Plaintiff satisfy its burden to show there was no retaliation. It further argues that Plaintiff has no admissible evidence to show that any of the persons involved in her demotion had a retaliatory motive because Undersheriff Myers did not "register Hoctor's remark as a complaint" and did not report it to Sheriff Dana, who made the ultimate decision to demote her. It also argues that Plaintiff was promoted to the Commander position as the direct result of her sexual harassment complaint against her predecessor and his demotion, so it makes no sense that she would be [*23]  retaliated against for making a later claim of discrimination. Finally, Defendant argues that the timing of Plaintiff's demotion does not prove causation because the "final tipping point" was the four officers who asked for demotions or to be relieved of their training responsibilities rather than continue working under Plaintiff.
As with Plaintiff's sex discrimination claim, there are genuine disputes of material fact that prevent summary judgment at this time. A jury should determine whether Defendant's proffered reasons are legitimate and worthy of belief. Accordingly, Defendant's motion for summary judgment as to Plaintiff's retaliation claim is denied.

3. Disability Discrimination/Failure to Accommodate Claim
Finally, Plaintiff alleges that Defendant discriminated against her on the basis of her disability by failing to accommodate her disability. Defendant argues that it is entitled to summary judgment on this claim because Plaintiff failed to meaningfully engage in the interactive process, and therefore her claim fails as a matter of law. The Court grants Defendant's motion as to the failure to accommodate claim.
Under the Americans with Disabilities Act, an employer must participate in the interactive accommodation [*24]  process upon notice of an employee's disability or an employee's request for an accommodation. Barnett v. U.S. Air, Inc., 228 F.3d 1105, 1114 (9th Cir. 2000) (en banc), rev'd on other grounds, 535 U.S. 391, 122 S. Ct. 1516, 152 L. Ed. 2d 589 (2002). Each side must communicate directly and exchange essential information in good faith; neither side may delay or obstruct the process. Id. at 1114-15.
Here, there are no disputes of material fact as to the failure to accommodate claim. The parties agree Plaintiff notified Sheriff Dana that she could not perform the duties of her new role—Sergeant—due to her disability of fibromyalgia. When Plaintiff met with Sheriff Dana after her demotion in early November, she said her disability would be accommodated if she were reinstated to the Commander position. However, promotion is not a reasonable accommodation. See, e.g., Gomez v. Am. Bldg. Maintenance, 940 F. Supp. 225, 260 (N.D. Cal. 1996). She also provided a doctor's note documenting her condition, and had previously received accommodations for this condition. In November 2018, Sheriff Dana notified Plaintiff they could make a reasonable accommodation for the Sergeant position if she requested one. ECF No. 22-3. She did not respond. In January 2019, the County's Human Resources Department again offered to engage in the interactive process. Plaintiff responded, "I do not wish to engage in [*25]  the ADA interactive process; this is a forced resignation, not voluntary." ECF No. 25-2, 25-3.
Failure to meaningfully engage in the interactive process is fatal to a failure to accommodate claim. See Goos v. Shell Oil Co., 452 Fed. Appx. 700, 702 (9th Cir. 2007) (citing Barnett, 228 F.3d at 1113). Accordingly, Defendant's motion for summary judgment as to Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim is granted.
Accordingly, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED:
1. Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment, ECF No. 18, is GRANTED in part and DENIED in part.
2. Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim is dismissed with prejudice.
3. A telephonic status conference to discuss the trial date in this matter is set for January 12, 2021 at 10:00 a.m. Parties shall join the conference by dialing the Court's conference line, 1-888-636-3807, access code 8839796#, no later than five minutes before the start of the conference.
IT IS SO ORDERED. The District Court Clerk is hereby directed to enter this Order and to provide copies to counsel.
DATED this 18th day of December 2020.
/s/ Stanley A. Bastian
Stanley A. Bastian
Chief United States District Judge


End of Document

