Jaafari v. Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi Ufj, Ltd.
United States District Court for the Southern District of New York
September 1, 2011, Decided; September 2, 2011, Filed
10 Civ. 4060 (AKH)

Reporter
2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 166423 *; 2011 WL 13128204
FIRAS JAAFARI, Plaintiff, -against- THE BANK OF TOKYO-MITSUBISHI UFJ, LTD., Defendant.
Subsequent History: Affirmed by Jaafari v. Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ, Ltd., 509 Fed. Appx. 68, 2013 U.S. App. LEXIS 2206 (2d Cir. N.Y., Jan. 30, 2013)
Counsel:  [*1] Firas Jaafari, II, Plaintiff, Pro se, Woodhaven, NY USA.
For The Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi Ufj, Ltd., Defendant: Dov Kesselman, LEAD ATTORNEY, Brian Daniel Murphy, Seyfarth Shaw L.L.P., New York, NY USA.
Judges: ALVIN K. HELLERSTEIN, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: ALVIN K. HELLERSTEIN
Opinion



ORDER GRANTING DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
ALVIN K. HELLERSTEIN, U.S.D.J.:
On April 29, 2010, plaintiff Firas Jaafari, who proceeds pro se in this matter, filed a complaint alleging that defendant The Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ, Ltd. ("BTMU"), his former employer, had discriminated against him based on his race, sex, religion, national origin, age, and disability; had retaliated against him for reporting allegedly illegal transactions; and had unlawfully invaded his privacy. BTMU now moves for judgment on the pleadings pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(c) or, in the alternative, for summary judgment pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56. BTMU gave Jaafari the special notice required when a pro se litigant opposes a Rule 12 motion supported by matters outside the pleadings. See Local R. 12.1 of the Local R, of the U.S. Dist. Courts for the S. and E. Dists. of N.Y. Although Jaafari has had ample time to oppose BTMU's motion, he has not done so to date.1 I exercise my discretion [*2]  to construe BTMU's motion as one for summary judgment and consider matters outside the pleadings. See Fed. R, Civ. P. 12(d). For the reasons that follow, I grant the motion and dismiss the complaint.

I. Background.
On or about August 15, 2005, Jaafari, then thirty-seven years old, started work as a vice president in BTMU's Financial Institutions and Emerging Markets Group ("FIEMG"). His offer letter provided for an annual salary of $100,000, but did not mention bonuses or the specific countries to which he would be assigned, Jaafari allegedly was told that he would be assigned to Brazil, which he considered the most profitable country in Latin America. When he started work, however, Jaafari was assigned to the Andean countries, e.g., Panama, Colombia, Ecuador, Argentina, Bolivia, and Venezuela, When the assignment of Brazil became available, it was given not to Jaafari, but to a new female vice president, Man Ishii, whose annual salary allegedly was $10,000 greater than Jaafari's.
On December 10, 2008, Jaafari and his supervisor, Makoto Kinoshita, met informally to discuss an earlier altercation between Jaafari and a co-worker, Jaafari alleges that, during the conversation, Kinoshita used the word "Kaishaku" [*3]  three times. Jaafari acknowledges that, depending upon the context of its use, the word "Kaishaku" can have a number of meanings, including "fired" and "to go out to dinner." After the meeting, Jaafari gathered some of his personal belongings and sent an email stating, "I am not feeling well and maybe out tomorrow as well." The next day, Jaafari sent an email stating that he would be using fourteen vacation days starting immediately.
In an email sent December 17, 2008, and a letter dated December 23, 2008, Jaafari inquired of BTMU about the status of his employment. In response to both communications, BTMU's human resources department assured Jaafari, in writing, that its official records showed he was on vacation and that his anticipated return-to-work date was January 2, 2009, However, Jaafari did not return to work on the scheduled date, BTMU's human resources department documented his separation from employment as follows: "As you have not returned to work today[,] January 2nd, 2009[,] as required, you are considered to have voluntarily resigned your position, and your employment will be terminated as of today."
On April 6, 2009, Jaafari filed a charge of discrimination with the [*4]  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC"), alleging that BTMU had engaged in unlawful discrimination beginning in January 2006 and continuing through January 2009, The EEOC charge alleged retaliation and discrimination based on race, sex, religion, national origin, age, and disability. The EEOC issued a "right-to-sue" letter on January 29, 2010.
Jaafari filed his complaint with this court on April 29, 2010, alleging that BTMU had (i) retaliated against Jaafari because he had reported an allegedly illegal transaction; (ii) violated the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.; (Hi) violated the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 ("ADEA"), 29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq.; (iv) violated Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964,42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq.; (v) violated the Equal Pay Act of 1963 ("EPA"), 29 U.S.C. § 206(d); and (vi) unlawfully invaded his privacy.
Despite having alleged discrimination in violation of federal law based on his belonging to a number of protected classes, Jaafari repeatedly acknowledged at his deposition his belief that "had [he] not complained about th[e] [allegedly] illegal activity [at BTMU], [he] would still be working" there. Jaafari's sworn statements suggest that he does not, in fact, believe that BTMU [*5]  discriminated against him based on his disability, age, national origin, or sex. Nonetheless, I evaluate the merits of each of Jaafari's claims in turn,
First, Jaafari alleges that BTMU created a hostile work environment and retaliated against him because he had reported and threatened to take action in response to what he believed to be other employees' illegal transactions, Jaafari claims that on June 7, 2006, he reported internally that certain BTMU employees had engaged in transactions that he believes violated the "ethical and compliance standards [of BTMU's] own internal policies" and that are "detrimental to United States firms competing fairly under strict U.S. government laws and regulations." Jaafari alleges that, as a result of his reporting this allegedly illegal activity, BTMU took a number of retaliatory actions against him. For example, Jaafari alleges that his country assignments were changed, that the most profitable deals were assigned to other employees, that a supervisor disclosed to other employees personal information in Jaafari's personnel file, and that his status as an authorized signatory for up to one million United States dollars was terminated. Moreover, [*6]  Jaafari alleges that he was moved from the "main area where other Japanese . . . bankers sat." His new desk, according to his own estimates, was "probably about six, seven meters" away from his previous work station, Jaafari also alleges that BTMU gave him a "dismal performance review . . . full of documented lies, inaccuracies and fabrications," and that he received a bonus of $10,000, which he believed to be low compared to his peers.2
Second, Jaafari alleges that BTMU violated Title I of the ADA (i) by not providing him with a higher work station, to allow him to stand at his desk; and (ii) by not providing a special chair to accommodate his back pain until ten months after he had first made his request. Jaafari claims that, soon after commencing work at BTMU in August 2005, he verbally requested accommodations to alleviate the back pain he experienced while sitting at his desk. However, Jaafari did not formally request an ergonomic chair, by submitting the required paperwork, until April 11, 2006, Along with his formal request, jaafari submitted a doctor's note stating, "Although [Jaafari] is improving in physical therapy and can now sit for half an hour before needing to get up [*7]  and move around, he would benefit from sitting in an orthopedic chair." BTMU paid for and delivered an ergonomic chair to Jaafari on June 26, 2006. BTMU also hired a specialist to instruct Jaafari on how to distance himself from his computer to alleviate discomfort while sitting.
Jaafari claims that, in November 2008, he verbally asked his supervisor, Kinoshita, for another accommodation, namely that he be allowed to use a nearby work station, higher than his desk, so that he could stand while working. However, Jaafari did not formally request this accommodation, by completing the required paperwork, nor did he submit a doctor's note indicating that he needed to stand while working. Jaafari claims that a few days after Kinoshita denied his request, BTMU put a Christmas tree in the space Jaafari had asked to use.
Third, Jaafari alleges that Kinoshita discriminated against Jaafari based on his age, as evidenced by the Kinoshita's comment to the effect that Jaafari was "getting old just like [his] old car" or that Jaafari "break[s] down just like [his] old car." Kinoshita made this comment after Jaafari had experienced a number of problems with his car, which may have required him to take [*8]  time off work.
Fourth, Jaafari alleges that he was subjected to a hostile work environment based on discriminatory comments his supervisor and co-workers allegedly made about his religion3 mid national origin, Jaafari testified at his deposition that his co-workers had not commented on his Middle-Eastern descent until two years after he had started working for BTMU and that he was "extremely grateful [t]o them [f]o[r] having been receptive." Jaafari testified further that his co-workers had known that he was of Middle-Eastern descent since he had commenced working for BTMU in 2005 and that it was "[n]ever an issue."
Then, in 2008, after Jaafari had started working on an Islamic finance project, his supervisor, Kinoshita, allegedly referred to him as "an Arab." However, Jaafari does not remember clearly the context in which Kinoshita made this comment. Jaafari testified at his deposition: "We were talking about, you know, like sports and that sort of stuff, if I remember correctly, and what I remember him saying is like oh, no, no, no. You are just an Arab so what I did, I felt embarrassed, I looked down to the floor."
Around the time of that conversation, the Islamic credit markets were [*9]  frozen, and it became clear that Jaafari's Islamic finance project was not going to happen. Kinoshita, whom Jaafari testified had been supportive of the project, allegedly told Jaafari that working with Islamic finance products is akin to a "Muslim touching a pig." Kinoshita stated that he understood that Jaafari was disappointed but hoped that Jaafari "would not blow [him] self up" or would not "blow up because [he] couldn't do [it]."4
At some undetermined time in 2008, Jaafari went out to lunch with his co-worker, German Garcia. Jaafari and Garcia found themselves near Radio City Music Hall, where they saw a camel. Jaafari gave the following account of the incident at his deposition:
[Jaafari:] . . . [Garcia] came back to the office he said a joke that "Jaafari felt alone. He went out for a walk and he was strolling around New York City and he saw a family member of his. He wanted to go over and hug him." So it was a joke. I laughed a lot about it. It was very funny actually.
[Defense counsel:] You didn't take it the wrong way?
[Jaafari:] No, no, Absolutely not. And then he had a way of putting things, his own personality. He was a nice guy. I don't know what happened to him and there [*10]  was a thing about me and camels and we were joking about this.
Jaafari testified that Kinoshita had overheard Garcia's joke about the camel, although Kinoshita was not involved in the employees' conversation.
Sometime thereafter, Jaafari and other BTMU employees were discussing the economic downturn and Jaafari expressed concern about his job security. Jaafari testified that he and the other employees "were all joking that we should all go to Europe and work there and be paid in Euro's," when Kinoshita said something to the effect that Jaafari's "Arabic w[ould] come in handy at a camel company." Although Kinoshita's comment was similar to Garcia's comment about the camel outside Radio City Music Hall, Jaafari took offense at Kinoshita's comment.
In further support of his national origin discrimination claim, Jaafari points to a May 2007 email, with the subject line "Evaluation," that describes a meeting between the email's author, Kinoshita, and Jaafari. The email states that Jaafari "may have some attack to the bank." The meaning of this statement and the context in which the email was sent are not entirely clear; however, the email was sent around the same time Jaafari alleges BTMU [*11]  gave him a "dismal performance review." In any event, the email could not have contributed to a hostile work environment because Jaafari was not aware of it until after he no longer worked for BTMU.
Lastly, with regard to his national origin discrimination claim, Jaafari claims that BTMU criticized his productivity, punctuality, and Japanese language skills, comparing him only to his Japanese colleagues. And, as a general matter, Jaafari believes that his assignments were re-allocated to Japanese employees,
Fifth, Jaafari alleges that BTMU discriminated against him based on his sex by paying a higher salary and higher bonuses and giving a more profitable country assignment to Mari Ishii, a female vice president. Jaafari alleges that Ishii earned $10,000 more per year than he did. Further, a supervisor allegedly explained that, because "Mari Ishii is a woman and it is very difficult to find Japanese women who are able to perform the same job, it was important for the company to give her an incentive."
Sixth, and finally, Jaafari alleges that BTMU invaded his privacy when someone in the human resources department sent him an email, without password protection, with an attached letter concerning [*12]  his child support payments. Jaafari testified that he was "extremely, extremely upset" about the way in which the letter was handled, and he sent a written complaint to the human resources department about the perceived invasion of his privacy. Jaafari contends that the head of the department, Thomas Hassek, stated in response to Jaafari's letter. "We have terminated people for things less than this." In addition, Jaafari claims that his supervisor, Kinoshita, violated Jaafari's privacy by discussing information from Jaafari's personnel file on the phone in such a way that other employees could overhear the conversation.
The parties exchanged document discovery and BTMU took Jaafari's deposition. BTMU now moves for summary judgment. Despite the passage of more than eight months, Jaafari has not opposed the motion. For the reasons stated below, the motion is granted.

II. Standard of Review.
BTMU relies upon deposition testimony not referred to in or appended to the pleadings; therefore, the court treats BTMU's motion as one for summary judgment.5 See Krijn v. Pogue Simone Real Estate Co., 896 F.2d 687, 689 (2d Cir. 1990); see also Alcantara v. City of New York, 646 F. Supp. 2d 449, 452 (S.D.N.Y. 2009). Upon converting a Rule 12 motion to one for summary judgment, the court "consider[s] all relevant, admissible evidence submitted by [*13]  the parties and contained in 'pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with . . . affidavits.'" Chambers v. Time Warner, Inc., 282 F.3d 147, 154-55 (2d Cir. 2002) (citing former Fed, R. Civ. P. 56(c)).
"If a party fails to properly support an assertion of fact or fails to properly address another party's assertion of fact as required by Rule 56(c), the court may . . . grant summary judgment if the motion and supporting materials—including the facts considered undisputed—show that the movant is entitled to it." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e). The court views the evidence and draws all reasonable factual inferences in favor of the non-moving party. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986).
The court construes pro se complaints liberally, "interpret[ing] them to raise the strongest arguments that they suggest." Burgos v. Hopkins, 14 F.3d 787, 790 (2d Cir. 1994). However, a pro se litigant must still put forward sufficient evidence to make out a genuine dispute of material fact for trial. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a), (c)(1).

III. Discussion.

a. Retaliation Claim Under Title VII Is Dismissed with Prejudice.
Jaafari alleges that BTMU retaliated against him by, among other things, relocating his desk, downgrading his work responsibilities, giving him a poor performance review, and, ultimately, terminating his employment because he requested that BTMU investigate what he believed to be illegal transactions. [*14]  To establish a prima facie case of retaliation under Title VII, a plaintiff must show "'[1] participation in a protected activity known to the defendant; [2] an employment action disadvantaging the plaintiff; and [3] a causal connection between the protected activity and the adverse employment action." Terry v. Ashcroft, 336 F.3d 128, 141 (2d Cir. 2003) (quoting Quinn v. Green Tree Credit Corp., 159 F.3d 759, 769 (2d Cir. 1998)). "Protected activity" includes "oppos[ing] any practice" that Title VII makes "an unlawful employment practice" or "ma[king] charge, testif[fying], assist[ing], or participat[ing] in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing tinder" Title VII. 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-3. Because Jaafari has not alleged that BTMU retaliated against him on the basis of any such protected activity, he does not state a claim of retaliation in violation of Title VII.
Because Jaafari is not represented by counsel, I construe his complaint liberally and consider whether the facts he alleges support a claim under a statute that is potentially more applicable, such as Title VIII of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, also known as the "Corporate and Criminal Fraud Accountability Act," 18 U.S.C. § 1514A, However, before a plaintiff may pursue a claim under the Act in federal court, he or she must first file a complaint with the Secretary [*15]  of Labor. See 18 U.S.C. § 1514A(b)(1), Because there is no indication that Jaafari exhausted his administrative remedies, he cannot pursue a claim under the Act in this court, See Portes v. Wyeth Pharms., Inc., No. 06 Civ. 2689 (WHP), 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 60824, at *16 (S.D.N.Y. Aug. 20, 2007).

b. ADA Claim Is Dismissed with Prejudice.
Jaafari alleges that BTMU violated the ADA by failing timely to provide a proper chair and his desired work station to accommodate his back pain. Under the ADA, an employer is required to provide "reasonable accommodations" for "the known physical . . . limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who is an . . . employee, unless . . . the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). A prima facie case "requires a showing that (1) plaintiff is a person with a disability under the meaning of the ADA; (2) an employer covered by the statute had notice of his disability; (3) with reasonable accommodation, plaintiff could perform the essential functions of the job at issue; and (4) the employer has refused to make such accommodations." Rodal v. Anesthesia Grp. of Onondaga, P.C., 369 F.3d 113, 118 (2d Cir. 2004).
A plaintiff has a disability within die meaning of the ADA if he or she has "a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities," has "a record of such an impairment," [*16]  or is "regarded as having such an impairment. 42 U.S.C. § 12102(1)(A)-(C). By statute, "major life activities include, but are not limited to, caring for oneself, performing manual tasks, seeing, hearing, eating, sleeping, walking, standing, lifting, bending, speaking breathing, learning, reading, concentrating, thinking communicating, and working." Id. § 12102(2)(A).
First—accepting that sitting constitutes a "major life activity," see 29 C.F.R, § 1630.2(i)(i)—there is no evidence that any limitation Jaafari faced as a result of his back pain was "substantial" within the meaning of the ADA, A generalized complaint of back pain, without any evidence to show its nature or severity, its duration, or the existence of any permanent or long-term impact, is insufficient to demonstrate a substantial limitation. See Colwell v. Suffolk County Police Dep't, 158 F.3d 635, 643-44 (2d Cir. 1998) (holding plaintiffs limitation is not substantial where he did not show that generalized pain affecting his ability to sit and stand was any worse than that suffered by a large portion of adult population). Absent evidence to show that Jaafari's back pain substantially limits his ability to perform a major life activity, he cannot maintain his ADA claim. 42 U.S.C. § 12102(1)(A).
Second, even if the court accepts that Jaafari's back pain substantially limited a major [*17]  life activity within the meaning of the ADA, BTMU accommodated Jaafari once he made BTMU aware of his alleged physical limitations. On April 11, 2006, Jaafari formally gave notice of his impairment by submitting the required paperwork and requesting an ergonomic chair. Jaafari's doctor's note stated, "Although [Jaafari] is improving in physical therapy and can now sit for half an hour before needing to get up and move around, he would benefit from sitting in an orthopedic chair." On June 26, 2006, in response to Jaafari's formal request and the documentation from Jaafari's doctor, BTMU gave Jaafari an ergonomic chair. In addition, BTMU brought in a specialist to show Jaafari how to adjust his work space so that he could sit at a more comfortable distance from his computer.6
Nevertheless, Jaafari alleges that BTMU violated the ADA by not allowing him to use a higher work station near his desk. Because Jaafari failed to provide any documentation from his doctor demonstrating a need for a higher work station, and because Jaafari did not file a formal request for such an accommodation, there is no evidence to suggest that BTMU had proper notice that Jaafari needed a higher work station. [*18]  See Rodal 369 F.3d at 118 ('"In general . . . it is the responsibility of the individual with a disability to inform the employer that an accommodation is needed.'" (quoting 29 C.F.R. pt. 1630, app. § 1630.9)); cf. Stola v. Joint Indus. Bd., 889 F. Supp. 133, 135 (S.D.N.Y. 1995) ("When the need for an accommodation is not obvious, an employer, before providing a reasonable accommodation, may require that the individual with a disability provide documentation of the need for accommodation,'" (quoting 29 C.F.R. pt. 1630, app. § 1630.9)). Jaafari merely alleges that he asked verbally whether he could use one particular area to work, "but a couple of days later they put a Christmas tree over there." Ultimately, whether or not Jaafari did provide proper notice, there is no evidence to suggest that he was prevented from standing while working at his desk or walking around to stretch his back or that he was prejudiced because he requested an accommodation.

c. ADEA Claim Is Dismissed with Prejudice.
Jaafari alleges that BTMU discriminated against him based on his age, as evidenced by Kinoshita's comment that Jaafari was "getting old just like [his] old car." To prevail on a claim under the ADEA, a plaintiff must prove he suffered an adverse employment action for which his age was a "but for" cause. See Gross v. FBL Fin. Servs., 557 U.S. 167, 129 S. Ct. 2343, 2351, 174 L. Ed. 2d 119 (2009). Kinoshita made this [*19]  comment about Jaafari's age only after Jaafari had mentioned that he was "having issues with [his] car." Jaafari did not experience any adverse employment action that directly corresponded with or followed closely after this lone comment. As this was the only comment made in relation to Jaafari's age over a period of almost three-and-one-half years' employment, I find Jaafari's age discrimination claim to be frivolous.

d. Hostile Work Environment Claim Is Dismissed with Prejudice.
Jaafari alleges that BTMU subjected him to a hostile work environment because of his Middle-Eastern descent and Muslim religious beliefs and took away some of his work responsibilities because he is not Japanese. Jaafari's hostile work environment claim falls short, however, because the challenged comments were neither "severe" nor "pervasive." Harris v. Forklift Sys., Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21, 114 S. Ct. 367, 126 L. Ed. 2d 295 (1993) (describing discriminatory conduct as "severe" and "pervasive" when it "'alter[s] the conditions of the victim's employment and create[s] an abusive working environment'" (quoting Meritor Sav. Bank, FSB v. Vinson, 477 U.S. 57, 67, 106 S. Ct. 2399, 91 L. Ed. 2d 49 (1986))).
Jaafari claims that his supervisor, Kinoshita, and his co-workers made several comments in 2008 about his Middle-Eastern descent and Muslim religious beliefs. Several of the comments were [*20]  made at or around that time that Jaafari, on BTMU's behalf, worked on an Islamic finance project that ultimately fell through. And it appears, based on Jaafari's own testimony, that several of the comments were meant to be jokes. Although derogatory comments made in jest may be offensive to some, Title VII does not set forth a "general civility code," but rather "forbids only behavior so objectively offensive as to alter the Conditions' of the victim's employment." Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Servs., 523 U.S 75, 80-81, 118 S. Ct. 998, 140 L. Ed. 2d 201 (1998); see Harris, 510 U.S. at 21 (noting that the "'mere utterance of an . . . epithet which engenders offensive feelings in an employee* does not sufficiently affect the conditions of employment to implicate Title VII" (quoting Meritor Sav. Bank, FSB v. Vinson, 477 U.S. 57, 67, 106 S. Ct. 2399, 91 L. Ed. 2d 49 (1986))). Because Jaafari does not allege conduct that is "severe or pervasive enough to create an objectively hostile or abusive work environment"—that is, "an environment that a reasonable person would find hostile or abusive"—he cannot prevail on this claim. Harris, 510 U.S. at 21.
In addition, Jaafari alleges that some of his work responsibilities were taken from him and given to Japanese employees in his division. However, Jaafari does not provide any specific information regarding which of his responsibilities were eliminated, or under what circumstances, [*21]  and he fails to demonstrate that he was qualified to perform those specific responsibilities. Jaafari's vague allegations, unsupported by evidence, cannot survive BTMU's motion for summary judgment. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(1).

e. Sex Discrimination Claims Are Dismissed with Prejudice.
Jaafari alleges that BTMU discriminated against him based on his sex in violation of the Equal Pay Act and Title VII by paying a higher salary and bonuses to a female vice president in his department, Mari Ishii.7 To establish a prima facie case of wage discrimination under the Equal Pay Act, a plaintiff must prove: "(1) the employer pays different wages to employees of the opposite sex; (2) the employees perform equal work on jobs requiring equal skill, effort, and responsibility; (3) the jobs are performed under similar working conditions." Aldrich v. Randolph Cent. Sch. Dist., 963 F.2d 520, 524 (2d Cir. 1992); see 29 U.S.C. § 206(d)(1). Roughly the same analysis applies to a claim of sex-based wage discrimination under Title VII as under the Equal Pay Act. See Belfi v. Prendergast 191 F.3d 129, 139 (2d Cir. 1999) (requiring Title VII plaintiff to "show that (1) [he] is a member of a protected class; and (2) [he] was paid less than non-members of [his] class for work requiring substantially the same responsibility"). However, "[i]n addition to the requirements that [*22]  are generally the same as those under the [Equal Pay Act], 'a Title VII plaintiff must also produce evidence of discriminatory animus in order to make out a prima facie case.'" Id. (quoting Tomka v. Seiler Corp., 66 F.3d 1295, 1313 (2d Cir. 1995). Jaafari claims that Ishii was paid $10,000 more annually than he was because of her sex. However, Jaafari does not allege that he and Ishii had substantially equal responsibility. Although Ishii worked in the same department as Jaafari, she was responsible for a different geographic region and may have performed different tasks.
Even if Jaafari were able to make a prima facie case of discrimination under the Equal Pay Act or Title VII, BTMU has met its burden of showing that any pay differential was due to a factor other than sex. Under the Equal Pay Act, an employer may justify a wage disparity by showing that the disparity results from "a seniority system"; "a merit system"; or "a system which measures earnings by quantity or quality of production," or by showing that the "differential [is] based on any other factor other than sex." 29 U.S.C. § 206(d)(1); Aldrich, 963 F.2d at 524. And a plaintiff may not challenge under Title VII a wage disparity that falls into one of those four categories and is therefore "authorized" by the Equal Pay [*23]  Act. 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2(h); County of Wash. v. Gunther, 452 U.S. 161, 167-71, 101 S. Ct. 2242, 68 L. Ed. 2d 751 (1981). A wage differential based on education and relevant work experience is a sufficient affirmative defense under the Equal Pay Act. Ottaviani v. State Univ. of N.Y., 679 F. Supp. 288, 338 (S.D.N.Y. 1988); see also Virgona v. Tufenkian Imp.-Exp. Ventures., Inc., No. 05 Civ. 10856 (GEL), 2008 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 72139 at *31-32 (S.D.N.Y. Sept. 23, 2008). BTMU has shown that Ishii had several more years of relevant work experience after business school as compared to Jaafari. In addition, BTMU has shown that at least two of Jaafari's prior positions were internships whereas Ishii's experience came from full-time employment. Therefore, in the absence of any opposition from Jaafari, BTMU has sufficiently justified any wage disparity by demonstrating that Ishii had both qualitatively and quantitatively more experience than Jaafari.

f. Invasion of Privacy Claim Is Dismissed Without Prejudice.
Having decided all claims arising under federal law. I note that Jaafari has not alleged diversity of citizenship and it appears unlikely he can establish an amount in controversy in excess of $75,000 for his invasion of privacy claim. See 28 U.S.C. § 1332(a). With no federal claims remaining, I decline to exercise supplemental jurisdiction over Jaafari's invasion of privacy claim. See Klein & Co. Futures v. Bd. of Trade, 464 F.3d 255, 262 (2d Cir. 2006) ("It is well settled that where . . . federal claims are eliminated in the early stages [*24]  of litigation, courts should generally decline to exercise pendent jurisdiction over remaining state law claims.").
Even if I were to exercise supplemental jurisdiction over the claim, I note that New York "ha[s] no common law of privacy." Howell v. N.Y. Post Co., 81 N.Y.2d 115, 612 N.E.2d 699, 703, 596 N.Y.S.2d 350 (N.Y. 1993); see Waldron v. Ball Corp., 210 A.D.2d 611, 619 N.Y.S.2d 841, 844 (N.Y. App. Div. 1994) ("[T]here is no common-law right of action for invasion of privacy in New York."). Moreover, New York statutory law on privacy prohibits only "the use of a living person's name, portrait or picture for 'advertising' or 'trade' purposes without prior written consent." Howell, 612 N.E.2d at 703; see N.Y. Civ. Rights Law §§ 50, 51. Jaafari's invasion of privacy of claim plainly does not fall within that category, and he identifies no other relevant source of law.

IV. Conclusion.
For the foregoing reasons, BTMU's motion for summary judgment is granted and Jaafari's request for additional time to oppose the motion is denied as moot.
With the exception of Jaafari's invasion of privacy claim, the complaint is dismissed with prejudice. The Clerk shall enter judgment in favor of BTMU mid mark the motions (Doc. Nos. 20, 25, and 26) terminated and the case closed.
SO ORDERED.
Dated: September 1, 2011
New York, New York
/s/ Alvin K. Hellerstein
ALVIN K. HELLERSTEIN
United States District Judge


End of Document

