Johnston v. Hunter Douglas Window Fashions, Inc.
United States District Court for the District of Colorado
June 9, 2016, Decided; June 9, 2016, Filed
Case No. 15-cv-00852-RM-KLM

Reporter
2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 193111 *
ALFRED LARRY JOHNSTON, Plaintiff, v. HUNTER DOUGLAS WINDOW FASHIONS, INC., et al., Defendants.
Subsequent History: Reconsideration denied by, Motion denied by Johnson v. Hunter Douglas Window Fashions, Inc., 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 215786 (D. Colo., Feb. 14, 2017)
Counsel:  [*1] For Alfred Larry Johnston, Plaintiff: Christopher Lynn Ingold, Ingold Law, LLC, Walnut, CA USA.
For Hunter Douglas Window Fashions, Inc., Defendant: Micah David Dawson, Holland & Hart, LLP-Denver, Denver, CO USA; Gregory Alan Eurich, Miller & Steiert, P.C., Littleton, CO USA.
For Liberty Insurance Corporation, Defendant: Brian John Spano, Lyndsay K. Arundel, Lewis Roca Rothgerber Christie LLP-Denver, Denver, CO USA.
For Sander Hugh Orent, M.D., Defendant: Brian G. McConaty, Robinson Waters & O'Dorisio, P.C., Denver, CO USA.
For Lawrence Allen Lesnak, D.O., and John Does 1-5, Defendant: Douglas C. Wolanske, Mark B. Collier, Messner & Reeves LLP, Denver, CO USA.
Judges: RAYMOND P. MOORE, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: RAYMOND P. MOORE
Opinion



OPINION AND ORDER
On August 19, 2015, plaintiff Alfred Larry Johnson ("plaintiff") filed an Amended Complaint against defendants Hunter Douglas Window Fashions, Inc. ("Hunter Douglas"), Liberty Insurance Corporation ("Liberty"), Dr. Sander Hugh Orent ("Orent"), and Dr. Lawrence Allen Lesnak ("Lesnak," and collectively with Hunter Douglas, Liberty, and Orent, "defendants"), asserting the following seven claims for relief: (1) violation of statute and breach of contract against [*2]  Hunter Douglas and Liberty; (2) bad faith against Hunter Douglas and Liberty; (3) age discrimination against Hunter Douglas;1 (4) retaliation under Title VII against Hunter Douglas;2 (5) disability discrimination under the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. et seq. ("the ADA"), against Hunter Douglas; (6) breach of fiduciary duty against Orent and Lesnak; and (7) outrageous conduct against defendants. (ECF No. 8.)
On September 8, 2015, defendants began filing a fairly steady stream of motions to dismiss the Amended Complaint. First, Liberty filed a motion to dismiss Claim One. (ECF No. 22.) Second, Orent filed a motion to dismiss all claims raised against him. (ECF No. 28.) Third, Hunter Douglas filed a motion to dismiss all claims raised against it. (ECF No. 30.) Fourth, Lesnak filed a motion to dismiss all claims raised against him. (ECF No. 33.) Their appetites not sufficiently sated, Orent and Lesnak also filed, respectively, second motions to dismiss. (ECF Nos. 40, 49.) Plaintiff has filed responses to all of the motions to dismiss. (ECF Nos. 32, 47, 52, 54, 56, 60.) Defendants have each filed replies in support of their respective motions. (ECF Nos. 34, 53, 59, [*3]  61, 64, 65.) Plaintiff has also filed a "Motion for Extension of Time to File a Certificate of Review Pursuant to § 13-20-602, C.R.S., Should the Court Require the Same." (ECF No. 63.) Lesnak has filed a response to plaintiff's motion (ECF No. 66), and plaintiff has filed a reply (ECF No. 70).

I. Legal Standard
In evaluating a motion to dismiss under Rule 12(b)(6), a court must accept as true all well-pleaded factual allegations in the complaint, view those allegations in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, and draw all reasonable inferences in the plaintiff's favor. Brokers' Choice of America, Inc. v. NBC Universal, Inc., 757 F.3d 1125, 1135-36 (10th Cir. 2014); Mink v. Knox, 613 F.3d 995, 1000 (10th Cir. 2010). In doing so, "a court may look both to the complaint itself and to any documents attached as exhibits to the complaint." Oxendine v. Kaplan, 241 F.3d 1272, 1275 (10th Cir. 2001). In the complaint, the plaintiff must allege a "plausible" entitlement to relief. Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 555-556, 127 S.Ct. 1955, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929 (2007). Conclusory allegations, however, are insufficient. Cory v. Allstate Ins., 583 F.3d 1240, 1244 (10th Cir. 2009). A complaint warrants dismissal if it fails "in toto to render [plaintiff's] entitlement to relief plausible." Id. at 569 n.14.

II. Factual Background
The Court assumes the truth of the following non-conclusory, factual allegations from the Amended Complaint. Plaintiff began working for Hunter Douglas in 1999 as a Senior Buyer/Planner. (ECF No. 8 at ¶ 19.) Throughout his employment, plaintiff satisfactorily [*4]  performed his job, and, on occasion, was commended and recognized for his work. (Id. at ¶ 20.) While working for Hunter Douglas, plaintiff observed older workers not being welcomed or maintained in their jobs. (Id. at ¶ 21.) Plaintiff observed the same treatment of employees who became disabled while working for Hunter Douglas. (Id. at ¶ 23.) After plaintiff turned 60 years old, he was increasingly subjected to a hostile work environment, including through "specious" performance improvement plans ("PIPs"). (Id. at ¶ 25.)
On December 19, 2011, plaintiff suffered a workplace injury after he fell over a large splinter of wood left in a walkway by another employee. (Id. at ¶ 26.) At the time of plaintiff's workplace injury, Liberty was listed as the insurance carrier for Hunter Douglas' Workers' Compensation insurance. (Id. at ¶ 36.) Hunter Douglas admitted liability for plaintiff's workplace injury through the Colorado Workers' Compensation system. (Id. at ¶ 27.) From the time of his workplace injury, plaintiff has needed immediate medical treatment, and delays in treatment have been harmful. (Id. at ¶ 34.) Plaintiff's workplace injury resulted in physical impairment that substantially [*5]  limited his major life activities, including work. (Id. at ¶ 29.) Despite this, plaintiff was qualified, and wanted, to return to work at Hunter Douglas. (Id. at ¶ 28.) Hunter Douglas was fully aware of the disability resulting from plaintiff's workplace injury, and regarded plaintiff as disabled. (Id. at ¶¶ 30, 31.)
Hunter Douglas and Liberty "actively interfered" with plaintiff's medical treatment for his workplace injury, impeding his recovery. (Id. at ¶ 46.) Hunter Douglas and Liberty referred plaintiff to Orent for medical care. (Id. at ¶ 47.) Hunter Douglas and Liberty were confident that they could direct and manipulate the care Orent provided to plaintiff. (Id.) Plaintiff repeatedly "begged" for appropriate medical help or referrals, but he was deprived of "appropriate" care due to the "collusion" of Hunter Douglas, Liberty, Orent, and Lesnak. (Id. at ¶ 48.) Hunter Douglas and Liberty had "improper" communications with Orent and Lesnak that harmed plaintiff. (Id. at ¶ 49.) Due to these "improper" communications, Orent and Lesnak offered opinions that harmed and distressed plaintiff, benefitted Hunter Douglas and Liberty's "attempt to manipulate and improperly control" plaintiff [*6]  and reduce their liability for workers' compensation benefits, and created a "hostile environment" for plaintiff. (Id. at ¶ 50.) Due to the defendants' conduct, plaintiff was deprived of needed and timely medical care, and plaintiff was required to return to work in a way that was "not calculated to accommodate [plaintiff's] disability" and intentionally made plaintiff's work environment increasingly hostile. (Id. at ¶¶ 51-53.) Defendants have repeatedly withheld medical care from plaintiff, and "deliberately interfered" with plaintiff's service contracts with authorized physicians. (Id. at ¶¶ 60, 61.)
After plaintiff's workplace injury, Hunter Douglas treated him differently than other similarly situated employees, and made his work environment "even more hostile" than when he was "simply" an older worker. (Id. at ¶ 32.) Hunter Douglas did "little" to integrate plaintiff back into the workplace or accommodate his disability. (Id. at ¶ 42.) In 2012, plaintiff filed an internal sexual harassment charge with Hunter Douglas ("the charge") due to "the nature of the hostile work environment created." (Id. at ¶ 44.) The filing of the charge became a point of retaliation against plaintiff. [*7]  (Id. at ¶ 45.) By the end of January 2012, Hunter Douglas imposed a PIP upon plaintiff. (Id. at ¶ 43.) In part due to the delays defendants' caused, plaintiff was fired on June 14, 2013 for not being able to return to work within defendants' time frame. (Id. at ¶ 54.) Plaintiff is aware of other employees outside his protected class that have been treated more favorably, and that he was replaced by someone outside his protected class. (Id. at ¶¶ 55, 56.)
Due to plaintiff's workplace injury, he has suffered, and continues to suffer, from extreme chronic pain, needful use of narcotics, and the effects of chronic sleep deprivation. (Id. at ¶ 69.) These conditions have substantially affected plaintiff's ability to think, concentrate, and remember. (Id.) A legal representative has never been appointed for plaintiff. (Id. at ¶ 70.)

III. Discussion
The Court will begin its analysis with plaintiff's claims arising under federal law, which are Claims Three, Four, and Five, all against Hunter Douglas solely. At the motion to dismiss stage, although a plaintiff need not establish a prima facie case of discrimination, "the elements of each cause of action help to determine whether [the plaintiff] [*8]  has set forth a plausible claim." Khalik v. United Air Lines, 671 F.3d 1188, 1192 (10th Cir. 2012).

A. Claim Three—Age Discrimination
Under the Age Discrimination in Employment Act ("the ADEA"), in the absence of direct evidence, a prima facie case of discrimination requires a plaintiff to show that: "(1) he is within the protected age group; (2) he was doing satisfactory work; (3) he was discharged; and (4) his position was filled by a younger person." McKnight v. Kimberly Clark Corp., 149 F.3d 1125, 1128 (10th Cir. 1998) (quotations omitted). A hostile work environment claim premised upon age discrimination requires a plaintiff to allege facts that "the workplace was permeated with discriminatory intimidation, ridicule, and insult, that is sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of the victim's employment and create an abusive working environment." MacKenzie v. City and Cnty. of Denver, 414 F.3d 1266, 1280 (10th Cir. 2005) (quotation and alteration omitted).
Hunter Douglas argues that plaintiff's age discrimination claim should be dismissed because plaintiff has alleged no factual connection between his age and any adverse employment action, and thus, failed to show that age was the "but for" cause of his termination. (ECF No. 30 at 9.) Plaintiff responds that he pled sufficient factual detail to show that Hunter Douglas discriminated against him based upon his age, pointing [*9]  to various allegations in the Amended Complaint. (ECF No. 54 at 16-17.)
Whether a plaintiff need allege facts, in order to survive a motion to dismiss, showing that his age was the "but for" cause of his termination, is debatable in this District. See Daviss v. Sch. Dist. No. 1, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 121384, 2015 WL 5315615, at *4 (D. Colo. Aug. 24, 2015). Nonetheless, even if plaintiff need not allege facts related to "but for" causation in the Amended Complaint, he has still failed to allege any facts related to two of the prima facie elements of age discrimination. The Court begins, though, with what is sufficiently alleged. Plaintiff alleges that after he became 60 years old he was subjected to age discrimination. (ECF No. 8 at ¶ 25.) Therefore, he has alleged that he is part of a protected age group (the first element). Plaintiff also alleges that Hunter Douglas terminated his employment (the third element). (Id. at ¶ 54.) The problem, however, is with what is not alleged, and with other allegations in the Amended Complaint that contradict any plausible contention that plaintiff's employment was terminated, even in part, due to age.
First, plaintiff does not sufficiently allege that he was doing satisfactory work. Plaintiff does allege that "[t]hroughout his employment with Hunter [*10]  Douglas," he satisfactorily performed his job. (ECF No. 8 at ¶ 20.) However, to the extent this allegation is intended to cover the time when plaintiff was terminated, it is contradicted by other allegations in the Amended Complaint that, after his workplace injury, plaintiff was disabled, his ability to work was "substantially limit[ed]," he developed serious medical conditions that required "extensive medical care," and his ability to think, concentrate, and remember were "substantially affect[ed]." (Id. at ¶¶ 29, 32, 33, 69.) All of these allegations undercut any suggestion that plaintiff was able to do satisfactory work.
In addition, a problem that plagues the entire Amended Complaint is the complete lack of a timeline to the events subsequent to plaintiff's workplace injury. Notably, plaintiff alleges that, at the end of January 2012, he received a performance improvement plan (id. at ¶ 43), which would suggest that plaintiff was able to return to work soon after the workplace injury in December 2011. However, plaintiff also alleges that he was terminated in June 2013 because he was not able to return to work within Hunter Douglas' "arbitrary time frame" (id. at ¶ 54), which would [*11]  suggest either that plaintiff never returned to work after the December 2011 workplace injury, or he returned to but later took leave from work. This is important because, if plaintiff was not able to work for Hunter Douglas at the time of his termination, then it is hard to discern how plaintiff could allege that he was doing satisfactory work or that his termination was due, even in part, to his age. Moreover, taking at face value plaintiff's allegation that he was terminated due to Hunter Douglas' "arbitrary time frame," this would suggest that plaintiff was terminated due to his physical or mental inability to continue working.
Plaintiff also fails to allege that his position was taken by a younger person. Instead, the only allegation in this regard is that plaintiff was "replaced by someone outside his protected class." (Id. at ¶ 56.) If this were a case involving only one protected class, then this allegation would not be problematic. However, here, plaintiff alleges that he was discriminated against on account of his age, gender, and disability. To which one of these protected classes plaintiff is referring in the Amended Complaint is entirely uncertain.3
In his response to [*12]  Hunter Douglas' motion to dismiss, plaintiff points to other allegations in the Amended Complaint, but none of these help make the age discrimination claim any more plausible. Plaintiff alleges that, during his employment with Hunter Douglas, he observed that older workers "were not welcomed or maintained by Hunter Douglas in employment with the company." (Id. at ¶ 21.) As an initial matter, "maintained by Hunter Douglas in employment with the company," like so many other statements in the Amended Complaint, is a perfectly vague piece of language. To the extent it means terminated, it still does not help make it plausible that plaintiff was treated in this way. Next, plaintiff alleges that Hunter Douglas maintained a pattern or practice of terminating older employees, and Hunter Douglas engaged in employment discrimination due to, inter alia, plaintiff's age. (Id. at ¶¶ 22, 57.) These allegations, though, are quintessential "naked assertions devoid of further factual enhancement." Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678, 129 S.Ct. 1937, 173 L. Ed. 2d 868 (2009) (quotations and alteration omitted).
Finally, plaintiff alleges that, after he turned 60 years old, he was increasingly subjected to a hostile work environment, "including through specious performance improvement [*13]  plans that were not warranted by his conduct." (ECF No. 8 at ¶ 25.) To the extent that plaintiff intends to raise a hostile work environment claim based upon age discrimination, he must allege that "the workplace was permeated with discriminatory intimidation, ridicule, and insult, that is sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of the victim's employment and create an abusive working environment." See MacKenzie, 414 F.3d at 1280. At no point in the Amended Complaint, however, does plaintiff allege that he was intimidated, ridiculed, or insulted to any degree. To the extent that plaintiff means for this allegation to imply an adverse employment action, he must allege actions that are "objectively and subjectively offensive" that "rise to some level of substantiality." See Lujan v. Johanns, 181 F. App'x 735, 737-738 (10th Cir. 2006). The reference to an unknown number of PIP(s) does not rise to this level, at least not when there is no allegation that the PIP(s) resulted in any change to plaintiff's employment conditions. See id. (explaining that a restrictive leave policy, a PIP, and letters of warning were not objectively or subjectively offensive and did not affect the plaintiff's future employment opportunities). This allegation also suffers from [*14]  the above described timeline problem; specifically, there is no allegation as to when plaintiff turned 60 years old, or, other than with respect to the PIP that he received in January 2012, when any other PIP(s) were issued to plaintiff.
As a result, the Court finds that plaintiff has failed to allege a plausible entitlement to relief with respect to his age discrimination claim.

B. Claim Four—Retaliation
To set forth a prima facie claim of retaliation under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 ("Title VII") a plaintiff must allege that: "'(1) he engaged in protected opposition to Title VII discrimination; (2) he suffered an adverse employment action; and (3) there is a causal connection between the protected activity and the adverse employment action.'" McCauley v. Bd. of Comm'rs for Bernalillo Cnty., 603 F. App'x 730, 734-735 (10th Cir. 2015) (quoting Meiners v. Univ. of Kansas, 359 F.3d 1222, 1229 (10th Cir. 2004)) (alterations omitted).
Hunter Douglas argues that plaintiff's Title VII retaliation claim fails because plaintiff does not allege to whom he complained, when he complained, or a nexus between the alleged protected conduct and any adverse employment action. (ECF No. 30 at 11.) Plaintiff responds that throughout the Amended Complaint there are "numerous and specific" factual assertions that Hunter Douglas retaliated against [*15]  him for opposing its unlawful employment practices, and thus, this claim is well pled. (ECF No. 54 at 18.)
The Court agrees with Hunter Douglas. Contrary to plaintiff's contention, there are only two allegations in the Amended Complaint related to retaliation. Specifically, plaintiff alleges that: (1) due to the hostile work environment created during 2012, he filed an internal sexual harassment charge with Hunter Douglas; and (2) the filing of the internal charge became "a point for retaliation" against plaintiff. (ECF No. 8 ¶¶ 44-45.) As for the remainder of the Amended Complaint, the Court cannot discern any allegations related to plaintiff engaging in Title VII protected opposition to discrimination, or Hunter Douglas causally retaliating against any such opposition. To the extent that plaintiff believes that such allegations are contained "throughout" the Amended Complaint, plaintiff notably fails to draw the Court's attention to any specific paragraph(s) of the Amended Complaint. (See ECF No. 54 at 18.) As plaintiff states in his response (see id. at 3-6), one of the purposes of the Amended Complaint is to place Hunter Douglas on notice of why plaintiff is entitled to relief, see Fed.R.Civ.P. 8(a)(2). Here, there is no [*16]  such notice, given that plaintiff fails to allege any facts indicating any causal connection between his internal charge and Hunter Douglas' alleged acts of retaliation committed in response to that charge. In addition, to the extent that plaintiff's termination is the retaliation to which he alludes, this suffers from the same timeline deficiency discussed supra. Namely, plaintiff does not allege when in 2012 he filed the internal charge, and thus, it is impossible to tell whether there is any temporal proximity between the two events. See Piercy v. Maketa, 480 F.3d 1192, 1198-99 (10th Cir. 2007) (explaining that "the passage of time does not necessarily bar a plaintiff's retaliation claim if additional evidence establishes the retaliatory motive.") (emphasis in original). Plaintiff also fails to allege who at Hunter Douglas was aware of the internal charge, and who was responsible for his termination. See McCauley, 603 F. App'x at 735 (affirming the grant of summary judgment as to the plaintiff's retaliation claim because the plaintiff failed to show that the persons responsible for failing to promote him were aware of his protected activity).
Instead, all that plaintiff alleges is that, at some point in 2012, he filed an internal charge of sexual harassment, and, [*17]  at some point thereafter, he was retaliated for doing so in an unidentified manner. (See ECF No. 8 at ¶¶ 44-45.) This is clearly insufficient to raise plaintiff's entitlement to relief for retaliation to the plausible level.

C. Claim Five—Disability Discrimination
To set forth a prima facie claim of disability discrimination under the ADA, plaintiff must allege that: (1) he is disabled under the ADA; (2) he is qualified to perform the essential functions of his job or a desired job, with or without reasonable accommodation; and (3) defendant discriminated against him on account of his disability. MacKenzie, 414 F.3d at 1274.
Hunter Douglas argues that this claim should be dismissed because plaintiff does not describe any discriminatory actions, does not identify any failures to accommodate or an alleged disability, and does not allege any connection between any disability and any adverse employment action. (ECF No. 30 at 12-13.) Plaintiff responds that the Amended Complaint is "replete with numerous and specific factual assertions that Hunter Douglas discriminated against him because of his disability and because the employer saw him as disabled." (ECF No. 54 at 19.)
The Court again agrees with Hunter Douglas. Although [*18]  plaintiff asserts that the Amended Complaint is "replete" with allegations supporting this claim, much like plaintiff's identical argument that the retaliation claim was supported by "numerous and specific factual assertions," plaintiff fails to cite to any of those allegations in his response. (See id. at 18-19.) Based upon the Court's own review of the Amended Complaint, there are no factual allegations to support the first element in the disability discrimination analysis, and the second and third elements suffer from contradictory and/or unsupported allegations.
First, other than alleging that his injury on December 19, 2011, caused a "disabling" injury, and then repeatedly alleging that he was (and is) disabled, plaintiff fails to allege any physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of his major life activities. See MacKenzie, 414 F.3d at 1275 (citing 42 U.S.C. § 12102(2)(A) as defining disability as a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of an individual's major life activities). Instead, plaintiff merely parrots the above language, alleging that his workplace injury "resulted in physical impairment that did substantially limit [plaintiff's] major life activities, including work." [*19]  (ECF No. 8 at ¶ 29.) This is simply insufficient, under Iqbal, to raise plaintiff's entitlement to relief to the plausible level. See Iqbal, 556 U.S. at 678.
This leads to the second element in the disability discrimination analysis—ability to perform a job—because plaintiff does allege, in relation to why this case was not filed sooner, that he suffered (and continues to suffer) from "a substantial disorder of [his] cognitive, volitional, or emotional processes—grossly impairing his judgment." (See ECF No. 8 at ¶ 68.) It is not clear whether these allegations are intended to apply to the first element discussed supra, but, irrespective, they critically wound any contention, for purposes of the second element, that plaintiff was "qualified to return to work" as he also alleges. (See id. at ¶ 28.) It is simply not plausible that, if plaintiff was suffering from a legal disability or something akin to such a disability in the manner alleged in the Amended Complaint (see id. at ¶¶ 68-69), plaintiff was qualified to return to work with or without a reasonable accommodation.
Finally, plaintiff fails to allege any facts that Hunter Douglas discriminated against him due to any disability. Plaintiff alleges that [*20]  Hunter Douglas' discriminatory conduct included not making reasonable accommodations and not offering him employment in other available positions. (Id. at ¶ 108.) Plaintiff alleges that Hunter Douglas "did little to integrate [plaintiff] back into the workplace or accommodate his disability." (Id. at ¶ 42.) Putting aside that the words "did little" are again vague, plaintiff fails to allege what reasonable accommodations Hunter Douglas rejected or did not consider. Notably, plaintiff fails to allege what a reasonable accommodation may have been. Plaintiff also fails to allege that Hunter Douglas did not engage in a "good faith" interactive process to identify any reasonable accommodation(s) that may have overcome plaintiff's disability. See Bartee v. Michelin North America, Inc., 374 F.3d 906, 916 (10th Cir. 2004) (explaining that the regulations implementing the ADA "envision an interactive process that requires participation by both parties."). As for other available positions at Hunter Douglas, plaintiff similarly fails to identify any said positions.
Plaintiff also alleges that Hunter Douglas discriminated against him in terminating his job, and through Hunter Douglas' "perceptions about [plaintiff] as disabled." (ECF No. 8 at ¶ 108.) The latter allegation [*21]  is perhaps a perfect encapsulation of the utterly vague and facially meaningless allegations that litter the Amended Complaint. What "perceptions" means in this context is entirely unexplained. Presumably, it is not just that plaintiff was disabled, given that plaintiff alleges that he was disabled. It is also presumable that these "perceptions" took some actual form, but, of course, plaintiff does not attempt to portray them in such a tangible manner. Instead, the Court is left with a vague word placed in a context that renders it meaningless.
That notwithstanding, the termination of plaintiff's job is far more tangible. However, this allegation suffers from inconsistencies with other allegations in the Amended Complaint. Plaintiff alleges that the workplace injury occurred in December 2011, and that injury resulted in physical impairments limiting his work activity. (Id. at ¶¶ 26, 29.) Plaintiff was terminated from his job in June 2013. (Id. at ¶ 54.) Between these two events, the only potentially discriminatory acts alleged are the issuance of a PIP at the end of January 2012 and a hostile work environment created in 2012. (Id. at ¶¶ 43-44.) However, plaintiff does not allege that [*22]  the PIP was issued in response to his disability,4 and he alleges that the hostile work environment was related to sexual harassment. Thus, in light of the significant temporal gap between plaintiff's workplace injury and his job termination, plaintiff has failed to allege a plausible inference that his termination was due to his disability. See Butler v. City of Prairie Village, Kansas, 172 F.3d 736, 748-749 (10th Cir. 1999) (explaining that a plaintiff must show that he was terminated under circumstances giving rise to an inference of discrimination, and finding that the temporal proximity of plaintiff's request for an accommodation and the decline in his work evaluations contributed to an inference that the plaintiff was terminated due to his disability).5

D. Leave to Amend
Plaintiff does not request leave to amend the Amended Complaint in the event that this Court found the allegations therein to be deficient. (See generally ECF No. 54.) Instead, plaintiff describes the Amended Complaint as "comprehensive, complete, and 23 pages." (Id. at 3.) As a result, the Court does not believe that leave to amend, in the absence of any request, is appropriate, especially where plaintiff has already filed an amended complaint and is represented by counsel. See Doe v. Heil, 533 F. App'x 831, 846-847 (10th Cir. 2013) ("'Although leave [*23]  to amend should be liberally granted, a trial court is not required sua sponte to grant leave to amend prior to making its decision to dismiss.'") (alteration omitted) (quoting Burger King Corp. v. Weaver, 169 F.3d 1310, 1318 (11th Cir. 1999)).
As a result, the Court GRANTS Hunter Douglas' motion to dismiss to the extent that Claims Three, Four, and Five against Hunter Douglas are DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE.

E. State Law Claims Against All Defendants
This leaves plaintiff's claims under state law against defendants. There is no independent basis for the Court to exercise jurisdiction over these claims, given their state nature and the lack of any alleged diversity between the parties. As a result, as plaintiff contends in the Amended Complaint, the only basis for the Court to exercise jurisdiction over the state claims is through its supplemental jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1367(a).6 (See ECF No. 8 at ¶ 17.) However, in the situation now before the Court—where all federal claims have been dismissed—the practice is to dismiss remaining state law claims without prejudice. See, e.g., Benton v. Herrera, 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 154049, 2014 WL 5488949, at *1-2 (D. Colo. Oct. 30, 2014); see also Carroll v. Lawton Indep. Sch. Dist. No. 8, 805 F.3d 1222, 1230 (10th Cir. 2015); 28 U.S.C. § 1367(c)(3). This is especially the case where, as here, Claims One and Seven have been challenged on the ground that they are pre-empted by the Colorado Workers' Compensation Act (see ECF [*24]  No. 30 at 5-7; ECF No. 22 at 3-5), and Claim Six has been challenged on statute of limitations grounds as well as on the ground that plaintiff failed to comply with Colorado law in failing to obtain a certificate of review prior to bringing that claim against Orent and Lesnak (see ECF No. 28 at 3-5; ECF No. 33 at 11-12; ECF No. 40 at 2-4; ECF No. 49 at 2-3).7 The courts of Colorado have a far greater interest in hearing and resolving these claims and defenses than this Court.
Therefore, the Court DISMISSES Claims One, Two, Six, and Seven WITHOUT PREJUDICE. As a result, Liberty's motion to dismiss (ECF No. 22), Orent's motion to dismiss (ECF No. 28) and second motion to dismiss (ECF No. 49), and Lesnak's motion to dismiss (ECF No. 33) and second motion to dismiss (ECF No. 40), are all DENIED AS MOOT. Hunter Douglas' motion to dismiss (ECF No. 30) is DENIED AS MOOT to the extent that Claims One, Two, and Seven against Hunter Douglas are DISMISSED WITHOUT PREJUDICE. Finally, plaintiff's motion for extension of time (ECF No. 63) is also DENIED AS MOOT.

IV. Conclusion
For the reasons discussed herein, the Court:
(1) DISMISSES WITH PREJUDICE in part and DISMISSES WITHOUT PREJUDICE in part [*25]  the Amended Complaint (ECF No. 8) as follows:
(a) DISMISSES WITH PREJUDICE Claims Three, Four, and Five; and
(b) DISMISSES WITHOUT PREJUDICE Claims One, Two, Six, and Seven;
(2) DENIES AS MOOT Liberty's Motion to Dismiss (ECF No. 22);
(3) DENIES AS MOOT Orent's Motion to Dismiss (ECF No. 28) and Second Motion to Dismiss (ECF No. 49);
(4) GRANTS in part and DENIES AS MOOT in part Hunter Douglas' Motion to Dismiss (ECF No. 30) as follows:
(a) GRANTS Hunter Douglas' Motion to Dismiss with respect to Claims Three, Four, and Five; and
(b) DENIES AS MOOT Hunter Douglas' Motion to Dismiss with respect to Claims One, Two, and Seven.
(5) DENIES AS MOOT Lesnak's Motion to Dismiss (ECF No. 33) and Second Motion to Dismiss (ECF No. 40); and
(6) DENIES AS MOOT plaintiff's "Motion for Extension of Time to File a Certificate of Review Pursuant to § 13-20-602, C.R.S., Should the Court Require the Same" (ECF No. 63).
The Clerk is ORDERED to enter Judgment in favor of Hunter Douglas with respect to all federal claims for relief (Claims Three, Four, and Five of the Amended Complaint). The Clerk is further ORDERED to close this case.
SO ORDERED.
DATED this 9th day of June, 2016.
BY THE COURT:
/s/ Raymond P. Moore
RAYMOND P. MOORE
United [*26]  States District Judge


End of Document

