Juarez v. City of Big Spring
United States District Court for the Northern District of Texas, Abilene Division
November 30, 2020, Decided; November 30, 2020, Filed
Civil Action No. 1:17-CV-00160-BU

Reporter
2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 268579 *
ELEUTERIO JUAREZ, Plaintiff, v. THE CITY OF BIG SPRING, TEXAS, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Eleuterio Juarez, Plaintiff: Richard Alvarado, Law Office of Richard Alvarado, Midland, TX; Allen Stroder, LEAD ATTORNEY, Odessa, TX.
For The City of Big Spring Texas, Defendant: Olivia Grace Stedman, Cotton Bledsoe Tighe & Dawson PC, Midland, TX; Aaron M Dorfner, LEAD ATTORNEY, Cotton Bledsoe Tighe & Dawson, Midland, TX.
Judges: JOHN R. PARKER, UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE.
Opinion by: JOHN R. PARKER
Opinion



MEMORANDUM OPINION AND ORDER
Before the Court is the Motion for Summary Judgment (Dkt. No. 17) filed by the City of Big Spring, Texas ("the City") in this lawsuit brought by former City employee Eleuterio Juarez ("Juarez"). Juarez filed a response in opposition to the City's motion. Dkt. No. 20. The City, in turn, filed a Reply. Dkt. No. 23.
Having considered the motion, the parties' briefing, and the applicable law, the Court determines that the City's motion for summary judgment should be DENIED.
I. BACKGROUND
Juarez began his employment with the City's Sanitation Department in 2014 and was employed by the City until his discharge on April 18, 2016. In 2009, several years prior to his employment with the City, Juarez sustained an injury to his right wrist in connection with an on-the-job injury with a different [*2]  employer. Dkt. No. 1 at 2; Dkt. No. 18 at 7. This injury resulted in Juarez being unable to lift more than five pounds with his right arm and wrist. Dkt. No. 1 at 2. This injury forms the basis of Juarez's disability.
Several years after sustaining his right wrist injury, Juarez sought employment as a truck driver with the City's Sanitation Department, though the parties disagree over the specific job held by Juarez and the essential functions of that position. Dkt. No. 19-3 at 2; Dkt. No. 21 at 3; Dkt. No. 24 at 3-4. The City required Juarez to undergo a pre-employment physical examination in May 2014 to determine whether Juarez could perform the essential functions of the job. Unfortunately, Juarez's pre-employment physical records produced in the summary judgment record nowhere indicate the title of Juarez's job or identify the essential functions provided to the examining physician for purposes of assessing Juarez pre-employment.1 See Dkt. No. 19-1 at 3-4. Nevertheless, Juarez's examining physician concluded at that time that, "[n]o medical conditions will interfere with the safe performance of the essential functions of the job" and that Juarez had "[n]o restrictions" related to [*3]  the essential job functions. Id. at 4. Juarez began his employment with the City shortly thereafter.
It appears from the summary judgment record that Juarez's position with the City exclusively involved operating the City's two roll-off dumpster trucks, referred to as "Little Bubba" and "Big Bubba." Dkt. No. 17 at 2. Roll-off trucks are used to transport large, open-top dumpsters, or "cans." Dkt. No. 22 at 40-48. Because the cans are open-top, their contents must be secured with a tarp that covers the top of the can. Id.
Juarez testified that both Little Bubba and Big Bubba were beset with various mechanical problems, but that the smaller of the two roll-off trucks, Little Bubba, was easier to operate. Id. As will be discussed below, the most significant mechanical issue with Big Bubba, insofar as is relevant here, was an inoperable automated tarp extending mechanism, which is used to extend a tarp over the top of the can, thereby securing its contents during transport.
Several months after the City hired Juarez, Juarez's physician sent the City a letter stating that Juarez would temporarily need an assistant to ride along with him until August 20, 2014. Dkt. No. 18 at 7; Dkt. No 19-7 [*4]  at 53. This letter appears to have been generated as a result of a Fitness for Duty ("FFD") exam in mid-July 2014. It also appears from the record that the City sent Juarez for an FFD exam in November of 2014. Dkt. No. 22 at 89-92. Although it is not clear what precipitated these 2014 FFD exams, one or both may have been in connection with Juarez's surgery for diverticulitis. Dkt. No. 19-7 at 53, 137; Dkt. No 22 at 85-92. Neither of the 2014 FFD exams appear related to Juarez's wrist injury.
The City provided Juarez with the requested assistant; however, despite the three weeks requested by Juarez's physician, Juarez "continued to request an assistant any time he operated the larger sanitation truck referred to as Big Bubba." Dkt. No. 18 at 7. And it appears that he operated Big Bubba approximately two or three times per week. Dkt. No. 22 at 62. The City claims that it nevertheless remained unaware not only that Juarez continued to request an assistant each time he operated Big Bubba, but also that the City continued to provide such assistance. Dkt. No. 18 at 8.
The City claims that it eventually became aware of Juarez's continued use of an assistant in the operation of Big Bubba in [*5]  the fall of 2015 — approximately a year after it started providing one — when Juarez requested adjusted job duties because of his hemorrhoids. Id. It was this accommodation request, the City explains, that alerted the City to the fact that Juarez continued to request, and receive, an assistant each time he operated Big Bubba. Id. In response, the City sent an FFD exam request to Juarez's physicians, Dr. Alfonso Barragan and Dr. Russell Van Husen, in December 2015 to determine "whether Plaintiff was capable of performing the essential functions of his job in a safe manner." Id. at 8, 22; Dkt. No. 19-4 at 2; Dkt. No. 22 at 71-80.
Importantly, these 2015 FFD forms appear to differ from the 2014 pre-employment and FFD exam forms in that the 2015 FFD exam forms included among the essential functions of Juarez's job the abilities to lift up to 80 pounds, pull or push between 10 to 100 pounds, and repetitively pull, grip, and grasp ("weight-based functions"). See Dkt. No. 19-6. These weight-based functions do not appear to have been provided to Juarez's doctors in connection with either his pre-employment physical or his 2014 FFD exams. Dkt. No. 22 at 85-92.
On December 29, 2015, Dr. Barragan [*6]  informed the City that Juarez "remains on restrictions of no carrying, lifting, pushing, pulling, or power gripping anything 5 lbs. or more with right hand . . . ." Dkt. No. 19-5 at 2. Dr. Barragan informed the City that he would re-evaluate Juarez on January 12, 2016. Id.
Two days later, on December 31, 2015, Dr. Van Husen informed the City that Juarez remained capable of performing the essential functions of the job, including the weight-based functions, but that he would need periodic breaks from prolonged sitting because of his hemorrhoids. Dkt. No. 19-6 at 2-4; Dkt. No. 22 at 71-73. The City opted to wait for Dr. Barragan's re-evaluation before taking any further action.
During the intervening weeks, on January 4, 2016, Juarez filed a complaint with the City, complaining that his supervisor, John Vega ("Vega") and utilities supervisor, Eddie Castillo ("Castillo"), were harassing him and had subjected him to "cripple jokes" since April 2015. Dkt. No. 1 at 2; Dkt. No. 19-7 at 31.
Shortly thereafter, on January 12, 2016, Dr. Barragan's re-evaluation of Juarez concluded that he was unable to perform the weight-based functions which the City provided to Dr. Barragan. Dkt. No. 19-7 at [*7]  2-4; Dkt. No. 22 at 76-78. The City placed Juarez on leave under the Family Medical Leave Act ("FMLA") the next day, which he fully exhausted twelve weeks later. Dkt. No. 1 at 2; Dkt. No. 18 at 8-9.
Through an April 6, 2016 letter ("April 6 Letter"), the City provided Juarez with notice of his FMLA leave exhaustion and instructed him to provide a medical release clearing him to return to work and perform the essential functions of the position — notably including the weight-based functions — "with no restrictions." Dkt. No. 19-7 at 10. Juarez never provided such a release. As a result, the City terminated Juarez through a letter dated April 18, 2016 ("April 18 Letter"). Dkt. No. 19-7 at 21. The City's April 18 Letter stated that Juarez's termination was premised on his exhaustion of FMLA leave and his failure to provide the City with the proper medical release form indicating that he could perform the essential functions of his job. Id.
Juarez timely filed with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC") alleging, among other things, disability-discrimination in violation of the ADA. On March 17, 2017, the EEOC issued a determination and a right to sue letter to Juarez, concluding that the City's requirement [*8]  that Juarez provide a return to "fully duty" medical release was a per se complaint on October 22, 2017, (Dkt. No. 1).
II. SUMMARY JUDGMENT EVIDENCE
The City, in its reply, raises two objections to Juarez's response briefing and appendix in support thereof. First, the City contends that Juarez violated Local Rule 7.1(i)(1) when he referenced a written position description for "roll-off truck driver" but failed to provide corresponding documents in his appendix materials. Dkt. No. 24 at 2. Local Rule 7.1(i)(l) provides that a "party who relies on materials—including depositions, documents, electronically stored information, affidavits, declarations, stipulations, admissions, interrogatory answers, or other materials—to support or oppose a motion must include the materials in an appendix." Because this deficiency did not interfere with the decisional process of the Court, the Court overrules the objection and has considered the documents that Juarez has submitted in support of his response brief in opposition.
Second, the City argues that Juarez "attempted to avoid summary judgment by providing the Court with an affidavit from Plaintiff that contradicts Plaintiff's earlier testimony." Dkt. No. 24 at 2. Namely, the City points [*9]  out the inconsistencies between Juarez's deposition testimony that Vega could operate Big Bubba without an assistant and Juarez's affidavit statement that Vega did, in fact, require an assistant to operate Big Bubba on Juarez's days off from work. Id. at 2-3. The City urges the Court not to consider this evidence. Even when excluding these inconsistent statements from the Court's consideration, the Court finds that numerous factual issues remain which preclude the granting of summary judgment in favor of the City.
III. SUMMARY JUDGMENT STANDARD
When the record establishes "that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law," summary judgment is appropriate. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). "[A dispute] is 'genuine' if it is real and substantial, as opposed to merely formal, pretended, or a sham." Bazan ex rel. Bazan v. Hidalgo Cnty., 246 F.3d 481, 489 (5th Cir. 2001) (citation omitted). A "material" fact is one that "might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). The City, as the movant, "bears the initial burden of identifying those portions of the pleadings and discovery in the record that it believes demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact, but is not required to negate elements [*10]  of the nonmoving party's case." Lynch Props., Inc. v. Potomac Ins. Co. of Ill., 140 F.3d 622, 625 (5th Cir. 1998); see also Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). "Once the moving party meets this burden, the nonmoving party must set forth" — and support with credible evidence — "specific facts showing a genuine issue for trial and not rest upon the allegations . . . contained in its pleadings." Lynch Props., 140 F.3d at 625; Little v. Liquid Air Corp., 37 F.3d 1069, 1075 (5th Cir. 1994) (en banc). Such a showing must be made as to "every essential component of its case." Morris v. Covan World Wide Moving, Inc., 144 F.3d 377, 380 (5th Cir. 1998).
The Court must draw all reasonable inferences in favor of the nonmoving party, but only if the summary judgment evidence shows that an actual controversy exists. See Anderson, 477 U.S. at 255. "Unsubstantiated assertions, improbable inferences, and unsupported speculation are not sufficient to defeat a motion for summary judgment." Brown v. City of Houston, 337 F.3d 539, 541 (5th Cir. 2003). Rather, a plaintiff must present "affirmative evidence in order to defeat a properly supported motion for summary judgment . . . even where the evidence is likely to be within the possession of the defendant, as long as the plaintiff has had a full opportunity to conduct discovery." Id. at 257.
IV. DISCUSSION
A. Judicial Estoppel
The Court first turns to the City's argument that Juarez is estopped from pursuing his claim for disability discrimination under the ADA based on his receipt of Social Security Disability Insurance ("SSDI") [*11]  benefits, and presumably, his inconsistent representations to the Social Security Administration that he was unable to work. Dkt. No. 18 at 19-20, 26-27. For the reasons explained below, the Court concludes that Juarez is not judicially estopped from bringing his claims under the ADA.
The ADA prohibits discrimination "against a qualified individual on the basis of disability" regarding the hiring, discharge, compensation, or any of the terms and conditions of the person's employment. 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). A "qualified individual" under the ADA is an individual with a disability "who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds or desires." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8).
The Social Security Act ("the Act") provides benefits, under appropriate circumstances, to an insured individual who "is under a disability." 42 U.S.C. § 423(a)(1)(E). The Act defines "disability" as an
inability to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any . . . physical or mental impairment which can be expected to result in death or which has lasted or can be expected to last for a continuous period of not less than 12 months.
42 U.S.C. § 423(d)(1)(A).
In Cleveland v. Policy Management Systems Corp, 526 U.S. 795, 802-03, 119 S. Ct. 1597, 143 L. Ed. 2d 966 (1999), the Supreme Court addressed whether a plaintiff who claims to be both "totally disabled" [*12]  for purposes of SSDI benefits and "qualified" for employment under the ADA is judicially estopped from bringing his ADA claim. The Cleveland Court observed that the application for, and receipt of, SSDI benefits does not automatically prevent a plaintiff from establishing a claim under the ADA, because unlike the ADA, the standard for determining disability under the Act "does not take the possibility of 'reasonable accommodation' into account." Id. at 803.
However, an "ADA plaintiff cannot simply ignore the apparent contradiction that arises out of the earlier SSDI total disability claim." Id. at 806. "Under Cleveland, 'to survive summary judgment for the employer, a plaintiff must address the apparent inconsistency between "qualified" for employment under the ADA and "disabled" for [Social Security disability] benefits.'" McClaren v. Morrison Mgmt. Specialists, Inc., 420 F.3d 457, 463 (5th Cir. 2005)). "Where a claim of total disability 'implies a context-related legal conclusion,' the necessary 'sufficient explanation' can simply be that the claimant could have performed the essential duties of the job if granted a reasonable accommodation." E.E.O.C. v. Vicksburg Healthcare, L.L.C., 663 F. App'x 331, 334-335 (5th Cir. 2016) (quoting Cleveland, 526 U.S. at 795, 806). Put differently, "[a] plaintiff's explanation of the apparent inconsistency must be 'sufficient to warrant a reasonable juror's concluding that, [*13]  assuming the truth of, or the plaintiff's good faith belief in, the earlier statement, the plaintiff could nonetheless perform the essential functions of her job, with or without reasonable accommodation.'" McClaren, 420 F.3d at 463 (quoting Cleveland, 526 U.S. at 807).
Juarez, in advancing his underlying ADA disability-discrimination claim, argues the evidence demonstrates that he is a "qualified individual" such that he could perform the essential functions of his job with or without an accommodation. Dkt. No. 20 at 3-4. Juarez attempts to explain any potential inconsistency in his claim under the ADA and his receipt of SSDI benefits, arguing that his "receipt of benefits began well before his employment and termination by the City" and that his "attempts to re-enter the workforce and his two year work history, as a matter of equity, should not be penalized." Id. at 4; Dkt. No. 21 at 8. In support of this contention, Juarez presents affidavit testimony that he received Worker's Compensation benefits after his injury, which began in 2012 and ended in 2013. Dkt. No. 22 at 4. Upon expiration of these benefits, Juarez applied for, and received, SSDI benefits prior to his employment with the City, though the exact date he started receiving [*14]  SSDI benefits is unclear to the Court. Dkt. No. 22 at 23 (Juarez deposition testimony that he started receiving SSDI benefits some time in 2013 or 2014); Dkt. No. 19-7 at 65 (Juarez protectively filed for SSDI benefits on July 24, 2012, alleging a disability onset date beginning October 21, 2009, and with a lasted insured date listed as December 31, 2013).
Irrespective of when Juarez began receiving SSDI benefits, it appears undisputed that he received these benefits both before and after his two-year employment with the City. Juarez's affidavit testimony further explained that, after the City hired him in 2014, he entered into an arrangement with the Social Security Administration, which "approved his attempts to get back in the working environment with a job that he could perform within his restrictions." Dkt. No. 21 at 7. Juarez claims that he was permitted to receive compensation in any amount for 11 months, and, per Social Security regulations, he could thereafter receive no more than $1,100 per month without deduction from his SSDI benefits.2 Id.
When the City terminated Juarez on April 18, 2016, Juarez sought reinstatement of his SSDI benefit payments. Dkt. No. 22 at 26. In [*15]  his SSDI application after his termination, Juarez reported that "he drove a truck and had a helper that would do everything else", that he "was unable to work", "concerned that he is not able to work", and that he stopped working due to his conditions. Dkt. No. 19-7 at 66, 69, 70, 153; Dkt. No. 24 at 5. Juarez testified that his SSDI benefit payments began again in December 2017. Dkt. No. 22 at 26. In its reply briefing, the City avers that Juarez has "failed to even attempt to explain these inconsistencies" and that he is therefore estopped from bringing his ADA claim. Dkt. No. 24 at 6. The Court disagrees.
Viewing the evidence in a light most favorable to Juarez as the nonmovant and drawing all reasonable inferences in his favor, the Court finds that Juarez's explanation is sufficient to support a reasonable juror's concluding that Juarez could nonetheless perform the essential functions of his job, with or without a reasonable accommodation, notwithstanding his representations to the Social Security Administration for purposes of receiving SSDI benefits. Moreover, as the Court explained below, several fact issues exist regarding the exact nature of the essential functions of Juarez's [*16]  job and whether Juarez could perform those functions with or without an accommodation. To rule in the City's favor and find Juarez judicially estopped from advancing an ADA claim would disregard those issues of fact.
Accordingly, the Court now turns to the merits of Juarez's claims under the ADA.
B. ADA Disability Discrimination Claim
In ADA discriminatory-termination actions, an employee may (1) present direct evidence of discrimination because of his disability or (2) proceed under the burden-shifting analysis in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S.Ct. 1817, 36 L.Ed.2d 668 (1973), a Title VII case." E.E.O.C. v. LHC Grp. Inc., 773 F.3d 688, 694 (5th Cir. 2014). Direct evidence is "evidence which, if believed, proves the fact without inference or presumption." Clark v. Champion National Security, Inc., 952 F.3d 570, 579 (5th Cir. 2020) (quoting Brown v. E. Miss. Elec. Power Ass'n, 989 F.2d 858, 861 (5th Cir. 1993)). "If an inference is required for the evidence to be probative as to [the City's] discriminatory animus in firing [Juarez], the evidence is circumstantial, not direct." Bennett v. Dallas Indep. Sch. Dist., 936 F. Supp. 2d 767, 776 (N.D. Tex. 2013) (quoting Sandstad v. CB Richard Ellis, Inc., 309 F.3d 893, 897-98 (5th Cir. 2002)).
1. Direct Evidence of Discrimination
Juarez argues that he has presented direct evidence of discrimination because the City's April 6 and April 18 Letters "on their face show that his disability was the reason for his termination." Dkt. No. 21 at 3. Juarez also argues that the EEOC determination letter is "direct evidence of a violation of the ADA and creates at least [*17]  a genuine issue of fact on the issue." Id. at 8. The Court disagrees.
While this evidence may—and does, as explained below—create a triable fact issue that precludes summary judgment, it does not serve as direct evidence because a reasonable juror would necessarily be required to employ a presumption or inference of the City's discriminatory animus. The City's April 6 and April 18 Letters do not facially rely on a prohibited factor as the basis for Juarez's termination. Nor does the EEOC determination letter, which expressly declined to take a position on the issue of disability discrimination, qualify as direct evidence. By definition, then, this evidence is circumstantial. Sandstad, 309 F.3d at 897-98. Therefore, Juarez must make a prima facie case for disability discrimination under McDonnell Douglas burden shifting framework. See LHC Grp., Inc., 773 F.3d at 694.
2. Prima Facie Case of Discrimination
To establish a prima facie case of discrimination, Juarez "must prove: (1) that he has a disability; (2) that he was qualified for the job; [and] (3) that he was subject to an adverse employment action on account of his disability." Id. at 695. If Juarez establishes a prima facie case, "a presumption of discrimination arises," and the burden shifts to the City to rebut [*18]  this presumption by "articulat[ing] a legitimate non-discriminatory reason for the adverse employment action." EEOC v. Chevron Phillips Chem. Co., 570 F.3d 606, 615 (5th Cir. 2009). If the City articulates a non-discriminatory reason, the burden then shifts back to Juarez to show that the City's proffered reason is pretextual. LHC Grp., 773 F.3d at 694.
The parties do not dispute that Juarez's has a disability; thus Juarez has met the first element of his prima facie burden. The City contends that summary judgment in its favor is proper because Juarez can meet neither the second nor the third elements of his prima facie burden because he is unable to demonstrate that he was a qualified individual or that the City terminated him on the basis of his disability. The Court finds that Juarez has met his prima facie burden.
a. Qualified Individual
A qualified individual is "an individual who, with or without a reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds or desires." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8).
The City argues that Juarez is not a qualified individual because he could not perform the essential functions of his position either without any accommodation or with anything other than an unreasonable accommodation. Specifically as to the latter, [*19]  the City contends that requiring an assistant to help Juarez each time he operated Big Bubba was an unreasonable accommodation for the City's understaffed Sanitation Department.
i. Juarez's Position
As a threshold matter, the parties are unable to agree on which position Juarez held. The City maintains that Juarez held the position of "sanitation truck driver" whereas Juarez maintains that he held the position of "roll-off truck driver." Dkt. No. 18 at 13; Dkt. No. 21 at 3. Consequently, the parties also disagree over what constituted the essential functions of Juarez's position and whether he could perform those functions. Unfortunately, the summary judgment evidence not only fails to bring clarity to these issues, it is often the source of more confusion, thus precluding the granting of summary judgment.
The summary judgment evidence includes a "Position Description" ("PD") that bears the job title "Sanitation Truck Driver." See Dkt Nos. 19-7 at 5-6, 57-58, Dkt. Nos. 22 at 11-12, 74-75, 79-80, and 91-92. It appears undisputed that this PD applied to Juarez's job.
The PD contains a "Job Summary" section which states that the position is "responsible for operating a sanitation truck." [*20]  Dkt. No. 19-7 at 57. Although the "Job Summary" section does not specifically mention the operation of a roll-off truck, it appears undisputed that this PD encompassed that assignment as well.
Juarez's PD also contains a section entitled "Duties, Functions and Responsibilities." Id. This section explains that an essential function or duty of the position may include the operation of "a sanitation truck and/or roll-off truck to collect residential and commercial waste, including trash, brush, litter, and bulky items." Id. (emphasis added). Thus, it is unclear whether the position held by Juarez required the operation of a sanitation truck, a roll-off truck, or both.
The PD does not mention any specific weight-based functions related to lifting, pushing, pulling, or grasping. However, the PD makes the following distinction between the physical demands related to the operation of a sanitation truck and a roll-off truck:
Sanitation Truck — work is typically performed while sitting in a vehicle for extended periods of time with intermittent standing, walking, bending, crouching, or stooping. The employee must frequently lift light and heavy objects. (emphasis added).
Roll-off Truck — work typically [*21]  includes getting on and off truck; pulling and pushing back gates on containers; pulling cables, ropes; climbing and reaching.
Id. at 58.
While both parties agree that this PD applies to Juarez's job, they disagree on whether the PD covers one position (i.e., sanitation truck driver with heavy lifting responsibilities who may also be required to drive a roll-off truck), as the City argues, or two positions (sanitation truck driver with heavy lifting requirements plus a roll-off truck driver without heavy lifting responsibilities), as Juarez argues.
According to the City, all drivers employed in the Sanitation Department hold the position of sanitation truck driver, including Juarez, subject to being assigned more specific responsibilities, including the operation of a roll-off truck. Dkt. No. 24 at 4. Juarez maintains, in effect, that the PD covers two positions — sanitation truck drivers and roll-off truck drivers — each with distinct physical demands as set out in the PD. The phrase "and/or roll-off truck" in the PD creates this confusion. See Dkt. No. 19-7 at 57. Regardless, it appears undisputed that Juarez exclusively operated roll-off trucks while employed by the City and that the [*22]  City never assigned him to operate any other type of truck.
To further obscure matters, the City refers to Juarez's position variously in its briefing, sometimes as a "Roll-off truck driver" and other times as a "Sanitation Truck driver." The City appears to concede in its opening motion that "Plaintiff was hired by the City to work in its sanitation department as a roll-off truck driver." (emphasis added). Dkt. No. 17 at 1. Notably, the City does not say Juarez was hired "as a sanitation truck driver assigned to a roll-off truck." The City includes in its opening appendix the affidavit of supervisor Eddie Castillo ("Castillo Affidavit I") who refers to Juarez's job as that of "a roll-off truck driver," not as a sanitation truck driver. Dkt. No. 19-3 at 2-4. These descriptions by the City of Juarez's job are at odds with the City's position that there is only one position of "sanitation truck driver" and no separate position of "roll-off truck driver."
What is clear from the summary judgment evidence is that the City's own PD makes a distinction between the physical demands of operating a sanitation truck versus the physical demands of operating a roll-off truck, so it is difficult for [*23]  the City to now disclaim that there is a distinction among the employees who operate these trucks. In other words, if, as the City argues, all truck drivers within the Sanitation Department were expected to meet the same physical demands, making a distinction in the PD between the physical demands of a sanitation truck and a roll-off truck would be superfluous at best.
Finding no clarity in the City's PD, the Court next looks to the essential functions of the job Juarez was actually required to perform.
ii. Essential Functions
"Essential functions are 'fundamental', as opposed to 'marginal', job duties" such that "a job is 'fundamentally alter[ed]' if an essential function is removed." Credeur v. Louisiana Through Office of Attorney General, 860 F.3d 785, 792 (5th Cir. 2017) (citing 29 C.F.R. §§ 1630.2(n)(l), Pt. 1630, app. at 397)). If an employer has never required any employee in a particular position to perform a function that the employer claims to be essential, this is evidence that the function is not, in fact, essential. See, e.g., Giles v. General Elec. Co., No. 3:97-CV-2774-H, 1999 WL 202573, at *3 (N.D. Tex. Apr. 6, 1999). The text of the ADA provides that that:
For the purposes of this subchapter, consideration shall be given to the employer's judgment as to what functions of a job are essential, and if an employer has prepared a written description before advertising or interviewing applicants for the [*24]  job, this description shall be considered evidence of the essential functions of a job.
42 U.S.C. § 12111(8); see also Credeur, 860 F.3d at 792. The Court may also consider seven non-exhaustive factors promulgated by the EEOC in determining the essential functions of a job.3
"[T]he inquiry into essential functions is not intended to second guess an employer's business judgment with regard to production standards . . . nor to require employers to lower such standards." Credeur, 860 F.3d at 792 (citing 29 C.F.R. § Pt. 1630, app. at 398). However, courts, of course, "should not give blind deference to an employer's judgment, but should instead evaluate the employer's words alongside its policies and practices." Id. at 794 (citing EEOC v. Ford Motor Co., 782 F.3d 753, 765-66 (6th Cir. 2015) (en banc)). "Fact-finders must determine whether a function is 'essential' on a case-by-case basis." LHC Grp, Inc., 773 F.3d at 698.
Here, ascertaining the essential functions of Juarez's position would seem to be an easy task by simply consulting the "Duties, Functions and Responsibilities" section of his PD which states that the "Essential duties and functions may include the following," and then provides a list of ten duties and functions. See Dkt. No. 19-7 at 57. Notably, none of these ten duties and functions include the disputed weight-based functions.
Nevertheless, the City offers Castillo Affidavit [*25]  I to support its claim that the essential functions of a roll-off truck driver include the weight-based functions not found in the PD. Dkt. No. 19-3 at 2-4 (emphasis added). But even here, the affidavit offered for this purpose refers to Juarez as a roll-off truck driver, not as a sanitation truck driver. Id. Regardless, other than Eddie Castillo, the City does not identify the source for these functions elsewhere in the summary judgment evidence, although they do appear, as discussed below, in the checklist position description provided to Juarez's physicians in connection with his 2015 FFD exams.
Juarez disagrees with the characterization of his job in Castillo Affidavit I, claiming that the essential functions described therein are at odds with the City's written PD and the work Juarez was required to perform, and actually performed, for the City. Dkt. No. 21 at 3-4. Again, it appears undisputed that the City never required Juarez to operate any truck other than the two roll-off trucks, and that Juarez was the only Sanitation Department truck driver who was specifically assigned to drive the roll-off trucks. Dkt. No. 22 at 38, 48. Juarez claims that he never lifted, pushed, or pulled [*26]  anything heavier than a three to four-pound cable during his two-year tenure operating the roll-off trucks, and that he was able to accomplish that task with his left hand. Dkt. No. 21 at 4; Dkt. No. 22 at 3. Moreover, Juarez claims that the more onerous weight-based functions were essential functions of a sanitation truck driver position, which did require heavy lifting, as reflected in the PD, but not of Juarez's position as a roll-off truck driver.
In its Reply, the City argues that Juarez "displays a fundamental misunderstanding of his position with the City" because, as the City states for the first time in its Reply — and despite its repeated references to Juarez as a "roll-off truck driver" — that "[a] Roll-Off Truck Driver is not a separate position with a separate job description in the Sanitation Department." Dkt. No. 24 at 4. Rather, the City insists, "Plaintiff was hired as a Sanitation Truck Driver and as a part of that position, he operated a roll-off truck." Id. (emphasis added). In support of these statements, the City offers a second affidavit from Eddie Castillo ("Castillo Affidavit II") in which Castillo attempts to clear up the now ample confusion within the record [*27]  regarding Juarez's position and its essential functions. See Dkt. No. 26 at 7. However, this effort fails because Castillo Affidavit II contradicts Castillo Affidavit I to the extent that Castillo changes his characterization of Juarez's position from that of a "roll-off truck driver" (Castillo Affidavit I) to that of a "Sanitation Truck Driver who operated a roll-off truck" (Castillo Affidavit II). See id.
Castillo Affidavit II also states, among other things, that, "[a]s a Sanitation Truck Driver who operated a roll-off truck Juarez was expected to meet the essential tasks listed in the job description of a Sanitation Truck Driver as well as any essential tasks specific to the operation of a roll off truck." Id. at 3-4. According to Castillo Affidavit I, these "essential tasks" include the above weight-based functions.4 Id. Here again, the only source the City offers for these weight-based functions, which are not found in the PD, is Castillo Affidavit I. Otherwise, the City does not produce any evidence to demonstrate that the PD was modified to include these additional weight-based functions.
However, as mentioned above, there is one other place in the record where the weight-based [*28]  functions appear, and that is in connection with the 2015 FFD exams.
The record reflects that during his two years with the City, Juarez appears to have had five FFD exams. Two FFD exams occurred in 2014 unrelated to Juarez's wrist injury (Dkt. No. 22 at 85-92), two occurred in late 2015 (Dr. Barragan and Dr. Van Husen) (Dkt. No. 19-4 at 2; Dkt. No. 22 at 71-80), and the fifth was the re-evaluation by Dr. Barragan in January 2016 (Dkt. No. 19-6 at 2-4). For the FFD exams in 2014, the City appears to have requested the FFD releases from Juarez's physicians by sending them routine transmittal letters with an accompanying Physician's Fitness for Duty Release ("PFFD") form and a copy of the PD, without the additional weight-based functions, for the doctor's reference in assessing Juarez's abilities. See Dkt. No. 22 at 85-92. If the City provided more to these physicians, the City did not provide it in the summary judgment evidence.
In contrast, it appears that for the FFD exams in December 2015 and January 2016, the City forwarded to the physicians a different position description in a checklist format that appears to list essential functions taken from the original PD, but in a checklist [*29]  format where the doctor can check whether the employee is either "Able to perform" or "Unable to perform" the listed functions. See Dkt. No. 22 at 71-72. However, the checklist position description used in connection with the 2015/2016 FFD exams differs from the PD forwarded to the physicians in connection with the 2014 FFD exams in that it includes, among the essential functions, the weight-based functions. It appears that these weight-based functions do not appear anywhere else in the record, except in Castillo Affidavit I.
The Court, viewing the evidence in a light most favorable to Juarez as the nonmovant and drawing all reasonable inferences in his favor, finds that City's contradictory evidence—coupled with Juarez's contentions about the work he actually performed—creates a genuine fact issue as to the essential functions of Juarez's position, whether that be as a roll-off truck driver or a sanitation truck driver.5
The Court is mindful that, in the context of ADA litigation, courts "do not 'allow employees to define the essential functions of their positions based solely on their personal viewpoint and experience.'" Credeur, 860 F.3d at 793 (quoting Ford Motor Co., 782 F.3d at 764). Moreover, the ADA and EEOC regulations specifically [*30]  reference the employer's judgment and written job description, but "[n]either the statute nor regulations nor EEOC guidance instructs courts to credit the employee's opinion about what functions are essential." Id. However, as the
City notes in its opening brief, "[t]he essential functions of a job may be determined from a variety of sources. Dkt. No. 18 at 13 (citing 29 CFR 1630.2(n)). The City cites to the "Definitions" section of the ADA for what constitutes an "essential function," specifically 29 C.F.R. §
1630.2(n)(3). Notably among the listed sources of evidence used for determining what constitutes the essential functions of a job is "[t]he amount of time spent on the job performing the function."
29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(3)(iii). Here, the time Juarez claims, apparently undisputed, to have spent performing the weight-based functions is particularly relevant given that he was the City's only roll-off truck driver. And here, Juarez claims that he never performed such duties, was never required by the City to do so, and they were not part of his PD. While a reasonable juror could agree with the City's position that the weight-based functions were essential functions of Juarez's job and required of all drivers within the Sanitation Department, [*31]  regardless of the truck assigned to them, the Court finds that a reasonable juror could also reach the opposite conclusion.
ii. Reasonable Accommodation
The ADA defines "reasonable accommodation" to include
job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, reassignment to a vacant position, acquisition or modification of equipment or devices, appropriate adjustment or modifications of examinations, training materials or policies, the provision of qualified readers or interpreters, and other similar accommodations for individuals with disabilities.
42 U.S.C. § 12111(9)(B). See also Feist v. La. Dep't of Justice, Office of the Att'y Gen., 730 F.3d 450, 453 (5th Cir. 2013) ("[A] modification that enables an individual to perform the essential functions of a position is only one of three categories of reasonable accommodation.").
Notwithstanding the City's insistence that Juarez was a sanitation truck driver and not a roll-off truck driver, it appears undisputed that Juarez was only required to operate the two roll-off trucks during his employment. There is no evidence that Juarez sought an accommodation in operating any truck other than a roll-off truck.
It also appears undisputed that Juarez could operate Little Bubba even without an accommodation. Dkt. No. 17 at 2. And that Juarez sought the [*32]  accommodation in question only because he could not operate the tarp on Big Bubba. Id. Notwithstanding that, the City asserts that Juarez's job also required him "to collect waste, pick up trash daily at the landfill and outside of gate areas, pulling and pushing gates on containers, and pulling cables and ropes." Dkt. No. 18 at 13-14. And the PD does contain this language. Nevertheless, the PD is silent with respect to any associated weight-based requirements to such functions. And Juarez testified that while he could not pick up trash at the landfill and outside of gate areas, pull and push gates on containers, or pull cables and ropes with his right arm, he could perform these tasks using his left arm. Dkt. No. 19-2 at 21-22. Regardless, there is no evidence that Juarez ever sought an accommodation based on his inability to pick up trash at the landfill and outside of gate areas, pull and push gates on containers, or pull cables and ropes.
Otherwise, the City appears to acknowledge that the only accommodation Juarez needed was in the operation of Big Bubba. Dkt. No. 18 at 7. And it appears undisputed that the only assistance Juarez needed with Big Bubba was in the operation of the [*33]  tarp mechanism. Specifically, Juarez testified that he needed a helper with Big Bubba because the automated tarp extending mechanism did not function properly which required the Big Bubba operator to manually extend the tarp over the load. Dkt. No. 21 at 5; Dkt. No. 22 at 40-52. Juarez also testified that he frequently submitted requests that the automated tarp mechanism on Big Bubba be repaired, even to the point that a supervisor reprimanded him for submitting such requests. Dkt. No. 22 at 49-50; Dkt. No. 19-2 at 19.
The City argues in its motion that, "[o]ne of the essential functions of Plaintiff's job was to secure the load of waste with a tarp." See Dkt. No. 17 at 2. And that Juarez was only able to successfully and safely operate Big Bubba and secure the tarp over the load when he had a helper assisting him. Id. The City argues that it "accommodated this restriction for as long as feasible, but given the small size of the department and the reduced work force size, the City was unable to continue to assign a helper to [Juarez] to perform the essential functions of his job as that accommodation became unreasonable." Dkt. No. 17 at 2; Dkt. No. 18 at 15.
There are three problems [*34]  with the City's reasonable accommodation arguments. First, the only evidence offered by the City in support of its argument that providing a helper to assist Juarez was unreasonable or constituted an undue burden is Castillo affidavit I in which Castillo declares that "[d]uring the time that Juarez was employed by the City of Big Spring, the Sanitation Department was not fully staffed with drivers." Dkt. No. 19-3 at 3. In an affidavit containing sixteen numbered paragraphs, the City devotes this single sentence to the undue hardship issue. Otherwise, the City fails to produce specific evidence to support this conclusion.6 This single sentence from Castillo Affidavit I fails to resolve the fact issue of whether providing a helper was unreasonable or an undue burden for the City.
Second, it appears undisputed that Juarez sought an accommodation of the helper in August 2014 for a period of three weeks. It also appears undisputed that this arrangement continued for over a year. While the City argues that providing this helper constituted an unreasonable accommodation "given the small size of the department and the reduced work force size," (Dkt. No. 17 at 2) the City fails to explain how [*35]  the provision of such a burdensome accommodation went unnoticed in this small, under-staffed department for over a year.
Thirdly, the City's entire reasonable accommodation argument is built on the false premise that the only accommodation available was that of providing Juarez with a helper to assist him with the tarp on Big Bubba. It is that accommodation and only that accommodation which the City argues was unreasonable and burdensome. The City fails to address the most obvious accommodation of simply repairing the defective tarp mechanism. From the record before the Court, Juarez would have been able to perform the essential functions of his job — at least insofar as is relevant to the only accommodation at issue — if the equipment he was assigned was properly repaired and maintained. Such a repair could have obviated the need for an assistant altogether, and would have benefited not just Juarez, but all present and future employees who would be expected to operate Big Bubba. And it appears undisputed that Juarez repeatedly sought the repair of the automated tarp mechanism, if not other things as well. The employer may not short-circuit the interactive dialogue by terminating the [*36]  employee rather than considering his reasonable request that the equipment be repaired. See Cutrera v. Bd. of Supervisors of La. State Univ., 429 F.3d 108, 113 (5th Cir. 2005). Again, at a minimum, there exists a fact issue on this point.
b. Adverse employment action
Because genuine issues of fact exist with respect to the essential functions of Juarez's former position and the reasonableness of the accommodations sought, the Court finds for summary judgment purposes that Juarez has met his prima facie burden. Thus, under the McDonnell Douglas framework, a "presumption of discrimination" now arises and the burden shifts to the City to proffer a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the adverse employment decision, and the City has done so. LHC Grp., Inc., 773 F.3d at 694.
The City has put forth evidence that it terminated Juarez because he "exhausted his FMLA leave" and offered "no confirmation that he was capable of returning to work and performing the essential functions of his job" with or without a reasonable accommodation. Dkt. No. 18 at 16. This explanation satisfies the City's burden of production in proffering a non-discriminatory, legitimate reason for termination. See Smith v. Rockwell Int'l Corp., 77 F.3d 473, 473 (5th Cir. 1995) (per curiam) (unpublished) ("Rockwell offered a legitimate reason for placing Smith on medical layoff: Smith's physicians had imposed [*37]  permanent medical restrictions on his activities that precluded him form performing the material duties of his position."). The burden now shifts back to Juarez to demonstrate that the City's proffered reason is pretextual.
At the summary judgment stage, "[e]vidence demonstrating that the employer's explanation is false or unworthy of credence, taken together with the plaintiff's prima facie case, is likely to support an inference of discrimination even without further evidence of defendant's true motive." LHC Grp., Inc., 773 F.3d at 702 (quoting Laxton v. Gap Inc., 333 F.3d 572, 578 (5th Cir. 2003)). A mere scintilla of evidence of pretext does not create an issue of material fact in all cases. See Crawford v. Formosa Plastics Corp., 234 F.3d 889, 902 (5th Cir. 2000). The determination is to be made on a case-by-case basis, depending on the nature, extent, and quality of the evidence, as to whether a jury could reasonably infer discrimination. See id.
Juarez's pretext argument, as the Court understands it, is two-fold: the City's underlying reason for placing Juarez on FMLA leave was based on a falsity, and, once on FMLA leave, the City's medical release requirement prejudiced Juarez.
On the first point, Juarez maintains that the City's contention the he could not perform the essential functions of the position is false and "demonstrably [*38]  pretextual." Dkt. No. 21 at 6. Juarez attempts to show that the City's explanation is "false" or "unworthy of credence" because his termination for the inability to perform the essential functions of the job were predicated on a "more physically onerous" description of essential functions not found in the City's PD or the 2014 pre-employment and FFD exam forms. Indeed, Juarez contends — and the record supports — that Juarez's physicians cleared him to "work with no restrictions" when assessing him for pre-employment and the two 2014 FFD exams which, notably, did not set out the weight-based functions as did the 2015 FFD forms. Id.; Dkt. No. 19-1 at 3-4. Notwithstanding the fact the 2015 FFD forms appear to have been more onerous, Juarez contends that the City disregarded Dr. Van Husen's conclusion that, based on a review of the 2015 FFD form, Juarez could perform the essential functions of the position but that he would need periodic breaks due to his hemorrhoids. See id.
With respect to the second point, the record reveals that, as a general policy, the City required employees returning from FMLA leave to provide a "fully duty" or "100%" medical release indicating that they could perform [*39]  the essential functions of their job without restriction. Dkt. No. 19-7 at 19; Dkt. No. 22 at 81, 83-84. Juarez argues that summary judgment on his disability discrimination claim is precluded on this basis, relying on the EEOC determination that the City committed a per se violation of the ADA when it required employees to obtain a "full duty" or "return to work without restrictions" medical release. Dkt. No. 21 at 8. The City urges the Court to disregard the EEOC letter on the bases that it is not binding on the Court, it is conclusory, and it is insufficient to create a genuine issue of fact. Dkt. No. 18 at 18.
While the City correctly notes that EEOC determinations are not binding on the courts and that courts have routinely disregarded such determinations, courts have made similar determinations consistent with the EEOC's finding in this case that the City's "full duty" medical release violates the ADA per se. Although the Fifth Circuit has not squarely addressed this issue, several district courts in this circuit have found that "100% healed" or "full duty" release policies "discriminate against qualified individuals with disabilities because they permit employers to substitute [*40]  a determination of whether a qualified individual is '100% healed' from his injury for their required individual assessment of whether the qualified individual is able to perform the essential functions of his job with or without the accommodation." Heard v. United Parcel Service, Inc, No. 09-1950, 2012 WL 399213, at *9 (W.D. La. Feb. 7, 2012); see also Barton v. Checkers Drive-in Rest, Inc., No. 11-0186, 2011 WL 1193061 n. 19 (E.D. La. Mar. 28, 2011) (holding that the defendant's policy of requiring employee to return to work with no restrictions violates the ADA); E.E.O.C. v. Methodist Hospitals of Dallas, 218 F. Supp. 3d 495, 502-03 (N.D. Tex. 2016) (citing Barton and noting that a policy requiring 100% recovery may violate the ADA, but finding in that case that plaintiff had submitted no evidence that defendant required a full release).
It is undisputed that the City knew of Juarez's disability at the time it hired him. It also knew of Juarez's weight bearing restriction in his right hand when submitting the 2014 and 2015 FFD exam forms, with the 2015 FFD forms including, apparently for the first time, specific weight-based functions that exceed Juarez's abilities. See Dkt. No. 18 at 7 (The City noting that the pre-employment physical indicated that Juarez could perform the essential functions of his job despite his wrist condition). Then, it is undisputed that the City placed Juarez in a no-work status based on his inability to meet these more onerous weight-based [*41]  functions. Finally, upon expiration of his FMLA leave, the City then asked Juarez to obtain the unobtainable—a "full duty" medical release from the five pound weight bearing restrictions the City already knew to have existed.
The Court, viewing the evidence in a light most favorable to Juarez as the nonmovant and drawing all reasonable inferences in his favor, finds that a reasonable juror could conclude that the City's proffered reason for terminating Juarez was pretext.
C. ADA Retaliation Claim
Similar to claims for disability discrimination under the ADA, courts routinely apply the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework when analyzing claims for retaliation under the ADA. See 411 U.S. 792; Nall v. BNSF Railway Co., 917 F.3d 335, 349 (5th Cir. 2019).
"To show an unlawful retaliation, a plaintiff must establish a prima facie case of (1) engagement in an activity protected by the ADA, (2) an adverse employment action, and (3) a causal connection between the protected act and the adverse action. Once the plaintiff has established a prima facie case, the defendant must come forward with a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the adverse employment action. If such reason is advanced, the plaintiff must adduce sufficient evidence that the proffered reason is a pretext [*42]  for retaliation. Ultimately, the employee must show that 'but for' the protected activity, the adverse employment action would not have occurred." Nall, 917 F.3d at 34-49 (quoting Seaman v. CSPH, Inc., 179 F.3d 297, 301 (5th Cir. 1999)).
The City does not dispute that Juarez complained to Human Resources about "cripple jokes" made by his supervisors, Vega and Castillo, or that this complaint is a protected activity under the ADA. Dkt. No. 1 at 2; Dkt. No. 18 at 21. Nor does the City dispute that it took an adverse employment action when it terminated Juarez in April 2016. Accordingly, the Court finds for summary judgment purposes that Juarez has satisfied elements one and two of his prima facie burden.
The City does dispute, however, whether Juarez meets the third element of his prima facie burden—the existence of a causal connection between the protected activity and the adverse employment action. For the reasons explained below, the Court concludes that Juarez has satisfied the third element of his prima facie burden.
"A 'causal link' is established when the evidence demonstrates that 'the employer's decision to terminate was based in part on knowledge of the employee's protected activity.'" Medina v. Ramsey Steel Co., 238 F.3d 674, 684 (5th Cir. 2001) (quoting Sherrod v. Am. Airlines, Inc., 132 F.3d 1112, 1122 (5th Cir. 1998)). The causal standard for ADA retaliation claims is stricter [*43]  than it is for ADA discrimination claims: the plaintiff must demonstrate "that the adverse action would not have occurred 'but for' the employer's retaliatory motive." Feist, 730 F.3d at 454 (quoting Seaman, 179 F.3d at 301). "Close timing between an employee's protected activity and an adverse action against him may provide the 'causal connection' required to make out a prima facie case of retaliation." Lyons v. Katy Indep. Sch. Dist., 964 F.3d 298, 305 (5th Cir. 2020) (quoting Swanson v. Gen. Servs. Admin., 110 F.3d 1180, 1188 (5th Cir. 1997)). But, as the City correctly notes in its briefing, "cases that accept mere temporal proximity between an employer's knowledge of protected activity and an adverse employment action as sufficient evidence of causality to establish a prima face case uniformly hold that the temporal proximity must be very close" Clark Cty. Sch. Dist. v. Breeden, 532 U.S. 268, 273, 121 S. Ct. 1508, 149 L. Ed. 2d 509 (2001); accord Strong v. University Health Care System, L.L.C., 482 F.3d 802, 808 (5th Cir. 2007).
The Fifth Circuit has found that a time lapse of four months may be sufficient evidence of causation, while a five-month gap is too long absent other evidence. Feist, 730 F.3d at 454 (citing Evans v. Houston, 246 F.3d 344, 354 (5th Cir. 2001); Raggs v. Miss. Power & Light Co., 278 F.3d 463, 472 (5th Cir. 2002)). Such other evidence may include an employment record that does not support dismissal, or an employer's departure from typical policies and procedures. Id. (citing Schroeder v. Greater New Orleans Fed. Credit Union, 664 F.3d 1016, 1024 (5th Cir. 2011).
In the instant case, Juarez complained to Human Resources on January 4, 2016, and he was terminated on April 18, 2016—approximately three months later. See Dkt. No. 19-7 [*44]  at 31 (Human Resources complaint); Dkt. No. 19-7 at 21 (City's April 2016 termination letter). The City does not identify any basis for terminating Juarez other than his exhaustion of FMLA leave and his inability or failure to provide a full duty medical release. The City appears to be suggesting that the initiation of the FFD exams in December 2015 began a process that somehow inevitably and inexorably ended in Juarez's termination in April 2016. As evidence of this, the City argues that it placed Juarez on a no-work status only after receiving the physicians' FFD reports in January 2016. But the City ignores that it solicited those reports, so it can hardly cite their receipt as something beyond their control.
And while it is undisputed that City solicited the FFD reports prior to Juarez's complaint to Human Resources, it is reasonable to infer from the record, drawing all such reasonable inferences in favor of non-movant Juarez, that Juarez's dislike of "cripple jokes" which allegedly began in April 2015, likely manifested itself before the FFD exams were solicited in December 2015, as did the City's discovery of his continued need for an accommodation in the operation of Big Bubba. [*45] 
But here the denial of summary judgment turns on more than merely the solicitation by the City in 2015 of the FFD exams. From this record, it appears reasonably clear that between the first FFD exams in 2014, when no weight-based functions appear to be provided to Juarez's physicians, and the FFD exams in 2015/2016, when those requirements were included, the same two events stand out. First, as alleged, Juarez was subjected to "cripple jokes" beginning in April 2015. Second, sometime in the fall of 2015 the City apparently realized that it had continued providing Juarez with an assistant when he operated Big Bubba.7 The timing of these events vis-à-vis the inclusion of the weight-based functions in Juarez's FFD exams may be coincidental or simply reflect a poorly developed summary judgment record. However, for whatever reason, unexplained by the City in its briefing or evidence, the City appears to have changed its practice in requesting FFD exams between 2014 and 2015, at least insofar as Juarez was concerned. And again, the only evidence the City offers in support of the weight-based functions being essential functions of Juarez's position is Castillo Affidavit I.
Ultimately, the Court [*46]  finds that Juarez has demonstrated, for summary judgment purposes, a sufficient causal connection between his protected activity and the adverse employment action to avoid summary judgment.
The City argues that even if Plaintiff establishes a prima facie case of retaliation, the City effectively rebuts that presumption by evidence of its legitimate, non-retaliatory reasons for its actions. The City has proffered a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for Juarez's termination—that he was (1) placed on no work status after receiving his physician's fitness for duty report and then (2) terminated because he exhausted his leave under the FMLA and did not provide a fitness for duty report indicating that he could return to work. Dkt. No. 18 at 22. However, given the City's apparent inconsistencies in the administration of Juarez's FFD exams and the fact issues surrounding the City's decision to terminate Juarez, the Court nevertheless finds that a reasonable juror could conclude that the City's explanation for the alleged retaliatory termination was pretextual. Thus, the City is not entitled to summary judgment on Juarez's ADA retaliation claim.
D. FMLA Restoration
Juarez's claims the City [*47]  violated the FMLA when it failed to restore him to the same or equivalent position upon his return from FMLA leave and that it interfered with his exercise of his right to return to work. The City contends that, because Juarez is unable to perform the essential functions of the job, he is not entitled to restoration under the FMLA, and thus, his FMLA claim is barred as a matter of law.
The FMLA contains two distinct provisions, one prescriptive and another proscriptive. See Mauder v. Metro. Trans. Auth. of Harris County, Tex., 446 F.3d 574, 580 (5th Cir. 2006). The "prescriptive provision" confers on employees "a series of entitlements or substantive rights." 29 U.S.C § 2612(a)(1) (sets forth entitlement to FMLA leave); see Mauder, 466 F.3d at 580. The FMLA entitles an eligible employee to a total of twelve weeks of leave each year for, among other things, "a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform the functions of the position of such employee." 29 U.S.C. § 2612(a)(1)(D). Employees who take FMLA leave "are entitled, upon their return, 'to be restored . . . to the position of employment held by the employee when the leave commenced" or 'to be restored to an equivalent position with equivalent employment benefits, pay, and other terms and conditions of employment.'" Forbes v. Unit Tex. Drilling, L.L.C., 526 F. A'ppx. 376, 380 (5th Cir. 2013) (quoting 29 U.S.C. § 2614(a)(1)(A)-(B)).
The proscriptive provision protects [*48]  employees in exercising their rights under the FMLA. 29 U.S.C. § 2615(a)(2) (prohibits interference with or discrimination for an employee's exercise of FMLA rights). "These proscriptive FMLA provisions create a cause of action analogous to the actions for discrimination and for retaliation that are found in Title VII and other discrimination statutes[,]" such as the ADA. Haley v. Alliance Compressor LLC, 391 F.3d 644, 649 (5th Cir. 2004). Under FMLA's prescriptive provisions, "[c]laims for failure to restore are also known as 'entitlement claims' and are brought under § 2615(a)(1)," while claims for violations of the FMLA's proscriptive rights are brought under 29 U.S.C. § 2615(a)(2). Amedee v. Shell Chemical, L.P., 953 F.3d 831, 834-35 (5th Cir. 2020). Juarez's FMLA claim, as the Court sees it, is most appropriately characterized as an "entitlement claim" brought under 29 U.S.C. § 2615(a)(1) rather than a claim for retaliation or discrimination brought under 29 U.S.C. § 2615(a)(2). Juarez does not allege that he was retaliated against or discriminated against for taking FMLA leave. Here, the City, as the employer, placed
Juarez on involuntary FMLA leave rather than Juarez, as the employee, providing notice of his intention to exercise his right to take FMLA leave. See Dkt. No. 19-7 at 8. Then, he alleges, the City failed to restore him to his former position or an equivalent position. See Dkt. No. 1 at 4. As the [*49]  Fifth Circuit recently noted in Amedee,
an employee's right to return to work after a qualified absence is not unlimited. Instead, "an employee must actually be entitled to the position to which he seeks reinstatement." Shirley [v. Precision Castparts Corp.], 726 F.3d [675, 682 (5th Cir. 2013)]. "[A]nd an employer may challenge that entitlement by offering evidence that the employee would have lost his position even had he not taken FMLA leave." Id. (citation omitted).
Id. at 836 (footnote omitted).
The City contends that Juarez was not entitled to the benefit afforded by the FMLA—the restoration to his former position or an equivalent position—because he could not perform the essential functions of the job. Because the City contends that Juarez was unable to perform the essential functions of the job, and therefore not entitled a benefit under the FMLA, the City concludes that it did not violate the FMLA nor interfere with Juarez's exercise of his rights under the FMLA when it did not permit him to return to work upon the exhaustion of his FMLA leave.
The City's stated reasons for terminating Juarez were his exhaustion of FMLA leave and his failure to present a full medical release at the end of this period. And, the City's decision to place Juarez on FMLA leave was premised [*50]  upon its determination that Juarez was unable to perform the essential functions of the job because of the weight bearing restrictions in his right wrist and arm. Other than this, the City has not offered any evidence that Juarez was subject to discipline or removal for any problems with his conduct or performance.
The Court has identified several fact issues with respect to the essential functions of Juarez's former position. The fact issues identified in the Court's ADA disability-discrimination analysis apply with equal force to preclude summary judgment on Juarez's FMLA claim. If Juarez could not perform the essential functions of his job, the City had no obligation to reinstate him. 29 C.F.R. § 825.216(c) ("If the employee is unable to perform an essential function of the position because of a physical or mental condition, including the continuation if a serious health condition, the employee has no right to restoration to another position under the FMLA."). Conversely, if an employee establishes a fact issue as to his ability to perform the essential functions in question, summary judgment on an "entitlement claim" under the FMLA, such as this, is improper. See Greenlee v. Christus Spohn Health Systems Corp., No. C-06-123, 2007 WL 38284, at *5-6 (S.D. Tex. Jan. 24, 2007) (denying defendant's motion for summary [*51]  judgment in light of fact issue as to whether plaintiff could perform the essential functions of the job with a two-pound lifting restriction). This remains an issue for the fact-finder, not the Court.
Here, on this record, the Court cannot grant summary judgment in the City's favor because Juarez has demonstrated the existence of factual disputes regarding the essential functions of his job and whether he was able to perform those functions, with or without an accommodation, at the time his FMLA leave expired.
VII. CONCLUSION
For these reasons, the City's Motion for Summary Judgment (Dkt. No. 17) is DENIED.
IT IS SO ORDERED this 30th day of November, 2020.
/s/ John R. Parker
JOHN R. PARKER
UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE


End of Document

