Kanne v. Kerry
United States District Court for the Central District of California
June 30, 2017, Decided; June 30, 2017, Filed
Case No.: 2:15-cv-09595 CBM (GJSx)

Reporter
2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 223483 *; 2017 WL 10605962
MICHAEL F. KANNE, JR., Plaintiff, v. JOHN F. KERRY, SECRETARY OF STATE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE. Defendants
Counsel:  [*1] For Michael F. Kanne, Jr., an Individual, Plaintiff: Larry A Minsky, LEAD ATTORNEY, Larry A Minsky Law Offices, Long Beach, CA; Richard A Stavin, Law Office of Richard Stavin, Woodland Hills, CA.
For The Hon. Rex Tillerson, Secretary of State, Defendant: David E Pinchas, LEAD ATTORNEY, Office of US Attorney, Civil Division, Los Angeles, CA; Grace Y Park, LEAD ATTORNEY, Office of US Attorney, Los Angeles, CA; Harpreet Chahal, LEAD ATTORNEY, Office of the US Attorney, Los Angeles, CA.
For United States Department of State, Defendant: Grace Y Park, LEAD ATTORNEY, Office of US Attorney, Los Angeles, CA.
Judges: CONSUELO B. MARSHALL, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: CONSUELO B. MARSHALL
Opinion



ORDER RE MOTIONS FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
The matters before the Court are: (1) Plaintiff Michael F. Kanne, Jr.'s Motion for Partial Summary Judgment ("Pl.'s Motion"); and (2) Defendant John F. Kerry's Motion for Summary Judgment, or in the alternative, for Summary Adjudication of Issues ("Def.'s Motion"). (Dkt. Nos. 27, 34.)
After considering both parties' motions, the evidence submitted in support thereof and in opposition thereto, and oral arguments, the Court DENIES Plaintiff's Motion and Defendant's Motion.

I. JURISDICTION [*2] 
This Court has jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1331, as this is a federal question case brought under the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (the "Rehabilitation Act"), 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq.

II. FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
On or around June 20, 2010, Plaintiff Michael F. Kanne, Jr. ("Plaintiff" or "Kanne") was hired as a program specialist for the U.S. Department of State's Office of Foreign Missions ("OFM") in Los Angeles. (Dkt. No. 1 ("Compl.") ¶ 11.) As a program specialist, Plaintiff was responsible for handling OFM's Diplomatic Motor Vehicle Program which required Plaintiff to handle motor vehicle registration, licensing, leasing, insurance, and vehicle disposition issues for vehicles owned and used by diplomats and their staff in his territory. (Pl.'s Vol. I, Deposition of Michael Kanne from 2014 Administrative Hearing ("Kanne Admin. Depo") 10:2-12:4, Dkt. No. 28.)
Plaintiff was appointed pursuant to the provisions of "Schedule A," a noncompetitive hiring program designed for persons with intellectual, psychiatric or severe physical disabilities. (Compl. ¶¶ 9, 10, 11.) Schedule A employees are hired on a temporary basis before being converted to a permanent position after two years of "satisfactory" service. See [*3]  5 C.F.R. § 213.3102(u)(5), (6).
On July 2, 2010, Plaintiff emailed Eliza Bethune-King, the Department of State's Reasonable Accommodation Coordinator for the Disability and Reasonable Accommodation Division ("DRAD"). (Def.'s Ex. 4, Dkt. No 34-6.) Plaintiff informed Bethune-King that he had attention deficit hyperactivity disorder ("ADHD") and needed guidance regarding the reasonable accommodation process. Bethune-King encouraged Plaintiff to work with his immediate supervisor and to contact DRAD for assistance should Plaintiff require accommodations. From July 2010 to December 2010, Plaintiff made various requests to his supervisor Shelley Pate for adjustments in the workplace. He did not, however, make any further contact with DRAD.
In January 2011, Plaintiff received a performance review in which he was rated "not successful" in interpersonal relationships with coworkers and tasks involving customer service. (See Pl.'s Ex. 64, Dkt. No. 31 at 16.) On or about February 18, 2011, Plaintiff was terminated within the two-year probationary period. (Compl. ¶ 16.) Plaintiff received a termination letter indicating "numerous incidents involving poor performance and unprofessional conduct towards coworkers and business contacts." [*4]  (Compl. ¶ 16; Pl. Ex. 57, Dkt. No. 31.)
On December 14, 2015, Plaintiff filed a complaint against Defendant asserting the following causes of action: (1) wrongful termination on the basis of disability in violation of the Rehabilitation Act; and (2) demand for injunctive relief.1 (Compl. ¶¶ 18-25.)
Plaintiff's Motion seeks partial summary judgment to establish that: (1) Plaintiff was a federal employee and a person with a disability within the meaning of the Rehabilitation Act; (2) Plaintiff was otherwise qualified for employment with Defendant; (3) Defendant failed to reasonably accommodate Plaintiff's disability; and (4) Defendant discriminated against Plaintiff by unlawfully terminating him. (Pl.'s Motion, Dkt. No. 27.)
Defendant's Motion seeks summary judgment, or in the alternative, partial summary judgment or summary adjudication of issues, to establish that: (1) Plaintiff has not established that he has a qualifying disability; (2) Plaintiff could not perform the essential functions of his position; (3) Plaintiff cannot recover for failure to accommodate his disability; and (4) Defendant had a legitimate non-discriminatory business justification for terminating [*5]  Plaintiff's probationary employment. (Def.'s Motion, Dkt. No. 34.)

III. LEGAL STANDARD
On a motion for summary judgment, the Court must determine whether, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party, there are any genuine issues of material fact. Simo v. Union of Needletrades, Indus. & Textile Employees v. Southwest Dist. Council, 322 F.3d 602, 609-10 (9th Cir. 2003); Fed. R. Civ. P. 56. Summary judgment against a party is appropriate when the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56. An issue is "genuine" only if there is a sufficient evidentiary basis on which a reasonable jury could find for the non-moving party. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 242, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). A factual dispute is "material" only if it might affect the outcome of the suit under governing law. Id. at 248. The evidence the parties submit must be admissible. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(1)(B). In judging evidence at the summary judgment stage, the Court does not make credibility determinations or weigh conflicting evidence. T.W. Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Pac. Elec. Contractors Ass'n, 809 F.2d 626, 630 (9th Cir. 1987). Rather, "[t]he evidence of the nonmovant is to be believed, and all justifiable inferences are to be drawn in [the nonmovant's] favor." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 255.
The non-moving party must come forward with more than [*6]  "the mere existence of a scintilla of evidence." Id. at 252. "Conclusory, speculative testimony in affidavits and moving papers is insufficient to raise genuine issues of fact and defeat summary judgment." Soremekun v. Thrifty Payless, Inc., 509 F.3d 978, 984 (9th Cir. 2007) (citations omitted). Similarly, in ruling on a motion for summary adjudication, the Court must determine, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party, whether there are any genuine issues of material fact. Fontana v. Haskin, 262 F.3d 871, 876 (9th Cir. 2001).

IV. DISCUSSION

A. Evidentiary Objections
1. Defendant's Objections to Plaintiff's Expert
Defendant objects to the Declaration of Samuel I. Miles ("Dr. Miles") submitted in support of Plaintiff's Motion. Defendant argues that Plaintiff failed to properly disclose Dr. Miles by submitting a written report pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 26(a)(2)(B). Dr. Miles was Plaintiff's treating physician since June 2013. (Pl. Vol. V, Declaration of Samuel I. Miles ("Miles Decl.") ¶ 1, Dkt. No. 42.) Dr. Miles diagnosed Plaintiff with ADHD and Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder ("OCD"), described Plaintiff's impairments and limitations, and offered several possible accommodations that Plaintiff could have received at work. (Miles Decl. ¶¶ 2, 3, 4.)
Rule 26(a)(2)(B) requires an expert disclosure to be accompanied by a [*7]  written report prepared and signed by the witness "if the witness is one retained or specially employed to provide expert testimony in the case . . ." Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(a)(2)(B). However, treating physicians are generally not retained or employed to provide expert testimony because they are percipient witnesses of the treatment rendered. Goodman v. Staples The Office Superstore, LLC, 644 F.3d 817, 826 (9th Cir. 2011). As such, a treating physician need not provide a detailed written report under Rule 26(a)(2)(B) as long as his or her expert opinion is formed during the course of treatment. Id.
After Goodman, Rule 26(a)(2) was amended with the addition of Rule 26(a)(2)(C), which mandates a limited disclosure for non-retained experts, like treating physicians, who offer opinions based on their "knowledge, skill, experience, training or education" under Federal Rules of Evidence 702, 703, or 705. The disclosure must state: "(i) the subject matter on which the witness is expected to present evidence under Federal Rule of Evidence 702, 703, or 705; and (ii) a summary of the facts and opinions to which the witness is expected to testify." Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(a)(2)(C).
Here, Plaintiff disclosed Dr. Miles under Rule 26(a)(2)(C), and stated that Dr. Miles would testify as to his "observations, diagnoses, prognoses, treatment and his assessment of Plaintiff's disabilities, his limitations and the behavioral manifestations flowing from said disabilities [*8]  as well as available adaptations that can be used to overcome challenges he experiences in his life." (Def.'s Reply, Pinchas Decl. Ex. II, Dkt. No. 48-2.) Plaintiff also attached Dr. Miles' CV, his rates, and a list of cases in which he has appeared. (Id.) Therefore, Plaintiff has complied with the applicable Rule 26 expert disclosure requirements.
Defendant further objects to Dr. Miles on the basis that his opinions regarding possible accommodations were formed outside the course of treatment.2 After reviewing the correspondence between Dr. Miles and Plaintiff's attorney, the Court concludes that Dr. Miles formed his opinion of possible accommodations only after reviewing documents prepared for purposes of this litigation. (See Miles Decl. ¶ 4, Ex. 111.) Accordingly, Dr. Miles' opinions regarding possible accommodations were not "formed during the course of treatment." Goodman, 644 F.3d at 826.
The Court SUSTAINS IN PART AND OVERRULES IN PART Defendant's objections to Dr. Miles. The objections are SUSTAINED as to Dr. Miles' opinions regarding the several possible accommodations Plaintiff could have received at work. The objections are OVERRULED as to any opinions formed during the course of treatment or otherwise [*9]  admissible under Federal Rules of Evidence 702, 703, or 705.
2. Plaintiff's Objections to Defendant's Expert
Plaintiff objects to the Declaration and Supplemental Declaration of Brian Jacks, M.D. ("Dr. Jacks") submitted in support of Defendant's Motion. Dr. Jacks is an expert psychiatrist who interviewed Plaintiff on December 29, 2016. Dr. Jacks opined that Plaintiff has an additional diagnosis of a personality disorder that cannot be accommodated. Plaintiff argues that Dr. Jacks' opinion constitutes an impermissible legal conclusion on an ultimate issue, that his opinion incorrectly assumes that people with a particular diagnosis cannot be accommodated or change their behavior. Additionally, Plaintiff argues Defendant failed to provide a timely "rebuttal designation" stating what opinions Dr. Jacks would testify about in this matter.
Absent a stipulation or court order, a rebuttal expert must be disclosed "within 30 days after the other party's disclosure." Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(a)(2)(D). Here, the parties stipulated to extend the rebuttal expert designation deadline to January 13, 2017. (Dkt. Nos. 19, 20.) Defendant disclosed Dr. Jacks' report and findings to Plaintiff on January 10, 2017. (Declaration of Larry Minsky, Plaintiff's counsel ("Minsky [*10]  Decl.") Vol. III ¶ 7, Dkt. No. 47.) Thus, excluding this expert's testimony is unwarranted.
The Court also finds Plaintiff's remaining objections untenable. First, Dr. Jacks' opinions do not constitute a legal conclusion on an ultimate issue, and even if they did, they would be admissible. See Fed. R. Evid. 704 ("[a]n opinion is not objectionable just because it embraces an ultimate issue"). Second, Plaintiff's objections that Dr. Jacks' opinions are incorrect or based on faulty assumptions go to the weight and credibility of their opinions, not their admissibility.
Accordingly, the Court OVERRULES Plaintiff's objections.

B. The Rehabilitation Act
The Rehabilitation Act created and extended rights, including those concerning employment and education, to persons with disabilities. 29 U.S.C. § 791 et seq. The Ninth Circuit has held that "[t]he standards used to determine whether an act of discrimination violated the Rehabilitation Act are the same standards applied under the Americans with Disabilities Act." Coons v. Secretary of the Treasury, 383 F.3d 879, 884 (9th Cir. 2004) (citations omitted). Therefore, the Court applies ADA standards in evaluating Plaintiff's claim for a violation of the Rehabilitation Act.
To establish a prima facie case of wrongful termination because of disability under [*11]  the Rehabilitation Act, Plaintiff must demonstrate that (1) he is a person with a disability, (2) who is otherwise qualified for employment, and (3) suffered discrimination because of his disability. Walton v. U.S. Marshals Serv., 492 F.3d 998, 1005 (9th Cir. 2007).

C. Whether Plaintiff Has a Disability Within the Meaning of 29 U.S.C. § 791
Like the ADA, the Rehabilitation Act defines an individual with a disability as a person who has a "physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities of such individual; a record of such an impairment; or being regarded as having such an impairment." 42 U.S.C. § 12102(1). Major life activities include "caring for oneself, performing manual tasks, seeing, hearing, eating, sleeping, walking, standing, lifting, bending, speaking, breathing, learning, reading, concentrating, thinking, communicating, and working." 42 U.S.C. § 12102(2)(A).
Additionally, "interacting with others" has been recognized as a major life activity. See Weaving v. City of Hillsboro, 763 F. 3d 1106, 1112 (9th Cir. 2014). To demonstrate a substantial impairment in the ability to interact with others, the limitation must be severe. A plaintiff must show that his "relations with others were characterized on a regular basis by severe problems, for example, consistently high levels of hostility, social withdrawal, or failure to communicate [*12]  when necessary." Id. at 1113 (quoting McAlindin v. County of San Diego, 192 F.3d 1226 (9th Cir. 1999)). In contrast, "mere trouble getting along with coworkers" is insufficient to establish a substantial impairment. Id.
Plaintiff contends he has a disability within the meaning of the Rehabilitation Act because he has been diagnosed with ADHD, a cognitive impairment that substantially impairs his thinking, concentrating, learning, working and ability to interact with others. (See Pl.'s Motion at 9.) Plaintiff provides documentation he submitted to Defendant at the time of hire indicating his ADHD diagnosis, as well as his treating physician Dr. Miles's opinion that Plaintiff's ADHD significantly impairs his "ability to learn, think and concentrate." (See Miles Decl. ¶ 3.)
Defendant argues Plaintiff's ADHD is not sufficiently severe to constitute a disability within the meaning of the Rehabilitation Act. (Def.'s Motion at 13; Reply at 5.) Further, Dr. Jacks opines that Plaintiff's difficulties with interpersonal relationships arise from a personality disorder entirely separate from his ADHD. (Jacks Decl. ¶¶ 2-4.)
There is no dispute that Plaintiff has been diagnosed with ADHD, and was appointed as an employee pursuant to Schedule A. (See Miles Decl. ¶ 2; Jacks [*13]  Decl. ¶ 2.) This diagnosis alone, however, is insufficient to establish a disability under the Rehabilitation Act. Weaving, 763 F.3d at 1114; see also Toyota Motor Mfg., Ky., Inc. v. Williams, 534 U.S. 184, 185, 122 S. Ct. 681, 151 L. Ed. 2d 615 (2002), superseded by statute on other grounds, ADA Amendments Act of 2008, Pub. L. No. 110-325 ("It is insufficient for individuals attempting to prove disability status under the ADA based upon an impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities to merely submit evidence of a medical diagnosis of an impairment.").
Defendant argues that Plaintiff's ADHD does not qualify as a disability within the meaning of the Rehabilitation Act because the Ninth Circuit's decision in Weaving, 763 F.3d 1106 (9th Cir. 2014) precludes such a finding. In Weaving, a police officer was terminated due to ongoing interpersonal conflicts with other police officers. Id. The officer sued, alleging disability discrimination, contending that his ADHD limited his major life activities of working and interacting with others, and that he was wrongfully terminated based on his disability. The Ninth Circuit held that based upon the evidence before the jury, Weaving's ADHD could not constitute a disability under the ADA because his impairment did not affect his work performance and mere trouble getting along with coworkers was insufficient to show a substantial [*14]  limitation in a major life activity. Id. at 1112. The Court noted evidence demonstrating that the officer's work was exceptional, that he was frequently promoted because of his proficiency, and that the officer's interpersonal problems almost exclusively occurred with peers and subordinates, not his supervisors or civilians. Id. at 1114.
The facts in Weaving differ in several respects to the case at hand. Unlike the officer in Weaving, Plaintiff had interpersonal problems with nearly everyone he came into contact with, including coworkers who trained him and important diplomatic customers. (Declaration of Tarik Obeidi ("Obeidi Decl.") ¶¶ 2-4; 7-9, Dkt. No. 34-1; Chronological Log of Shelley Pate ("Pate Log"), Dkt. No. 34-8.) Plaintiff's supervisor received reports that Plaintiff spoke to consular customers in a "condescending and curt" manner and that he lacked cultural sensitivity to work with customers from other countries. (Pate Log ¶ 2f.) Plaintiff testified himself that one of his consular customers hung up on him and others made complaints to his supervisors. (Deposition of Michael Kanne ("Kanne Depo.") at 124:13-125:20; 128:15-20; 130:9-131:7, Dkt. No. 34-3.) Dr. Miles opined that due to Plaintiff's [*15]  ADHD, "[h]e has a significant inability to comprehend how his actions, words, and deeds affect others." (Miles Decl. ¶ 3.) Plaintiff's difficulty interacting with others was reflected in his January 2011 job performance evaluation, where Plaintiff was rated "not successful" in the areas of customer service and "interpersonal skills and communication." (Pl.'s Ex. 64, Dkt. No. 31 at 15-22.)
The evidence before the Court also demonstrates that Plaintiff's impairment substantially limited major life activities other than "working" or "interacting with others," which were the only two major life activities alleged in Weaving. Weaving, 763 F.3d at 1107. Plaintiff's supervisor, Shelley Pate, testified that Plaintiff was easily distracted by conversations going on around him, had trouble following instructions and staying focused, had difficulty multitasking, and was easily frustrated and angry. (Deposition of Shelly R. Pate ("Pate Depo") at 105:5-18, 108:5-19, Dkt. No. 39.) The coworker who trained Plaintiff observed that he "does not absorb information," "gets fixated on things that are not relevant to the task," and "ask[s] questions which have nothing to do with what he's learning." (Pate Log ¶ 2f.) Furthermore, among the [*16]  key reasons cited for terminating Plaintiff was his difficulty focusing on tasks and his tendency to learn "rather slowly." (Pl.'s Ex. 102, Dkt. No. 41.) Thus, unlike in Weaving where the officer was able to overcome ADHD's impediments and succeed in his career with "knowledge and technical competence," here the evidence demonstrates that Plaintiff's impairment substantially limited other major life activities. Weaving, 763 F.3d at 1112. Accordingly, the Weaving case does not preclude a finding that ADHD is an impairment that can substantially limit one or more major life activity.
Both parties provide evidence that Plaintiff has a personality disorder in addition to ADHD. Plaintiff's treating physician diagnosed Plaintiff with Obsessive Compulsive Personality Disorder, whereas Defendant's expert opined that Plaintiff has a general personality disorder. (Miles Decl. ¶ 2; Jacks Decl. ¶ 2.) Plaintiff's treating physician opined that Plaintiff's difficulty interacting with others was caused by ADHD; Defendant's expert opined that Plaintiff's difficulty interacting with others is primarily caused by the personality disorder. (Jacks Decl. ¶¶ 2-4.)
Therefore, a genuine issue of material fact remains as to whether [*17]  Plaintiff was a person with a disability under the Rehabilitation Act as a result of his ADHD.

D. Whether Plaintiff Was Otherwise Qualified to Perform the Essential Functions of His Position
An otherwise qualified person is one who can perform the essential functions of the job in question "with or without reasonable accommodation." Bates v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 511 F.3d 974, 989 (9th Cir. 2007); see also 42 U.S.C. § 12102(1)(A), 12111(8). "Essential functions" are "fundamental job duties of the employment position . . . not includ[ing] the marginal functions of the position." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(1); see Cripe v. City of San Jose, 261 F.3d 877, 887 (9th Cir. 2001). If an individual cannot perform one or more "essential functions" without an accommodation, the burden is on the individual to provide evidence making a facial showing that a "reasonable accommodation" is possible. Buckingham v. United States, 998 F.2d 735, 740 (9th Cir. 1993).
It is undisputed that customer service and interacting with coworkers are "essential functions" of Plaintiff's position as a Program Specialist. Defendant offers evidence that Plaintiff had substantial difficulty providing respectful and courteous customer service as well as refraining from conflicts with coworkers. (Obeidi Decl. ¶¶ 2, 3; Kanne Depo. 73:2-75:15, 104:1-17.) Plaintiff's supervisor, Shelley Pate, listened to several of Plaintiff's phone conversations with customers, including [*18]  motor vehicle dealers and consular personnel, and described Plaintiff's style as "abrasive and unpolished." (Pate Log ¶ 3g.) Pate stated that often times a coworker or intern had to step in and complete the conversation with the contact because "[Plaintiff] gets so stressed and upset that he becomes unable to function or at times, even formulate a coherent sentence." (Id.) Additionally, Plaintiff's January 2011 performance review reflected Plaintiff's problems with interpersonal relationships and customer service. (See Pl.'s Ex. 64, Dkt. No. 31 at 16.)
Plaintiff argues that his performance problems were attributable to his disability and that accommodations were available that would have enabled Plaintiff to perform the essential functions of his position. For example, Plaintiff submits deposition testimony from employees of the Disability Reasonable Accommodations Division of the Department of State detailing reasonable accommodations available for employees with ADHD, including use of a job coach or an adjustment to method of supervision. (Deposition of Patricia Pittarelli ("Pittarelli Depo.") 87:17-103:1; Deposition of Eliza Bethune-King ("King Depo.") 11:18-17:2, 48:7-54:12.) Plaintiff [*19]  also submits expert testimony from Dr. Peter Blanck demonstrating that Defendant failed to explore several reasonable accommodations for Plaintiff that have proven successful for other employees with ADHD. (Report of Peter Blanck pt. V.B.3, Dkt. No. 33, at 89-93.)
Defendant offers the declaration of its retained expert Dr. Jacks, who opined that Plaintiff's difficulties with interpersonal relationships are caused by his personality disorder. (Jacks Decl. ¶ 2.) According to Dr. Jacks, individuals with personality disorders are not amenable to reasonable accommodations in the workplace because they are "unaware of the problems that they have or their activities." (Jacks Decl. ¶¶ 4-5.) Thus, Dr. Jacks finds that Plaintiff's difficulties interacting with others could not be accommodated. Plaintiff provides evidence demonstrating that the U.S. Department of Labor's Job Accommodation Network has an online Accommodation Series setting forth numerous recommendations for employees with personality disorders. (See Pl.'s Ex. 131, Dkt. No 47-1.)
The Court finds there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Plaintiff was "otherwise qualified" to perform the essential functions of his position [*20]  with an accommodation.

E. Whether Plaintiff's Employer Failed to Provide Reasonable Accommodations
The Rehabilitation Act requires federal employers to provide reasonable accommodations for the known physical and mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability, unless the agency can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an "undue hardship." 28 C.F.R. § 42.511. A "reasonable accommodation" is defined as "modifications or adjustments to the work environment, or to the manner or circumstances under which the position held or desired is customarily performed, that enable a qualified individual with a disability to perform the essential functions of that position." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(1)(ii).
Once an employee gives an employer "notification of [his] disability and the desire for accommodation," Vinson v. Thomas, 288 F.3d 1145, 1154 (9th Cir. 2002) (citing Barnett v. U.S. Air, Inc., 228 F.3d 1105, 1112 (9th Cir. 2000), vacated on other grounds, 535 U.S. 391, 122 S. Ct. 1516, 152 L. Ed. 2d 589 (2002)), the employer must engage in an informal interactive process "to clarify what the individual needs and identify the appropriate accommodation." Id. (quoting Barnett, 228 F.3d at 1112.) Employers may not place the entire burden on the employee to identify a reasonable accommodation since "they do not have the superior knowledge of the workplace that the employer has." Barnett, 228 F.3d at 1113. "An employer who fails to [*21]  engage in such an interactive process in good faith may incur liability 'if a reasonable accommodation would have been possible.'" Id. (quoting Barnett, 228 F.3d at 1112.)
In this case, Plaintiff initiated the interactive process on July 2, 2010 by sending an email to Eliza Bethune-King, the reasonable accommodation coordinator in the Department of State's Disability and Reasonable Accommodations Division (DRAD). (See Def.'s Ex. 4, Dkt. No. 34-6.) In the email, Plaintiff stated that he had ADHD, that he was in the process of informing his coworkers about his disability, and that he "did not know if [he] need[ed] any reasonable accommodation." (Id.) Bethune-King replied and explained to Plaintiff that "[i]t is important to work with your immediate supervisor to engage in the interactive process" and that should Plaintiff require accommodations, to contact DRAD for assistance. (Id.)
Plaintiff provides evidence that during the period from July 2010 to December 2010, he made the following requests to his supervisor Shelley Pate:
• To move his work station and place a partition between him and his coworker's desk, in an effort to avoid auditory distractions (Pate Depo. at 140:3-143:9.)
• To assign him a different division [*22]  of the customer portfolio such that he could work with the clients with whom he had developed a better rapport (Kanne Depo. at 249:23-250:5.)
• To use flex time to work 10 hours a day four days per week (Pate Depo. at 268:2-273:20; Kanne Depo. 249:19-21.)
• To participate in Defendant's mentorship program (Kanne Decl. ¶ 15, Vol. V at 465.)
• To receive a different method of training (Kanne Depo. 248:12-15.)
There is no dispute that with exception to the partition, all of Plaintiff's requests were denied by Plaintiff's supervisor.3
The "interactive process" requires an employer to assess an individual's limitations, offer suggestions for reasonable accommodations, or discuss practical alternatives to requests. See Barnett, 228 F.3d at 1115. An employer who fails to engage in the interactive process in good faith faces liability only if a "reasonable accommodation would have been possible." Id. at 1116. When making the determination of whether a reasonable accommodation is possible, "the jury is entitled to bear in mind that had the employer participated in good faith, there may have been other, unmentioned possible accommodations." Id. at 1115-16.
Plaintiff submits expert testimony demonstrating several possible accommodations that have proven successful [*23]  for employees with ADHD, such as: a job coach, a mentor, disability sensitivity training, teleworking or a flexible work schedule, the use of technology to reduce distraction (i.e., white noise machines or noise canceling headsets), multitasking strategies (e.g., checklists, note taking), an expert to examine the physical layout of the office to reduce noise and distraction, job reassignment, or consultation with the Department of Defense's Computer/Electronic Accommodations program ("CAP") and the U.S. Department of Labor's Job Accommodation Network ("JAN"), which has designated information on accommodations for individuals with ADHD. (See Report of Peter Blanck pt. V.B.3, Dkt. No. 33, at 89-93.)
Defendant provides evidence that after Plaintiff's initial email to Bethune-King, he never contacted DRAD for assistance. (See Def.'s Ex. 4, Dkt. No. 34-6; Kanne Depo. at 118:8-119:25.) Defendant also contends that Plaintiff's requests do not qualify as requests for reasonable accommodation because they were not specifically requested to accommodate Plaintiff's disability. Plaintiff's supervisor testified at her deposition that Plaintiff never requested an accommodation for his alleged disability [*24]  and in fact insisted he could perform the job without a reasonable accommodation. (Pate Depo. 83:12-20, Dkt. No. 34.)
The Court finds that Plaintiff's July 2, 2010 email to DRAD, followed by several requests to his supervisor, constitute requests for accommodation that triggered Defendant's duty to engage in the interactive process. See Barnett, 228 F.3d at 1112 (an employee is not required to use any particular language when requesting an accommodation and need only "inform the employer of the need for an adjustment due to a medical condition."). Genuine issues of material fact exist as to whether Defendant engaged in the good faith interactive process with Plaintiff, and whether Plaintiff's proposed accommodations were reasonable without imposing undue hardship on Defendant.

F. Whether Plaintiff Was Terminated Because of His Disability
To establish a prima facie case of wrongful termination because of disability under the Rehabilitation Act, Plaintiff must demonstrate that he was terminated solely because of his disability. Lucero v. Hart, 915 F.2d 1367, 1371 (9th Cir. 1990). "If the plaintiff makes out a prima facie case of wrongful termination under the Act, the burden shifts to the defendant who must demonstrate a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for [*25]  the termination." Id. If defendant articulates a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the action, the burden then shifts back to the plaintiff to produce evidence showing that the reason offered by the defendant is pretextual. See Smith v. Barton, 914 F.2d 1330, 1339-1340 (9th Cir. 1990) (applying McDonnell Douglas framework for Title VII discrimination claims to discrimination claim brought under ADA). "The link between the disability and termination is particularly strong where it is the employer's failure to reasonably accommodate a known disability that leads to discharge for performance inadequacies resulting from that disability." See Humphrey v. Memorial Hosps. Ass'n, 239 F.3d 1128, 1140 (9th Cir. 2001).
Plaintiff asserts that he was terminated for "performance-related issues directly attributable to his disability" and that had he been provided with reasonable accommodations, his performance issues related to customer service and interpersonal relationships would have subsided. (See Pl.'s Motion at 24.)
Defendant provides email correspondence between Plaintiff's supervisor and the regional director setting forth three reasons for recommending Plaintiff's termination: (1) Plaintiff's continued "trouble in his dealings with both customers and colleagues"; (2) Plaintiff's difficulty in multitasking; [*26]  and (3) Plaintiff's tendency to "learn rather slowly." (See Pl. Ex. 102, Dkt. No. 41.) Defendant subsequently sent a letter to Plaintiff indicating that the reason he was being terminated was because of "numerous incidents involving poor performance and unprofessional conduct toward coworkers and business contacts." (Compl. ¶ 16; Pl.'s Ex. 57, Dkt. No. 31.)
Given that Plaintiff requested accommodations which he believed would have addressed his performance issues, the Court finds that genuine issues of material fact exist as to whether Defendant's justifications for Plaintiff's termination were pretextual.

V. CONCLUSION
The Court DENIES Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment.
The Court DENIES Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment, or in the alternative, for Summary Adjudication of Issues.
The Court DISMISSES with prejudice Plaintiff's Second Cause of Action.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
DATED: June 30, 2017
/s/ Consuelo B. Marshall
CONSUELO B. MARSHALL
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

