Kershaw v. Johnston Mem'l Hosp. Auth.
United States District Court for the Eastern District of North Carolina, Western Division
March 10, 2023, Decided; March 10, 2023, Filed
No. 5:21-CV-00465-M

Reporter
2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 53880 *; 2023 WL 2671412
Erica Kershaw, Plaintiff, v. Johnston Memorial Hospital Authority, d/b/a Johnston Health, Defendant.
Subsequent History: Adopted by, Motion denied by Kershaw v. Johnston Mem'l Hosp. Auth., 2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 53436, 2023 WL 2669052 (E.D.N.C., Mar. 27, 2023)
Counsel:  [*1] For Erica Kershaw, Plaintiff: Alexander C. Kelly, The Kirby Smith Law Firm, Winston-Salem, NC.
For Johnston Memorial Hospital Authority, d/b/a Johnston Health, Defendant: Luther Donald Starling, Jr., LEAD ATTORNEY, Daughtry, Woodard, Lawrence & Starling, P. O. Drawer 1960, Smithfield, NC.
Judges: Robert T. Numbers, II, United States Magistrate Judge.
Opinion by: Robert T. Numbers, II
Opinion



Memorandum & Recommendation
Erica Kershaw sued her former employer, Johnston Memorial Hospital Authority, under the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Family and Medical Leave Act. She alleges that JMHA discriminated against her, denied her reasonable accommodations, and eventually fired her because of her disabilities. Am. Compl., D.E. 10. Last April, JMHA moved to dismiss Kershaw's lawsuit, alleging that her ADA claims failed to state a claim for relief1 and that her FMLA claim is barred by the statute of limitations. Mot. Dismiss, D.E. 22. For the reasons set forth below, the undersigned recommends that the district court deny JMHA's motion to dismiss (D.E. 22).

I. Background
The parties present the factual issues involved in this case with differing levels of detail.
Kershaw alleges that she began working for JMHA as a [*2]  full-time clinical coordinator and registered nurse in September 2018. Am. Compl. ¶ 11. She was one of four clinical coordinators working under the same supervisor. Id. ¶ 20. She was the only one, however, who was responsible for overseeing staff at two separate JMHA locations. Id. ¶ 19.
Kershaw contends that she suffers from major depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder. Id. ¶ 13. These conditions allegedly limit her ability to socialize, think, and work. Id. ¶ 14. Hoping to ease these ailments, Kershaw's doctor suggested that she undergo Transmagnetic Stimulation ("TMS") therapy in September 2019. Id. ¶ 15. The TMS treatments required daily visits to a doctor's office, so Kershaw went on continuous FMLA leave beginning on September 24. Id. ¶ 16. Kershaw was supposed to return to work on December 17, 2019. Id. ¶ 17.
Roughly a month before Kershaw was scheduled to return, she met with two JMHA human resources representatives to discuss potential accommodations. Id. ¶ 18. As recommended by her physician, Kershaw asked that JMHA limit her workweek to four days (rather than five) and station her at only one location (rather than two). Id. ¶ 21.
In early December, JMHA denied [*3]  Kershaw's requests. Id. ¶ 23. She responded by asking for another two weeks of unpaid leave to finish her TMS treatments, but JMHA denied this request as well. Id. ¶¶ 24-26.
JMHA allegedly gave Kershaw two options: come back to work as scheduled on December 17, or give up the position as a clinical coordinator and work as a per-diem nurse—a position without benefits or stable hours. Id. ¶¶ 26-28. After her doctor cleared her to work without accommodations, Kershaw chose the former option. Id. ¶¶ 31-32.
But matters only got worse once Kershaw returned to work. On her second day back, she accidentally bumped a car in the JMHA parking lot. Id. ¶ 33. Just after the fender-bender, JMHA required Kershaw to take a drug test and attend a meeting with human resources. At the meeting, JMHA reportedly told Kershaw that she came back to work too soon. Id. ¶ 36. JMHA employees then sent Kershaw home; barred her from returning to work; and, just over a week later, posted a listing for her position. Id. ¶¶ 37, 39-40. Kershaw alleges she was constructively terminated on December 19, 2019, when she was not allowed to return to work the day after she was sent home. Id. ¶ 45.
JMHA paints a different picture. [*4]  In its brief, JMHA explains that Kershaw's position requires travel between two facilities as well as face-to-face communication with managers and other employees. Mem. Supp. Mot. Dismiss at 2, D.E. 23. Kershaw allegedly signed a document making these requirements clear. Id.
JMHA agrees that Kershaw began working for it in September 2018. Id. at 1-2. It also agrees that things began to go south shortly after Kershaw requested accommodations. But JMHA contends that, on top of requesting a four-day workweek, Kershaw wished to be excused from face-to-face contact with other employees "despite presenting a doctor's note that released her to full duty with no restrictions." Id. According to JHMA, it could not honor this request for two reasons. First, it would have to hire another employee to cover the one day each week that Kershaw could not work. Id. And second, the clinical coordinator position requires interpersonal contact. Id. As an alternative, JMHA offered Kershaw "other positions of employment that might better align with her work preferences[.]" But she insisted on returning as a clinical coordinator. Id.
After Kershaw's car accident on December 18, JMHA contends, she worked for [*5]  fewer than three hours before another employee found her in a state of distress in her office. Id. at 3. Kershaw was in no frame of mind to work, so JMHA allowed her to return home and instructed her to reach out when she was ready to come back. Id. But according to JMHA, Kershaw did not try to return to work. Id. In fact, she did not reach out until she hired an attorney. Despite all this, JMHA maintains that it never formally fired Kershaw. Instead, it allowed her to retain access to employee benefits until October 2020, when she was removed from JMHA's payroll because she failed to show up for work for nearly a year. Id.
On this much the parties agree: Kershaw sued JMHA in November 2021. See Compl., D.E. 1. Her amended complaint alleges that JMHA discriminated against her, retaliated against her, and failed to accommodate her in violation of the ADA. Am. Compl. ¶¶ 41-55. It also asserts that JMHA retaliated against her under the FMLA. Id. ¶¶ 56-59. Kershaw seeks declaratory relief, back pay, front pay, damages, attorney's fees, and costs. JMHA moved to dismiss Kershaw's claims in April 2022.

II. Discussion
JMHA claims that Kershaw's amended complaint should be dismissed for two reasons: [*6]  First, it argues that her ADA claims fail to state a claim for relief.2See Mem. Supp. Mot. Dismiss at 5-10. And second, it contends that her FMLA claim is barred by the statute of limitations. See id. at 10-12. The undersigned finds neither argument persuasive.

A. ADA Claims
The ADA prohibits an employer from firing "a qualified individual with a disability because of the disability[.]" 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). It also requires an employer to make "reasonable accommodations" that allow "an otherwise qualified individual with a disability" to do her job. Id. § 12112(b)(5)(A). Kershaw alleges three violations of the ADA: discrimination, retaliation, and failure to accommodate. Am. Compl. ¶¶ 41-55.
JMHA argues that Kershaw's ADA claims should be dismissed because they fail to state a claim for relief. The Supreme Court has explained that, to withstand a motion to dismiss under Rule 12(b)(6), "a complaint must contain sufficient factual matter, accepted as true, to 'state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face.'" Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678, 129 S. Ct. 1937, 173 L. Ed. 2d 868 (2009) (quoting Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 570, 127 S. Ct. 1955, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929 (2007)). In evaluating a motion to dismiss, the court must "construe . . . facts in the light most favorable to the plaintiff," Nemet Chevrolet, Ltd. v. Consumeraffairs.com, Inc., 591 F.3d 250, 255 (4th Cir. 2009), and "draw all reasonable inferences in [her] favor," E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co. v. Kolon Indus., Inc., 637 F.3d 435, 440 (4th Cir. 2011).
At the motion to dismiss [*7]  stage, the court must generally consider only the sufficiency of the allegations laid out in the complaint and the "documents attached or incorporated into the complaint." Id. at 448. Documents attached to a motion to dismiss may only be considered "when the document is integral to and explicitly relied on in the complaint, and when the plaintiffs do not challenge [the document's] authenticity." Zak v. Chelsea Therapeutics Int'l, Ltd., 780 F.3d 597, 606-07 (4th Cir. 2015) (citations and internal quotation marks omitted). Thus, the court will only consider the allegations in Kershaw's amended complaint. All contentions in the parties' briefs—whether intended to supplement or refute the amended complaint—fall outside the court's ambit at the motion to dismiss stage. To proceed otherwise would "improperly convert[] the motion to dismiss into a motion for summary judgment." Id. at 606 (citation omitted).

1. Discrimination
Kershaw first alleges that JMHA fired her on account of her disability. To state a claim for disability discrimination under the ADA, a plaintiff must plausibly allege "(1) that she has a disability, (2) that she is a qualified individual for the employment in question, and (3) that [her employer] discharged her . . . because of her disability." Jacobs v. N.C. Admin. Off. of the Courts, 780 F.3d 562, 572 (4th Cir. 2015) (quotations omitted). [*8]  JMHA does not contest that Kershaw has a disability.3 Instead, it contends that she is not a qualified individual and that she cannot demonstrate that JMHA discriminated against her. See Mem. Supp. Mot. Dismiss at 5-7.
The ADA defines a "qualified individual" as "an individual with a disability who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds or desires." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). A job's essential functions are those that "bear more than a marginal relationship to the job at issue." Martinson v. Kinney Shoe Corp., 104 F.3d 683, 686 (4th Cir. 1997) (quotation omitted).
Kershaw alleges that her doctor endorsed her return to work even without the requested accommodations. Am. Compl. ¶ 32. But after the fender-bender on her second day back, Kershaw contends that JMHA drug tested her, told her that she returned to work too soon, and sent her home. Id. ¶¶ 33-37. The next day, JMHA allegedly prohibited her from working, constructively firing her. Id. ¶ 37. And little more than a week later, JMHA posted Kershaw's position online. Id. ¶ 39. This series of events, as laid out in the amended complaint, provides a plausible argument that Kershaw is a qualified individual with a disability [*9]  who was fired because of her disability.
JMHA counters that Kershaw is not a qualified individual because the job description for the clinical coordinator position—which Kershaw signed—stipulates that working in two locations is an essential element of the job. Mem. Supp. Mot. Dismiss at 5. And JMHA maintains that it never prevented Kershaw from coming into work after the fender-bender—she chose not to show up. Id. at 6. In fact, according to JMHA, it never fired Kershaw. Instead, she was merely "administratively terminated" in October 2020 after she failed to come to work for almost a year. Id. at 7. Thus, JMHA alleges that it never discharged her because of her disability.
Kershaw's former employer may be correct about its factual assertions, but since they are not part of Kershaw's amended complaint, the court cannot consider them in resolving JMHA's motion. See Zak, 780 F.3d at 606-07. Evaluating the allegations in Kershaw's amended complaint alone, the district court should find that she has stated a claim for ADA discrimination.

2. Retaliation
Next, Kershaw contends that JMHA retaliated against her for taking leave and requesting accommodations. A plaintiff who wishes to state a claim for ADA retaliation [*10]  must plausibly plead that "(1) she engaged in a protected activity; (2) her employer acted adversely against her; and (3) her protected activity was causally connected to her employer's adverse action." Rhoads v. FDIC, 257 F.3d 373, 392 (4th Cir. 2001). Kershaw maintains that she engaged in protected activities when she took leave to treat her disabilities and when she requested accommodations for those disabilities. Am. Compl. ¶ 48. She also alleges that "[t]he temporal proximity between" her protected actions "and her termination supports an inference of causation." Id. ¶ 50. JMHA retorts that it never acted adversely against her—even if she were terminated in December 2019, her requests for unreasonable accommodations fall outside the ADA's protections. Mem. Supp. Mot. Dismiss at 10.
The Fourth Circuit has explained that requesting accommodations is a protected activity. See, e.g., Haulbrook v. Michelin N. Am., Inc., 252 F.3d 696, 706 (4th Cir. 2001) ("The record shows a termination and shows protected activity -- Haulbrook's November 4 request for accommodation."). It has also noted that a close temporal proximity between a denied accommodations request and an employee's termination can give rise to the inference that the two are connected. Id. Thus, JMHA's motion to dismiss this claim can only [*11]  succeed if Kershaw's requests for accommodations were unreasonable as a matter of law.
The ADA helps explain which accommodations are reasonable. The Act states that a reasonable accommodation can include "job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, [and] reassignment to a vacant position[.]" 42 U.S.C. § 12111(9)(B). Generally, the reasonableness of an accommodation is a question of fact. Cf. Pandazides v. Va. Bd. of Educ., 13 F.3d 823, 833 (4th Cir. 1994) (Rehabilitation Act case).
Kershaw initially requested two accommodations—both of which her doctor recommended: a four-day workweek and a single location of employment. Am. Compl. ¶ 22. After JMHA denied these requests, Kershaw asked for two additional weeks of unpaid leave to continue her TMS treatments. This, too, was shot down. Id. ¶ 26. The only accommodation JMHA allegedly offered was to transfer Kershaw to a position as a per-diem nurse, which would leave her without benefits or a stable schedule. Id. ¶ 28.
Focusing solely on Kershaw's amended complaint and resolving inferences in her favor, the undersigned finds no grounds to conclude that her proposed accommodations were facially unreasonable at this stage. The ADA itself contemplates that "job restructuring" (like switching from two workplaces to one) and "part-time [*12]  or modified work schedules" (like switching from a five-day workweek to a four-day workweek) can be reasonable accommodations. 42 U.S.C. § 12111(9)(B). And the Fourth Circuit has held that a request for leave is not facially unreasonable "so long as it (1) is for a limited, finite period of time; (2) consists of accrued paid leave or unpaid leave; and (3) is shown to be likely to achieve a level of success that will enable the individual to perform the essential functions of the job in question." Wilson v. Dollar Gen. Corp., 717 F.3d 337, 345 n.7 (4th Cir. 2013) (citations omitted). Kershaw requested two weeks of additional leave—without pay—to finish her TMS therapy. Am. Compl. ¶ 24. While the parties will need to exchange discovery to definitively answer whether the two extra weeks would have improved Kershaw's performance upon returning to JMHA, the undersigned cannot make that determination based on Kershaw's amended complaint alone.
In sum, Kershaw has stated a claim for ADA retaliation. The district court should deny JMHA's motion to dismiss this claim.

3. Failure to Accommodate
Kershaw's final ADA claim alleges that JMHA failed to provide her with reasonable accommodations. To state a claim for failure to accommodate, Kershaw must plausibly allege four elements: First, [*13]  she must contend that she had a disability under the ADA. Wilson v. Dollar Gen. Corp., 717 F.3d 337, 345 (4th Cir. 2013). Second, she must indicate that JMHA had notice of the disability. Id. Third, she must claim that she could perform the essential functions of her position with reasonable accommodations. Id. And fourth, Kershaw must allege that JMHA refused to make such accommodations. Id. Here, the parties only dispute the third prong.
As discussed above, Kershaw contends that she could have performed the essential functions of a clinical coordinator if she had a shorter workweek, worked from a single location, or had another two weeks of unpaid leave to finish her TMS therapy. Am. Compl. ¶¶ 21-26. And as with Kershaw's ADA retaliation claim, JMHA alleges that her requests were unreasonable as a matter of law. Mem. Supp. Mot. Dismiss at 8-10. But—as with its argument on retaliation—JMHA's argument on this point is better suited for summary judgment. Thus, the district court should deny its motion to dismiss Kershaw's failure to accommodate claim.

B. FMLA Claim
Finally, Kershaw contends that JMHA retaliated against her by firing her for taking FMLA leave to treat her anxiety and depression. The FMLA prohibits employers from discriminating or [*14]  retaliating against employees who, in compliance with the Act, take time off "[b]ecause of a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform the functions of the position of such employee." 29 U.S.C. § 2612.
JMHA asks the court to dismiss Kershaw's FMLA claim as time-barred. The FMLA provides that, unless a violation of the Act was willful, an action must be brought within two years. 29 U.S.C. § 2617(c)(1). Because Kershaw's FMLA leave began on September 24, 2019, JMHA argues, her lawsuit—which was filed in November 2021—is untimely. Mem. Supp. Mot. Dismiss at 11-12.
But the text of the FMLA refutes JMHA's claim. The Act provides that "an action may be brought under this section not later than 2 years after the date of the last event constituting the alleged violation for which the action is brought." 29 U.S.C. § 2617(c)(1) (emphasis added). And because Kershaw contends that she was fired on or about December 19, 2019, the statute of limitations began running then—not in September. Kershaw's FMLA claim filed in November 2021, therefore, is timely. Thus, the court should deny JMHA's motion to dismiss Kershaw's FMLA claim.

III. Conclusion
For the reasons discussed above, the undersigned recommends that the court deny JMHA's motion [*15]  to dismiss (D.E. 22).
The Clerk of Court must serve a copy of this Memorandum and Recommendation ("M&R") on each party who has appeared in this action. Any party may file a written objection to the M&R within 14 days from the date the Clerk serves it on them. The objection must specifically note the portion of the M&R that the party objects to and the reasons for their objection. Any other party may respond to the objection within 14 days from the date the objecting party serves it on them. The district judge will review the objection and make their own determination about the matter that is the subject of the objection. If a party does not file a timely written objection, the party will have forfeited their ability to have the M&R (or a later decision based on the M&R) reviewed by the Court of Appeals.
Dated: March 10, 2023
/s/ Robert T. Numbers, II
ROBERT T. NUMBERS, II
UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE


End of Document

