Kideckel v. Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.
United States District Court for the Southern District of California
February 3, 2021, Decided; February 3, 2021, Filed
Case No.: 20-cv-00681-DMS (JLB)

Reporter
2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 20778 *
BRENT KIDECKEL, Plaintiff, v. WELLS FARGO BANK, N.A., Defendant.
Prior History: Kideckel v. Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 238716 (S.D. Cal., Dec. 18, 2020)
Counsel:  [*1] Brent Kideckel, Plaintiff, Pro se, Vista, CA.
For Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., Defendant: An Le, LEAD ATTORNEY, Severson & Werson, Irvine, CA; Marquis Wraight, LEAD ATTORNEY, Severson & Werson APC, San Francisco, CA.
Judges: Hon. Jill L. Burkhardt, United States Magistrate Judge.
Opinion by: Jill L. Burkhardt
Opinion



ORDER RE: E-MAIL COMMUNICATIONS WITH THE COURT
On February 1, 2021, Plaintiff Brent Kideckel ("Plaintiff") e-mailed several documents to the undersigned's e-file address asking the Court to file them "as a reasonable accommodation" under the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"). These documents include the following pleadings signed by Plaintiff: (1) Notice of Withdrawal of Plaintiff's Motion to Dismiss; (2) Motion to Continue All Proceedings for 180 Days Per COVID-19; (3) Motion to Vacate Order Sanctioning Plaintiff; and (4) Order to Show Cause.
As Plaintiff has been instructed on multiple occasions, uninvited communications with the Court via Judge Burkhardt's e-file e-mail address are prohibited and will be disregarded. (See ECF Nos. 23, 26, 27, 31, 35, 39, 43.) He has further been advised that e-mailing documents to chambers does not constitute the filing of pleadings. Any pleadings must be filed on the [*2]  docket. He was additionally, more specifically advised that "[a]ny future pleadings must be filed with the Clerk's Office, in person, by mail, or using CM/ECF, in accordance with court rules and procedures." (See ECF Nos. 35; 39 at 2 n.1.) Plaintiff purports to request an ADA accommodation but the Court is unaware of any reason Plaintiff would have the ability to draft and e-mail pleadings, but no ability to mail them.1
Although the Court has warned Plaintiff that further violations of the its orders [*3]  on email communications with the Court will result in an additional order to show cause why sanctions should not issue, the Court will give Plaintiff the benefit of the doubt and assume that Plaintiff was not clear on the proper basis for or manner to request an accommodation under the ADA. Further, the Court will generously assume that Plaintiff overlooked (in spite to the Court's earlier communications) his ability to file pleadings by mail. Accordingly, the Court will not issue an Order to Show Cause with respect to his latest communication and the Court will direct the Clerk's Office to file Plaintiff's (1) Notice of Withdrawal of Plaintiff's Motion to Dismiss; (2) Motion to Continue All Proceedings for 180 Days Per COVID-19; and (3) Motion to Vacate Order Sanctioning Plaintiff.
Plaintiff also attached to his email an Order to Show Cause upon which he has typed "FILED UNDER SEAL." Plaintiff does not attach a motion to file the document under seal and the document does not appear on its face to meet the legal requirements for filing under seal. The Court will not authorize a document to be filed under seal that should not properly be filed under seal, and the Court will not authorize [*4]  to be filed on the public docket a pleading Plaintiff submitted with the expectation that it would only be filed under seal. Thus, the Court will not direct the Clerk's Office to file Plaintiff's Order to Show Cause.
If Plaintiff wishes to file any documents in the future, he must do so through the Clerk's Office. The Court has attached information regarding filing through the Clerk's Office to this Order.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
Dated: February 3, 2021
/s/ Jill L. Burkhardt
Hon. Jill L. Burkhardt
United States Magistrate Judge


End of Document

