Lamb v. Clayton County Sch. Dist.
United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division
September 21, 2020, Decided; September 21, 2020, Filed
CIVIL ACTION FILE NO.: 1:19-cv-0695-WMR

Reporter
2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 259310 *
CRYSTAL N. LAMB, Plaintiff, v. CLAYTON COUNTY SCHOOL DISTRICT, Defendant.
Prior History: Lamb v. Clayton County Schs, 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 240035 (N.D. Ga., Oct. 17, 2019)
Counsel:  [*1] For Clayton County School District, Defendant: Aliayah Jasmine Baaith, LEAD ATTORNEY, Williamson & Starr LLC, Atlanta, GA; Shirnelle Council, LEAD ATTORNEY, Fincher Denmark LLC, Atlanta, GA; Valorri C. Jones, Fincher Denmark, Atlanta, GA; Winston A. Denmark, Fincher Denmark & Williams & Minnifield LLC, Jonesboro, GA.
For Crystal N. Lamb, Plaintiff: Holly Anne Pierson, Pierson Law LLC, Atlanta, GA; John T. Stembridge, LEAD ATTORNEY, Stembridge Taylor LLC, Atlanta, GA; Lisa Durham Taylor, Stembridge Taylor LLC, Watkinsville, GA.
Judges: WILLIAM M. RAY, II, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: WILLIAM M. RAY, II
Opinion



ORDER
This matter is before the Court on the Magistrate Judge's Final Report and Recommendation ("R & R") [Doc. 77], which recommends that Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. 51] be DENIED. Defendant has filed objections to the R & R [Doc. 83], claiming that Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment should have been granted. For the following reasons, this Court agrees with the Magistrate Judge's recommendations and concludes that Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. 51] should be DENIED.
Under 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1), the Court reviews the R & R for clear error if no objections are filed by either party [*2]  within 14 days after service. If a party does file objections, the Court must determine de novo any part of the Magistrate Judge's disposition that is the subject of a proper objection. Id. As Defendant has filed objections to the R & R in this case [Doc. 83], the de novo standard applies as to those portions of the R & R subject to Defendant's objections.

I. SUMMARY JUDGMENT STANDARD
When the parties' pleadings, affidavits, and other discovery materials establish that there is no genuine dispute of material fact and that the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, summary judgment should be granted. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). The moving party bears the burden of showing the absence of a genuine issue of material fact when viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the nonmovant. Adickes v. S. H. Kress & Co., 398 U.S. 144, 157, 90 S. Ct. 1598, 26 L. Ed. 2d 142 (1970); Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). After a motion for summary judgment has been properly supported, the nonmovant must present affirmative evidence "from which a reasonable jury might return a verdict in his favor" and that demonstrates the presence of "a genuine issue of fact that requires a trial." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 257, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986).

II. FACTUAL BACKGROUND
In 2016, while working for Fulton County Public schools, Plaintiff was diagnosed with myotonia disorder, a form of muscular [*3]  dystrophy that can cause her to fall. [Doc. 50, Def. SMF, ¶¶ 1-2; Doc. 67, Pl. Resp. SMF, ¶¶ 1-2]. Thereafter, Plaintiff was hired by Defendant Clayton County School District's Georgia Network of Education and Therapeutic Support ("GNETS") program to teach special education for the 2017-18 school year. [Doc. 50, Def. SMF, ¶¶ 10, 15-16; Doc. 67, Pl. Resp. SMF, ¶ 9]. In the job description of a GNETS teacher, Defendant states a teacher "[m]ust be able to stand and walk approximately seven (7) to seven and one-half (71/2) hours per day." [Doc. 49-1 at 300]. Additionally, teachers must be "[t]rained for restraints and de-escalation" and may be required to "travel to different school sites." [Id.]. The job description further acknowledged that most days would involve "sitting at a desk or table; intermittently sitting, standing, or stooping." [Id. (describing the job's "physical effort" requirements)].
After being offered the job by Defendant, Plaintiff completed a medical history questionnaire on which she indicated, by circling "N," that she had no "condition which constitutes a permanent impairment of any kind including: foot, leg, hand, arm, the body as a whole or other." [Id. at 301]. [*4]  Notably, however, Plaintiff circled "Y" on the same form when asked if she suffered from muscular dystrophy. [Id.].
GNETS teachers are trained in a two-step, de-escalation technique called "MindSet," which is utilized when a student is having a behavioral issue. [Doc. 50, Def. SMF, ¶ 20; Doc. 67, Pl. Resp. SMF, ¶ 19]. This technique involves "verbal deescalation" to calm the student down, followed by physical restraint if verbal de-escalation is ineffective. [Id.]. Plaintiff testified in her deposition that not all of the GNETS teachers are able to perform the MindSet procedure and that she informed her trainer during her MindSet training that she would be unable to perform the physical restraint component due to her myotonia disorder. [Doc. 49-1 at 79-80, 82]. Plaintiff further testified that the trainer allowed her to participate in the MindSet training in a modified form. [Id.].
On October 11, 2017, Plaintiff was chasing a student and tripped over a shoe that was thrown at her. [Doc. 50, Def. SMF, ¶¶ 21-22; Doc. 67, Pl. Resp. SMF, ¶¶ 20-21]. She injured her knee and ankle, and, as a result, was absent from work for approximately two days. [Doc. 50, Def. SMF, ¶¶ 23-24; Doc. 67, Pl. [*5]  Resp. SMF, ¶¶ 22-23]. On October 13, 2017, Plaintiff attempted to return to work with a doctor's note stating that she must sit 70% of the time while she is working and cannot squat or kneel.1 [Doc. 50, Def. SMF, ¶ 24; Doc. 67, Pl. Resp. SMF, ¶ 23; Doc. 49-1 at 86-89]. Plaintiff, however, was told she had to leave work and could not return with less than a 100% release with no restrictions from her healthcare provider. [Doc. 67, Pl. SMF, ¶ 28; Doc. 49-1 at 87-90]. Plaintiff was then placed on medical leave pending her full recovery. [Doc. 67, Pl. SMF, ¶ 29].
While on leave, Plaintiff provided Defendant with regular status updates from her healthcare providers, which indicated that she was released to work with restrictions but still could not work free of all restrictions. [Id. ¶ 31]. When her doctor recommended that she return to work aided by the use of a four-prong cane, Defendant denied this suggestion because the cane could be potentially wielded as a weapon by a student. [Doc. 50, Def. SMF, ¶ 44].
On March 1, 2018, Plaintiff received a letter from Defendant giving her three options: return to work on March 16 with a full duty work release report from her healthcare provider, retire, [*6]  or resign. [Doc. 53-2 at 3]. On March 16, Plaintiff informed Defendant's Human Resources Department that her status had not changed regarding her work restrictions, and on March 30, she was informed that her employment contract with Defendant was being recommended for termination. [Doc. 67, Pl. SMF, ¶¶ 36-37].
Thereafter, on April 5, 2018, Plaintiff filed a charge of discrimination with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC"), alleging that Defendant unlawfully discriminated against her based on her disability. [Id. ¶ 39]. Plaintiff filed the present action on February 8, 2019, following the conclusion of the EEOC proceedings. [Doc. 1].
Plaintiff asserts four counts against Defendant in her Second Amended Complaint. [Doc. 29 at ¶¶ 43-76]. Counts I and III allege that Defendant discriminated against Plaintiff by failing to accommodate her disability. [Id. ¶¶ 43-53, 59-71]. Count I is brought under the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), and Count III is brought under the Rehabilitation Act ("RA"). [Id.]. Counts II and IV allege that Defendant retaliated against Plaintiff by refusing to allow her to return to work with restrictions and ultimately terminating her employment contract. [Id. ¶¶ 54-58, 72-76]. Count II is brought under [*7]  the ADA, and Count IV is brought under the RA. [Id.].
Defendant filed the present Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. 51] on February 17, 2020. On June 23, 2020, the Magistrate Judge entered his R & R denying Defendant's Motions for Protective Order and to Exclude, as well as recommending that Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment be denied. [Doc. 77 at 46]. The Court notes that Defendant has not filed a response to Plaintiff's Statement of Material Facts in Dispute [Doc. 67], although Defendant has filed objections to the R & R [Doc. 83].

III. DISCUSSION
The R & R recommends that this Court deny Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment in its entirety. Specifically, as it relates to Plaintiff's claims under the RA, the Magistrate Judge concluded that Plaintiff, who is suing under Section 504, is under no obligation to exhaust administrative remedies. As such, the Magistrate Judge found that summary judgment on Plaintiff's RA claims is not warranted on that basis. Regarding Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claims, the Magistrate Judge found that genuine disputes of material facts exist concerning (1) whether Plaintiff has established a disability, (2) whether Plaintiff requested an accommodation [*8]  related to her myotonia disorder, and (3) whether performing the physical restraint component of the MindSet technique was an essential function of Plaintiff's job, and thus, whether Plaintiff's requested accommodations were reasonable enough to trigger Defendant's duty to accommodate her. [Doc. 77 at 18-39]. Regarding Plaintiff's retaliation claims, the Magistrate Judge concluded that those claims are not barred by a failure to exhaust administrative remedies and that Plaintiff put forth sufficient evidence to establish a prima facie case of retaliation. [Id. at 39-46].
As explained in more detail below, this Court agrees with the recommendations of the Magistrate Judge and concludes that material factual disputes exist, precluding summary judgment on Plaintiff's claims. As such, Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. 51] is hereby DENIED.

A. Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claims under both the ADA and RA survive summary judgment.2
Regarding Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claims under both the ADA and the RA, Defendant raises several objections to the Magistrate Judge's findings. Specifically, Defendant argues that the Magistrate Judge erred in determining that genuine [*9]  disputes of material facts exist as to whether: (1) Plaintiff has a physical impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities; (2) Plaintiff's injury is a disability; (3) Plaintiff has a record of such an impairment; (4) Plaintiff requested an accommodation for her alleged myotonia disorder; and (5) a reasonable accommodation was available. [See Doc. 83 at 5-17]. The Court will address each objection below.

1. A genuine issue of material fact exists regarding whether Plaintiff has a physical impairment that substantially limits one or more of her major life activities.
An individual is disabled within the meaning of the ADA if she (1) has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such individual; (2) has a record of such impairment; or (3) is regarded as having an impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities. 29 CFR § 1630.2(g). The ADA Amendments Act of 2008 ("ADAAA") amended the ADA to provide that, for the purpose of establishing the existence of a "disability," "a major life activity also includes the operation of a major bodily function, including but not limited to, functions of the immune system, normal cell growth, [*10]  digestive, bowel, bladder, neurological, brain, respiratory, circulatory, endocrine, and reproductive functions." 42 U.S.C. § 12101(2)(B).
Defendant argues that there is no genuine dispute of material fact as to whether Plaintiff has a physical impairment that substantially limits one or more of her major life activities. Like the Magistrate Judge, this Court disagrees. While Defendant references in its objections that Plaintiff indicated on her medical questionnaire that she had no condition constituting a permanent impairment to her foot, leg, hand, arm, body, etc., she did inform Defendant of her muscular dystrophy on that same questionnaire. [Doc. 49-1 at 301]. The evidence further shows that Plaintiff informed her MindSet trainer that she would be unable to perform the physical "take-down" component of the technique due to her myotonia disorder. [Id. at 79-80]. Plaintiff also testified to her myotonia disorder diagnosis and explained that it limits her ability to stand, walk, bend, or kneel. [Id. at 39-40, 50, 228 (testifying that her disorder causes "muscle stiffness and weakness," that she needs to alternate between sitting and standing, and that she "wasn't squatting and kneeling before [her] injury")]. [*11]  Finally, in a letter written on February 2, 2017, Dr. Saila Upadhyayua stated that Plaintiff suffers from myotonia disorder and that due to her diagnosis, Plaintiff has an "inability to navigate stairs and inclines." [Doc. 68-1 at 6].
Considering this evidence in the light most favorable to the Plaintiff, in addition to the doctor-imposed restrictions on her return to work following her workplace injury3 , the Court concludes that there is sufficient evidence for a jury to conclude that Plaintiff's impairment substantially limits one or more of her major life activities and constitutes a disability under the ADA. As such, the Court rejects Defendant's first objection.

2. A genuine dispute of material fact exists regarding whether Plaintiff's injury constitutes a disability.
Next, Defendant objects to the Magistrate Judge's suggestion that Plaintiff can establish herself as disabled based on her work-place injury. Defendant references EEOC guidelines in support of its objection and states that the duration of a work-place injury is relevant to whether the impairment is substantially limiting and may be considered a disability. First, like the Magistrate Judge pointed out, just because Plaintiff's [*12]  limitations were exacerbated by her work-place injury does not mean her limitations were unrelated to her underlying myotonia disorder. Second, while Defendant urges this Court to only consider permanent impairments to be disabilities, as noted in the R & R, the Court concludes that Plaintiff may still establish that her impairment is a disability even if the impact of her impairment is only temporary. See Mancini v. City of Providence, 909 F.3d 32, 41 (1st Cir. 2018) ("[I]t is clear that injuries can comprise impairments, even when their impact is only temporary."); Moore v. Jackson Cty. Bd. of Educ., 979 F. Supp. 2d 1251, 1261 (N.D. Ala. 2013) (finding that a plaintiff's ankle injury constituted a disability and concluding "that Congress no longer intends for temporary impairments to be excluded from the definition of 'disability.'").
Based on the evidence presented, the Court finds that, at least, a material factual dispute exists as to whether Plaintiff's injury substantially limits one or more of her major life activities. This is particularly true when considering her work-place injury in conjunction with the evidence demonstrating that she suffers from a preexisting condition, myotonia disorder. As such, Defendant's objection on this point is rejected.

3. The Magistrate Judge did not address whether Plaintiff can establish [*13]  that she has a record of an impairment.
As stated above, an individual is disabled within the meaning of the ADA if she (1) has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such individual; (2) has a record of such impairment; or (3) is regarded as having an impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities. 29 CFR § 1630.2(g). In its objection, Defendant argues that Plaintiff has not shown that she has a "record of such impairment" to demonstrate she is disabled within the meaning of the ADA. [Doc. 83 at 11-14].
Because the Court finds that Plaintiff has presented sufficient evidence for a jury to conclude that she suffers from a physical impairment that substantially limits one or more of her major life activities, the Court need not address whether Plaintiff can also show that she is disabled via the "record of such impairment" or the "is regarded as having an impairment" prongs. Further, Defendant did not raise this argument in its Motion for Summary Judgment, and, as such, the Magistrate Judge did not address the issue in its R & R. Because Defendant now attempts to object to something not addressed by the Magistrate Judge, [*14]  this Court concludes that this objection is improper and declines to address it.

4. A genuine issue of material fact exists regarding whether Plaintiff requested an accommodation related to her myotonia disorder.
Defendant next objects to the Magistrate Judge's finding that a genuine dispute of material fact exists as to Plaintiff's request for an accommodation related to her myotonia disorder, arguing that Plaintiff requested accommodations for her work-place injury and not for her alleged disability. [Doc. 83 at 14-15]. Defendant characterizes Plaintiff's testimony on this issue as plain and unambiguous and states that the Magistrate Judge's finding directly contradicts Plaintiff's own testimony. [Id.].
Defendant, however, does not dispute that after her injury Plaintiff submitted doctor's notes stating that she could return to work with restrictions, such as limiting her time standing during the work day. Defendant also does not dispute that, to the extent these restrictions were related to a disability, Plaintiff's submission of doctor's notes would be an adequate accommodation request. Instead, Defendant seems to again take issue with the fact that Plaintiff "intertwines her injury [*15]  with her disability," as Defendant argued in its Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. 51 at 12]. As the Magistrate Court correctly explained in the R & R, the exact cause or causes of Plaintiff's impairment do not matter as long as her impairment could qualify as a disability under the ADA. Since the Court has already concluded that a jury could reasonably find that her impairment qualifies as a disability, it does not matter whether it stemmed from her myotonia, her work-place injury, or both.
The evidence in this case also suggests that Defendant knew Plaintiff's requests were related to an ADA disability. Plaintiff noted on her medical questionnaire upon her hiring by Defendant that she suffered from muscular dystrophy. Additionally, she informed her MindSet trainer that she would not be able to perform the physical restraint component due to her myotonia condition. Finally, in an internal email discussing Plaintiff's requests for accommodations, Leslie Harris, a Risk Management Analyst in Defendant's Equity & Compliance Department, stated: "[Plaintiff] also advised that she is back to her pre injury status indicating that her preexisting condition is what prevents her from performing [*16]  her job tasks. [Plaintiff] stated that she was never able to walk up stairs or get on the floor to restrain a child to do things to[o] strenuous." [Doc. 52-2 at 27 (emphasis added)]. Thus, based on this evidence and considering it in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, this Court agrees with the Magistrate Judge and concludes that a jury could reasonably conclude that Plaintiff requested an accommodation related to her myotonia disorder.

5. A genuine dispute of material fact exists regarding whether Plaintiff's job duties were essential.
Defendant also objects to the Magistrate Judge's determination that a genuine dispute of material fact exists concerning Plaintiff's essential job duties. The ADA explains that an employer unlawfully discriminates against an individual when the employer does not make "reasonable accommodations" for the employee, unless "the accommodation would impose an undue hardship" on the employer. 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). The EEOC recommends a "flexible, interactive process" between the employer and employee in determining what accommodation is appropriate and will enable the employee to complete the requirements of their job despite their impairment. 29 C.F.R. pt. 1630 App. § 1630.9. If an employee is unable to [*17]  perform the essential functions of his or her position with reasonable accommodations, the employer is not required to eliminate and/or reallocate the essential functions of the job. See Holbrook v. City of Alpharetta, 112 F.3d 1522, 1527 (11th Cir. 1997).
To determine what functions of a job are deemed essential, "consideration shall be given to the employer's judgment . . . and if an employer has prepared a written description before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job, this description shall be considered evidence of the essential functions of the job." Id. at 1526 (quoting 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8)). Regulations promulgated under the ADA provide three factors to consider when determining if a task if an essential part of a job: "(1) the reason the position exists is to perform the function; (2) there are a limited number of employees available among whom the performance of the job function can be distributed; and (3) the function is highly specialized so that the incumbent in the position was hired for his or her expertise or ability to perform the particular function." Holbrook, 112 F.3d at 1526 (citing 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(2)(i)-(iii)).
Here, the Court finds that Plaintiff has put forth sufficient evidence to bring the essential functions of her job into question. First, the written job description provided by Defendant acknowledges [*18]  that most days the position would involve "sitting at a desk or table; intermittently sitting, standing, or stooping." [Doc. 49-1 at 300]. Additionally, prior to her work-place injury, Plaintiff avers that she sat for most of the workday. [Doc. 68 ¶ 9]. There is also evidence that not every single teacher was required to physically restrain students as part of their job. For example, as noted above, Plaintiff testified that she told her MindSet trainer that she would be unable to perform the physical "takedown" component of the MindSet technique due to her myotonia disorder. [Doc. 49-1 at 79-80]. Despite notifying her trainer of her restriction, Defendant continued to employ Plaintiff. Plaintiff also testified that other teachers called for assistance in performing "takedowns" of a student. [Id. at 113].
Therefore, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, the Court finds that Plaintiff has put forth sufficient evidence to survive summary judgment on the issue of whether standing for the majority of the work day and physically restraining students were essential functions of her job, and thus, whether her requested accommodations, such as limiting her time spent [*19]  standing and not physically restraining students, were reasonable enough to trigger Defendant's duty to accommodate her under the ADA and RA.

B. Summary judgment is not warranted as to Plaintiff's retaliation claims under the ADA and RA.
In its last objection, Defendant urges this Court to grant summary judgment on Plaintiff's retaliation claims because Plaintiff did not engage in statutorily protected conduct by making a request for accommodations. Defendant again argues that the only request made by Plaintiff was for accommodations related to her workplace injury, which Defendant contends is not a disability. Because Plaintiff cannot show that she engaged in protected activity, Defendant contends that she cannot show a causal link between the protected activity and her adverse employment action. [Doc. 83 at 17-18].
This Court has already concluded that Plaintiff has put forth sufficient evidence to demonstrate that she both requested an accommodation for her disability and suffers from a disability under the ADA and the RA. Therefore, for the reasons already discussed above, Defendant's last objection is overruled, and the Court finds that summary judgment is not warranted on Plaintiff's [*20]  retaliation claims.

IV. CONCLUSION
In sum, after reviewing, de novo, the portions of the R & R to which Defendant raised objections and the remaining parts of the R & R for plain error, the Court receives the R & R [Doc. 77] with approval and adopts its findings and legal conclusions as the Opinion of this Court. Accordingly, Defendant's objections [Doc. 83] are OVERRULED and Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment [Doc. 51] is hereby DENIED.
IT IS SO ORDERED, this 21st day of September, 2020.
/s/ William M. Ray, II
WILLIAM M. RAY, II
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

