Levin v. Huntington Ingalls, Inc.
United States District Court for the Southern District of Mississippi, Southern Division
August 15, 2016, Decided; August 15, 2016, Filed
CAUSE NO. 1:15CV278-LG-RHW

Reporter
2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 143489 *
MARC LEVIN, PLAINTIFF v. HUNTINGTON INGALLS, INC., DEFENDANT
Subsequent History: Reconsideration denied by Levin v. Huntington Ingalls, Inc., 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 140598 (S.D. Miss., Oct. 11, 2016)
Counsel:  [*1] For Marc Levin, Plaintiff: Michael Farrell, LEAD ATTORNEY, MIKE FARRELL, PLLC, Jackson, MS.
For Huntington Ingalls, Inc., Defendant: Paul Brooks Eason, LEAD ATTORNEY, Adria H. Jetton, BAKER, DONELSON, BEARMAN, CALDWELL & BERKOWITZ, PC - Jackson, Jackson, MS.
Judges: LOUIS GUIROLA, JR., CHIEF UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: LOUIS GUIROLA, JR.
Opinion



MEMORANDUM OPINION AND ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
BEFORE THE COURT is the Motion [37] for Summary Judgment filed by defendant Huntington Ingalls, Inc. Plaintiff Marc Levin claims that Huntington Ingalls violated the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Family Medical Leave Act when it did not reinstate his employment after he took medical leave. Ingalls argues that Levin's claims are limited by the statute of limitations and the administrative exhaustion requirement. As limited, Ingalls contends that the claims should be dismissed because 1) Levin cannot overcome its legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for its failure to provide the ADA accommodation he requested, and 2) Levin received much more generous leave benefits than those prescribed by the FMLA, and therefore he suffered no prejudice because of the alleged violation of the Act.
The [*2]  issues have been fully briefed by the parties. The Court has reviewed the parties' submissions and the relevant law, and concludes that Ingalls is entitled to summary judgment. Levin has shown no question of material fact for the jury in regard to his ADA and FMLA claims.

FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Plaintiff Marc Levin began working as a grinder at Huntington Ingalls' shipyard in 2009. A grinder uses tools to "grind metal. Basically make welds look good." (Def. Mot. Ex. A 8, ECF No. 37-1). The position is within the Hull Department and subject to a Collective Bargaining Agreement ("CBA") between the Metal Trades Department of the AFL-CIO and Huntington Ingalls. (Def. Mot. Ex. H 46, ECF No. 37-8).
Levin alleges that he suffered two seizures at home in April and May, 2014. (Compl. 2, ECF No. 1). After the second seizure, Levin saw a neurologist who diagnosed him with generalized epilepsy and excused him from work for the following month. (Def. Mot. Ex. A 9, ECF No. 37-1). His last day worked was May 6. (Def. Mot. Ex. K, ECF No. 37-11).
In June, Levin's physician authorized him to return to work, but he imposed three restrictions: (1) Levin could not drive until he was seizure-free for [*3]  six months; (2) he could not work at unprotected heights; and (3) he was to avoid working in confined spaces. (Def. Mot. Ex. B 1, ECF N. 37-2). Levin alleges that he asked to go back to work when he was released by his physician in June, because the restrictions did not prevent him from performing his job as a grinder. (Compl. 2, ECF No. 1). According to Huntington Ingalls' Return-to-Work Coordinator,
[t]he Return-to-Work Committee reviewed Mr. Levin's restrictions and rejected [his] request to return to work because there was no place in the shipyard where Mr. Levin could work as a grinder. I notified Mr. Levin of the Return-to-Work Committee's decision and that he would remain on non-industrial medical leave.
(Def. Mot. Ex. D 1, ECF No. 37-4). Huntington Ingalls' non-industrial medical leave allows an employee up to one full year of leave. (Id. at 2). Levin testified that he applied for FMLA leave and also received short-term disability payments for almost six months. (Def. Mot. Ex. B 32, ECF No. 37-2). Levin alleges that Ingalls placed him on medical leave rather than properly designating his leave as under the FMLA.
After six months, in November 2014, Levin's physician removed the driving and [*4]  enclosed space restrictions but continued to restrict Levin from working more than ten feet above the ground. (Def. Mot. Ex. F, ECF No. 37-6). The Return-to-Work Committee again rejected Levin's request to return to work. (Def. Mot. Ex. D 2, ECF No. 37-4). According to the Chief of the Hull Department, only grinders assigned to work in "the shop" work less than ten feet above the ground. (Def. Mot. Ex. E 1, ECF No. 37-5). However, Levin did not have the seniority required to work in the shop, as he requested. (Id. at 2). At the time Levin requested to return to work, there were five grinders with "far more seniority" waiting for an open position in the shop. (Id.). The CBA did not allow Huntington Ingalls to place Levin in the shop preferentially to the more-senior grinders. (Id.).
The Return-to-Work Coordinator states that,
Mr. Levin never sent any modified restrictions to me after November 2014. I contacted Mr. Levin's physician several times to see if Mr. Levin's restriction that he avoid unprotected heights over ten feet had been revised or lifted. I was advised that Mr. Levin had not been in for a follow-up appointment and that Mr. Levin's physician could not define Mr. Levin's medical [*5]  status or activity level without seeing the patient.
(Def. Mot. Ex. D 2, ECF No. 37-4). Levin's employment was terminated on May 6, 2015, when the one year non-industrial medical leave period ended. (Def. Mot. Ex. K, ECF No. 37-11).
In February 2015 (approximately three months before his employment was terminated), Levin filed a charge of discrimination with the EEOC based on retaliation, disability, and national origin, which reads:
I was hired on August 5, 2009 as a Chipper. On April 24, 2014, I was diagnosed with a disability. My employer laid me off and told me not to return to work until I obtained a release from my doctor. My doctor released me to return to work on June 13, 2014 with two restrictions. On a continuing basis, I am being denied a reasonable accommodation and recall to work.
Although I have complained of being discriminated against in regards to my medical condition, nothing has been done to alleviate my employment issues.
I believe I am being discriminated against in violation of the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 because of my disability, in retaliation of Title VII of The Civil Rights Act of 1964 and because of my national origin (Cuban).
(Def. Mot. Ex. L, [*6]  ECF No. 37-12). The EEOC conducted an investigation, and issued a right-to-sue letter when the investigation was complete. (Def. Mot. Ex. M, ECF No. 37-13). Reconsideration of its decision was denied. (Def. Mot. Ex. N, ECF No. 37-14).
Levin filed this lawsuit alleging violation of the FMLA and the ADA. He alleges Ingalls failed to designate his leave as FMLA leave and interfered with his right to return to work from a FMLA-qualifying leave. He further alleges that Ingalls did not allow him to return to work because of his disability, failed to accommodate his disability even though it would not create any hardship on Ingalls, and terminated him because of his disability.

DISCUSSION
A motion for summary judgment may be filed by any party asserting that there is no genuine issue of material fact and that the movant is entitled to prevail as a matter of law on any claim. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56. The movant bears the initial burden of identifying those portions of the pleadings and discovery on file, together with any affidavits, which it believes demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 325, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). Once the movant carries its burden, the burden shifts to the non-movant to show that summary judgment should [*7]  not be granted. Id. at 324-25. The non-movant may not rest upon mere allegations or denials in its pleadings but must set forth specific facts showing the existence of a genuine issue for trial. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 256-57, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986).
Huntington Ingalls argues that 1) the portion of Levin's ADA claim that concerns action taken prior to August 14, 2014 is time-barred; 2) Levin failed to exhaust the ADA termination claim; 3) the ADA claim is without merit; and 4) the FMLA claim is without merit.

I. STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXHAUSTION
Title VII requires claimants to file a charge of discrimination with the EEOC within 180 days after the alleged unlawful employment practice. 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-5(e)(1). This requirement serves as a statute of limitations for ADA claims. Hood v. Sears Roebuck & Co., 168 F.3d 231, 232 (5th Cir. 1999).
The Charge of Discrimination at issue in this lawsuit was filed with the EEOC on February 3, 2015. Therefore, discrimination claims arising out of employment decisions made by Ingalls prior to August 14, 2014, are barred by the statute of limitations. To the extent Levin alleges that in June 2014, Ingalls denied him reinstatement because of his disability and/or failed to accommodate his disability, his ADA claim is untimely.
Next, Levin alleges that his termination violated the ADA, [*8]  but Ingalls argues that he did not include that allegation in his Charge of Discrimination, and in fact, he was not terminated until three months after filing the charge. The scope of a judicial complaint is limited to the scope of the EEOC investigation which can reasonably be expected to grow out of the charge of discrimination. McClain v. Lufkin Indus., Inc., 519 F.3d 264, 274 (5th Cir. 2008) (internal citation and quotation marks omitted). Levin's charge, set out in full above, alleges that he had been "laid off" and that "[o]n a continuing basis, I am being denied a reasonable accommodation and recall to work." Termination is within the scope of an investigation into this charge, even if termination had not yet, in fact, occurred. The Court will consider the allegation that Ingalls terminated Levin's employment in violation of the ADA to have been administratively exhausted.

II. THE AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT
Levin claims that Ingalls failed to make an accommodation for his disability, and ultimately terminated him because of his disability. When, as is this case, "a plaintiff can offer only circumstantial evidence to prove a violation of the ADA, this court applies the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework." Burton v. Freescale Semiconductor, Inc., 798 F.3d 222, 227 (5th Cir. 2015) (quoting E.E.O.C. v. Chevron Phillips Chem. Co., LP, 570 F.3d 606, 615 (5th Cir. 2009)). Under the McDonnell [*9]  Douglas framework, the plaintiff must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination. If the plaintiff meets its burden, then the burden shifts to the employer to "articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse employment action." Id. If the employer satisfies its burden, the burden shifts back to the plaintiff to show that the employer's articulated reason is pretextual. Id.

A. Failure to Accommodate
The elements of a prima facie failure-to-accommodate claim are: (1) the plaintiff is a qualified individual with a disability; (2) the disability and its consequential limitations were known by the covered employer; and (3) the employer failed to make reasonable accommodations for such known limitations. Neely v. PSEG Tex., L.P., 735 F.3d 242, 247 (5th Cir. 2013).
Huntington Ingalls bypasses a challenge to the prima facie elements to argue that the failure to accommodate claim fails because Huntington Ingalls had two legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons for not providing Levin with the accommodation he requested in November 2014. (Def. Mot. Mem. 9-10, ECF No. 38). First, Levin could not return to his previous position because Huntington Ingalls was no longer employing a grinder in that position. Levin had not been replaced, [*10]  and the shift he worked on was being phased out altogether. Second, Levin could not be employed in the shop on the first shift, where his height restriction could be accommodated, because the CBA required Huntington Ingalls to favor more senior employees for grinder positions in the shop. Placing Levin in the shop in front of the five more senior grinders who were waiting for an open position would have violated the CBA.
Levin asserts that Huntington Ingalls's first reason is not worthy of belief because his "supervisor testified that he did not ask for a replacement because he wanted to hold the position open for Levin because of his good work." (Pl. Resp. Mem. 5, ECF No. 41). Levin was the only grinder on the second shift. (Pl. Resp. Ex. B 12, ECF No. 41-2). The supervisor testified that "management" told him when Levin went out on disability, "we were just going to go like this, see if he comes back." (Id. at 23-24). The second shift shop welders did the grinding when Levin was out and continue to do so now because there are no grinders on the second shift. (Id. at 13, 24-25).
Levin's evidence corroborates, rather than contradicts, Huntington Ingalls' first reason for not putting him back to work in November [*11]  2014. Regardless of his supervisor's opinion of Levin's work or his desire to have Levin come back, Levin was not, in fact, replaced by Huntington Ingalls, and the shift was eliminated.
Levin next asserts that Huntington Ingalls' second reason is not worthy of belief, because he had been working in the shop for eight months before going out on leave. He knew he could be "bumped out" by a more senior person at any time. (Pl. Resp. Mem. 3-4, ECF No. 41). "He took that risk before and he was willing to take it again." (Id. at 4). Levin contends that Huntington Ingalls is "advanc[ing] a newfangled construction of the [CBA] that ignores the practical application of [the seniority] provision given by all parties." (Pl. Resp. Mem. 3, ECF No. 41).
According to Huntington Ingalls' 30(b)(6) representative, Levin could have been accommodated in November 2014 by working in the shop, but "if he didn't have the seniority to be in a shop, I can't knowingly place him in the shop." (Pl. Resp. Ex. D 29-30, ECF No. 41-4). As noted above, five grinders with more seniority than Levin were waiting for positions in the shop at the time. The CBA states that "[s]enior employees shall be given preference in shop assignments provided there [*12]  are sufficient qualified employees available to perform other work requirements efficiently." (CBA Art. 12 Sec. 9, Def. Mot. Ex. H, ECF No. 37-8). Nevertheless, the representative agreed that if Levin were somehow working in the shop and another grinder with more seniority didn't know he was there, then Levin could remain working in the shop. (Id. at 42). The representative testified that he did not know how Levin came to be working in the shop on second shift prior to going out on medical leave, since
we did not move him into a shop. . . . That would be between him and [his supervisor]. . . . I don't know exactly how he got into a shop but lots of time on, especially second shift, you know, we don't have the union watching us close. . . . So he probably was loaned out to the shop and just never returned where he came from.
(Id. at 54). The representative was asked whether there was "some reason that Mr. Levin could not have been returned to work under [his supervisor] and just kind of wait and see if the union ever says anything about it?" He replied,
I just — I couldn't do it, I mean, not knowing that I was violating the rules. I mean, if it happens and it doesn't follow normal procedures, that's one thing. But if I knowingly [*13]  went out there and did it, I mean that's a direct violation. The union would burn me on it.
(Id. at 71-72).
The Fifth Circuit holds that "the ADA does not require an employer to take action inconsistent with the contractual rights of other workers under a collective bargaining agreement." Foreman v. Babcock & Wilcox Co., 117 F.3d 800, 810 (5th Cir. 1997). "It will ordinarily be unreasonable" to reassign an employee to a vacant position if it violates the terms of a CBA. US Airways, Inc. v. Barnett, 535 U.S. 391, 403, 122 S. Ct. 1516, 152 L. Ed. 2d 589 (2002). In this instance there is no evidence of a vacant position in the shop, and therefore Huntington Ingalls would have had to remove another grinder in order to place Levin there. All shop grinders had more seniority than Levin, as did all five grinders who had requested a position in the shop. (Def. Mot. Ex. I, ECF No. 37-9). Removing or bypassing one of the more senior grinders to place Levin in the position, in violation of the CBA, would not be a reasonable accommodation.
Levin argues that it is inconsistent for Huntington Ingalls to apply the seniority provision to deny him a grinder position in the shop now, when he actually held that position for eight months without challenge. (Pl. Resp. Mem. 3, ECF No. 41). Levin argues that Hunting Ingalls is "advanc[ing] a newfangled construction of the [CBA] that [*14]  ignores the practical application of [the seniority] provision given by all parties." (Id.).
The Court does not discern an inconsistency. There is no evidence that the CBA provision was applied to Levin's prior position at all. Levin stated that "nobody ever exercised their right to bump me out, so I stayed there until I went out on medical leave." (Pl. Resp. Ex. G 3, ECF No. 41-6). It is possible that Levin was the most senior grinder who wanted a second shift position in the shop during the eight months he was there. And unless another grinder requested the second shift position, Huntington Ingalls would not have a reason to apply the seniority provision. The mere fact that Levin was allowed to remain in the shop for eight months does not indicate that Huntington Ingalls inconsistently applied the CBA seniority provision.1
Levin fails to show that Huntington Ingalls' reasons for not accommodating his request to return to work were pretext for disability discrimination. Huntington Ingalls is entitled to summary judgment on this claim.

B. Discriminatory Termination
The ADA prohibits employers from discriminating "against a qualified individual on the basis of [a] disability in regard to . . . [the] discharge of employees, . . . and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). A prima facie case consists of evidence that a plaintiff: "1) suffers from a disability; 2) was qualified for the job; 3) was subject to an adverse employment action; and 4) was replaced by a non-disabled person or was treated less favorably than non-disabled employees." Milton v. Tex. Dep't of Criminal Justice, 707 F.3d 570, 573 (5th Cir. 2013) (quoting Daigle v. Liberty Life Ins. Co., 70 F.3d 394, 396 (5th Cir. 1995)).
Levin's termination claim is simply a continuance of his failure-to-accommodate claim — Huntington Ingalls failed to accommodate his request to return to work until his one year medical leave period expired and he was removed from the payroll. Huntington Ingalls argues that Levin was terminated because he could not return to work when his medical leave [*16]  expired. The CBA provides for a one-year leave period, unless an extension is granted. (CBA Art. 14 Sec. 1(a)(3), Def. Mot. Ex. H 24, ECF No. 37-8). Levin did not seek an extension, and so when his leave expired in early May 2015, he was administratively terminated.
Huntington Ingalls contends that its compliance with the CBA is a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for Levin's termination, and further, Levin does not argue or provide evidence that Huntington Ingalls treats non-disabled employees differently than it treated him. These arguments go to Levin's prima facie case and whether he can establish pretext.
i) ADA Prima Facie Case
Levin has not established a prima facie case of disability discrimination based on his administrative termination. He was not qualified to perform the duties of his job. Levin was only "qualified" if he could do the job with reasonable accommodation. See Amsel v. Tex. Water Dev. Bd., 464 F. App'x 395, 400 (5th Cir. 2012). As discussed above, there was no reasonable accommodation available. Second, Levin presents no argument or evidence that he was treated less favorably than any nondisabled employee.
ii) Pretext
Huntington Ingalls' policy of terminating employees after one year of leave pursuant to the CBA constitutes a legitimate, nondiscriminatory [*17]  reason for terminating Levin. See Wheat v. Columbus Bd. of Educ. Columbus Pub. Sch., No. 2:13-cv-819, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 85185, 2015 WL 4039356, at *6 (S.D. Ohio June 30, 2015); Kessell v. Mega Life & Health Ins. Co., CIV. A. No. 3:03-CV-2788-N, 2005 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 2308, 2005 WL 383700, at *6 (N.D. Tex. Feb. 15, 2005). Levin does not attempt to show that this reason was a pretext for discrimination. Huntington Ingalls is therefore entitled to summary judgment in regard to Levin's claim of discrimination under the ADA.

III. FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE ACT
Levin claims that his leave qualified as FMLA leave, but Ingalls failed to designate it as such, and did not allow him to return to work after his leave ended. These are claims of interference with substantive FMLA rights. See Mauder v. Metro. Transit Auth., 446 F.3d 574, 580 (5th Cir. 2006).
To establish a prima facie FMLA interference case, a plaintiff must show that: (1) he was an eligible employee; (2) the defendant was an employer subject to the FMLA's requirements; (3) plaintiff was entitled to leave; (4) he gave proper notice of his intention to take FMLA leave; and (5) the defendant denied him the benefits to which he was entitled under the FMLA. See Lanier v. Univ. of Tex. Sw. Med. Ctr., 527 F. App'x 312, 316 (5th Cir. 2013).
Employees bear the burden of proving a real impairment of their FMLA rights and resulting prejudice. Jones v. Children's Hosp., 58 F. Supp. 3d 656, 668 (E.D. La. 2014) (citing Lubke v. City of Arlington, 455 F.3d 489, 497 (5th Cir. 2006)). "FMLA's remedial scheme requires an employee to prove prejudice as a result of the employer's [*18]  lapse; the employee may not expand the statute's coverage as a penalty for an employer's technical compliance shortcoming." Lubke, 455 F.3d at 497. Even where a reasonable jury could find that an employer interfered, restrained or denied the exercise of FMLA rights, an employee must still point to evidence that he lost compensation or benefits by reason of the violation, sustained other monetary losses as a direct result of the violation, or suffered some loss in employment status such that equitable relief is appropriate. Jones, 58 F. Supp. 3d at 668-69 (citing Ragsdale v. Wolverine World Wide, Inc., 535 U.S. 81, 90, 122 S. Ct. 1155, 152 L. Ed. 2d 167 (2002); 29 U.S.C. § 2617(a)(1)).

A. Designation of Leave
In his claim that Huntington Ingalls failed to designate his leave under the FMLA, Levin has identified only a potential "technical compliance shortcoming." Regardless of how Levin's medical leave was classified by Huntington Ingalls, Levin was provided more than the twelve weeks of unpaid leave that is required by the statute. Further, it appears that Huntington Ingalls did consider Levin's leave to qualify as FMLA leave; Levin's physician was promptly asked to provide a certification for medical or family care leave (Def. Mot. Ex. B, ECF No. 37-2), and Levin testified that after his second seizure his foreman helped him get started with "get[ting] me put on [*19]  family medical leave." (Def. Mot. Ex. A 9, ECF No. 37-1). More importantly, Levin identifies no prejudice flowing from his leave being classified as non-industrial medical rather than FMLA. This is fatal to his claim. See Calderone v. TARC, 640 F. App'x 363, 365 (5th Cir. 2016); Bernard v. Bishop Noland Episcopal Day Sch., 630 F. App'x 239, 243 (5th Cir. 2015) (no prejudice when long-term leave program was more generous than what the FMLA required).

B. Reinstatement
In regard to his claim that his FLMA rights were impaired when Huntington Ingalls did not allow him to come back to work when his leave expired, the Court notes that Levin's twelve weeks of FMLA leave began in early May 2014, and would have expired at the end of August. Levin's right to reinstatement expired when his leave was exhausted. Silva v. City of Hidalgo, Tex., 575 F. App'x 419, 424-25 (5th Cir. 2014). At the end of August 2014, Levin was still under the unprotected height and confined space restrictions that made him ineligible for any grinder jobs in the shipyard. (Def. Mot. Ex. D 1, ECF No. 37-4; Pl. Resp. Ex. C 24, ECF No. 41-3). An employer does not violate the FLMA by refusing to reinstate an employee who is physically incapable of performing his duties. Johnson v. Houston's Rest., Inc., 167 F. App'x 393, 396 (5th Cir. 2006). By the time Levin was ready to return to work with only the ten foot height restriction in November 2014, Huntington Ingalls was under no FMLA obligation to reinstate [*20]  him. Silva, 575 F. App'x at 425. Accordingly, the Court finds that Levin has not shown an actionable violation of the FMLA. Huntington Ingalls is entitled to judgment as a matter of law in regard to this claim.
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED AND ADJUDGED that the Motion [37] for Summary Judgment filed by defendant Huntington Ingalls, Inc. is GRANTED. Plaintiff's claims against the defendant are DISMISSED with prejudice.
SO ORDERED AND ADJUDGED this the 15th day of August, 2016.
/s/ Louis Guirola, Jr.
LOUIS GUIROLA, JR.
CHIEF U.S. DISTRICT JUDGE

JUDGMENT
In accordance with the Court's Order entered herewith,
IT IS ORDERED AND ADJUDGED that judgment is rendered in favor of the Defendant. Plaintiff's claims against the Defendant are DISMISSED with prejudice.
SO ORDERED AND ADJUDGED this the 15th day of August, 2016.
/s/ Louis Guirola, Jr.
LOUIS GUIROLA, JR.
CHIEF U.S. DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

