Lobascio v. Broward Cty.
United States District Court for the Southern District of Florida
September 28, 2012, Decided; September 28, 2012, Entered on Docket
Case No. 12-60134-CIV-ZLOCH/ROSENBAUM

Reporter
2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 200809 *; 2012 WL 12872587
MARK LOBASCIO, Plaintiff, v. BROWARD COUNTY, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Mark Lobascio, Plaintiff: Shawn Logan Birken, LEAD ATTORNEY, Law Offices of Shawn L. Birken, Fort Lauderdale, FL USA; Stuart A. Rosenfeldt, Rosenfeldt & Birken, P.A., Fort Lauderdale, FL USA.
For Broward County, Defendant: Adam Katzman, LEAD ATTORNEY, Broward County Attorney's Office, Fort Lauderdale, FL USA.
Judges: ROBIN S. ROSENBAUM, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: ROBIN S. ROSENBAUM
Opinion



ORDER
This matter is before the Court on Defendant Broward County's Motion for Summary Judgment. [D.E. 27]. The Court has carefully considered the Motion, all supporting and opposing filings, and the entire record. For the reasons that follow, the Court grants Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment.

I. Material Facts 1
Plaintiff Mark Lobascio is a former employee of Defendant Broward County ("Broward County" or the "County") who suffers from diabetes. See D.E. 34-1. Broward County first hired Lobascio in February of 2008, for the job of Carpenter I in the County's Parks and Recreation Division. See D.E. 28-1. When Lobascio began working for Broward County, he was required to attend an Employment Issues course that informs employees about Broward County's anti-discrimination policies, including its policies regarding [*2]  the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"). See D.E. 29-2. A portion of the course addresses the process by which an employee may request a reasonable accommodation under the ADA. See id. Lobascio attended the course in March 2008 and went to a refresher course in August 2009. See D.E. 29-3. As with all County employees, Lobascio's supervisors also attended the Employment Issues course. See D.E. 29-4.
After working for Broward County as a Carpenter I for over a year, in October 2009, Lobascio was subject to a reduction in force ("RIF") due to budget cuts in Broward County. See D.E. 28-3. Because of the RIF, Lobascio was reassigned to a vacant position as a Maintenance Worker II with Parks and Recreation. See id. In his position as a Maintenance Worker II, Lobascio's immediate supervisor was James Silvestri ("Silvestri"). See D.E. 27-1 at 58; D.E. 27-4 at 6. Silvestri, in turn, was supervised by Barbara Reinking ("Reinking"), who reported to Chris Deal ("Deal"). See D.E. 27-1 at 58-59.
According to Broward County's written description, the essential functions of the job of Maintenance Worker II include the ability to (1) perform heavy manual labor for extended periods; (2) perform semi-skilled [*3]  duties in the maintenance and repair of buildings and of mechanical and electrical systems equipment; (3) perform a variety of skilled gardening tasks such as the cleaning of bulbs and the planting and transplanting of flowers and shrubs, and assisting in the construction and development of flower beds; (4) safely and skillfully operate hand or power tools and specialized equipment, materials, and machinery; (5) safely operate light automotive equipment and riding mowers; and (6) install signs, picnic tables, grills and playground swings. See D.E. 28-4.
In performing his job as Maintenance Worker II, Lobascio was responsible for all maintenance at the park to which he was assigned. Lobascio used a weed wacker, which Lobascio acknowledged sometimes caused rocks to "whip up" and hit him. Additionally, Lobascio operated tire changers, blade sharpeners, and grinding wheels, and he maintained heavy equipment and other tools. See D.E. 27-1 at 56, 63, 112. Lobascio also worked with forklifts and trucks with pallets, as well as with tools with sharp edges, including shovels, floor jacks, and other machinery. See id. at 56; D.E. 27-3. Although Lobascio agrees that all of these duties were essential to [*4]  his job as a Maintenance Worker II, he contends that he spent only approximately ten percent of his time in proximity to heavy objects or equipment. See D.E. 32 at ¶ 6; D.E. 34-1.
Broward County requires certain employees, including individuals performing the job of Maintenance Worker II, to wear safety shoes because of the duties assigned to the position and because maintenance workers had the highest number of injuries while at work. See D.E. 27-2 at ¶10; D.E. 29-5. Broward County relied on Occupational Safety & Health Administration ("OSHA") safety standards for drafting the County policies. See D.E. 27-1 at ¶ 17. Lobascio knew that wearing safety shoes was a mandatory requirement of Broward County for individuals performing the job of Maintenance Worker II.2 See D.E. 32 at ¶ 13. Broward County, however, allowed Lobascio to purchase any safety shoes that he wished, as long as the shoes met OSHA standards. See D.E. 29-5. Lobascio was required to submit a receipt for proof of the amount of the safety shoes in order to be reimbursed for the cost of the shoes, up to $82.50. See id.; D.E. 27-1 at 48.
Lobascio claims that in October or November 2009, Lobascio asked his supervisor, Silvestri, [*5]  if he could wear sneakers instead of safety shoes because his foot was bothering him. See id. at 120-21. Silvestri informed Lobascio that he inquired up the chain of command, but Lobascio had to wear steel-toed boots. Id. Lobascio asserts that Silvestri did not contact the Office of Equal Opportunity or advise Lobascio of his right to do so. See D.E. 33 at 3. According to Lobascio, however, Lobascio also spoke to Deal about the possibility of wearing sneakers instead of safety shoes, but Deal informed him that because of the essential functions of Lobascio's job and, further, due to safety concerns, Broward County would not permit him to wear sneakers. See D.E. 27-1 at 122-24.
In December 2009, Lobascio began developing a callus on his right toe. See id. at 69. Later that month, after the callus developed, Lobascio told Silvestri that his foot was hurting him because of the safety shoes. See id. Silvestri commented that it was common to develop a callus or blister from wearing safety shoes. See id. at 69, 74. In early February 2010, after speaking to his supervisors about the continuing problems with his foot, Lobascio was advised that he could purchase a new pair of safety shoes. Accordingly, on February 12, 2012, Lobascio [*6]  bought new work boots. See id. at 129-130. Lobascio states that when he purchased his new boots, the only type of safety shoes that the store carried was steel-toed shoes. See D.E. 34-1 at ¶ 8.
The new boots did not alleviate Lobascio's problems with his foot. To the contrary, the problems associated with Lobascio's foot became worse. In late February 2010, Lobascio showed his foot to Silvestri and Reinking and, after viewing Lobascio's foot, Reinking told Lobascio that he should see a doctor. See D.E. 27-5 at 8. Because of his persistent foot problems, Lobascio ultimately went on sick leave in late February 2010. In accordance with Broward County policy, on March 8, 2010, the County sent Lobascio a Family Medical Leave Act ("FMLA") form requesting that Lobascio provide a health certification form from his doctor by March 22, 2010. See D.E. 28-2. Broward County received the requested forms from Lobascio's doctor on March 8, 2010, and April 2, 2010, which indicated that Lobascio had a foot ulcer attributable to diabetes and that he must stay off his foot while he was healing. See D.E. 28-9. Lobascio returned to work on March 15, 2010.
On April 5, 2010, Broward County sent a notice to Lobascio indicating [*7]  that his prior request for FMLA leave had been approved. See D.E. 28-10. The notice also advised Lobascio to contact Broward County's Office of Equal Opportunity ("OEO") to determine whether he was eligible to be considered a qualified individual with a disability under the ADA and, thus, whether he might be eligible for an accommodation. See D.E. 28-10 at 4.3 On April 5, 20120, Lobascio again went on leave because of his foot, but on May 20th, Broward County received a note from Lobascio's doctor releasing Lobascio to work without restrictions. Lobascio returned to work on May 27, 2010. See D.E. 28-12.
Soon after his return, on June 14, 2010, Lobascio notified his supervisor that he needed to take additional FMLA leave. Pursuant to the County's request, Lobascio provided a new health certification form indicating that he would be out from "June 8, 2010 to pending." See D.E. 28-13; D.E. 28-14. In a notice dated June 21, 2010, Broward County approved Lobascio's leave request and notified him that his FMLA entitlement would be exhausted on July 5, 2010. See D.E. 28-15. The notice again advised Lobascio to contact the OEO to determine whether he was a qualified individual under the ADA [*8]  and whether he might be eligible for an accommodation. See id.
The parties dispute whether Lobascio ever contacted the OEO to pursue a request for an accommodation. Broward County claims that Lobascio never contacted the OEO office, but Lobascio contends that he called the OEO office in March 2010 and left a voice mail, but never received a return phone call. See D.E. 27-6 at ¶ 9; D.E. 34-1 at ¶ 11. Lobascio's statement that he called the OEO in March 2010 appears in an affidavit prepared in opposition to the pending Motion for Summary Judgment. During his deposition, however, Lobascio stated that he did not contact anyone at the OEO until after his termination. D.E. 27-1 at 86-87.
In the Eleventh Circuit, "'[w]hen a party has given clear answers to unambiguous questions which negate the existence of any genuine issue of material fact [for summary judgment], that party cannot thereafter create such an issue with an affidavit that merely contradicts, without explanation, previously given clear testimony.' Such an affidavit would be a sham." McCormick v. City of Fort Lauderdale, 333 F.3d 1234, 1240 n. 7 (11th Cir. 2003) (quoting Van T. Junkins & Assoc., Inc. v. U.S. Industries, Inc., 736 F.2d 656, 657 (11th Cir.1984) (emphasis added by McCormick Court). As a result, a court may find an affidavit that contradicts deposition testimony a sham where the [*9]  party fails to offer any valid explanation for the change. Id. at 656-658.4
Although Lobascio exhausted his FMLA leave on July 5, 2010, Broward County granted him additional leave without pay until July 30, 2010. See D.E. 27-7. On July 8, 2010, Lobascio submitted documentation indicating that his return-to-work date could not be determined. See D.E. 28-16. In a letter dated July 26, 2010, the County informed Plaintiff that because he was unable to provide an estimated return-to-work date, and, further, because of operational needs, Lobascio's leave of absence could not be further extended. See D.E. 28-17. The County noted that despite its letters dated April 5, 2010, and June 21, 2010, in which it recommended that Lobascio contact the OEO for a determination regarding his status under the ADA, Lobascio had not "taken advantage of the opportunity to participate in the determination process." See id. Consequently, Broward County separated Lobascio from employment effective July 30, 2010. Id.
As a result of Lobascio's foot injury, he underwent multiple surgeries and was required to take intravenous antibiotics to fight off infection in his foot. See D.E. 34-2. Lobascio acknowledged [*10]  that he does not believe that anyone from Broward County purposefully discriminated against him. See D.E. 27-1 at 162-163. Nor does Lobascio dispute that he cannot presently perform the essential functions of the Maintenance Worker II position. See D.E. 27-1 at 150.

II. Procedural History
On January 26, 2012, Lobascio filed a Complaint against Broward County alleging disability discrimination. See D.E. 1. After obtaining leave of Court to amend the Complaint, Lobascio filed an Amended Complaint on April 2, 2012. See D.E. 13. The Amended Complaint sets forth two counts — one alleging violations of the Rehabilitation Act, 29 U.S.C. § 794, and one alleging violations of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101, et seq. In both counts, Lobascio alleges that Broward County discriminated against him based on his disability when it failed to provide Lobascio with a reasonable accommodation. D.E. 13 at ¶¶ 19, 27, 29. More specifically, Lobascio contends that Broward County "intentionally failed to permit Plaintiff the accommodation of wearing sneakers instead of work boots" while performing his job of Maintenance Worker II. See D.E. 13 at ¶ 27. Lobascio also asserts that Broward County violated the Rehabilitation [*11]  Act by refusing to extend Plaintiff's FMLA leave. See D.E. 13 at ¶ 20. Based on these charges, Lobascio seeks judgment against Broward County for lost wages, consequential damages, emotional and physical distress, pain and suffering, and an award of his attorney's fees.
Following discovery, Broward County filed its pending Motion for Summary Judgment. See D.E. 27. In response, Lobascio concedes that he is not asserting a claim for wrongful discharge and that he does not challenge Broward County's decision to terminate him. See D.E. 33. Accordingly, Lobascio advances only his claim that he was denied a reasonable accommodation by Broward County. Broward County submitted its Reply [D.E. 38], and the parties have also filed declarations and deposition transcripts of various witnesses. Accordingly, this matter is now ripe for disposition.

III. Analysis

A. Summary Judgment Standard
Summary judgment is appropriate if "the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). Not any factual dispute will defeat a motion for summary judgment; rather, "the requirement is that there be no genuine issue of material fact." [*12]  Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 247-48, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986) (emphasis in original). A dispute is genuine if "a reasonable trier of fact could return judgment for the non-moving party." Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Fla. v. United States, 516 F.3d 1235, 1243 (11th Cir. 2008) (citing Anderson, 477 U.S. at 247-48). A fact is material if "it would affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law ." Id. (citing Anderson, 477 U.S. at 247-48).
In deciding a summary judgment motion, the Court views the facts in the light most favorable to the non-moving party—here, Lobascio—and draws all reasonable inferences in his favor. See Davis v. Williams, 451 F.3d 759, 763 (11th Cir. 2006). Further, the Court does not weigh conflicting evidence. See Skop v. City of Atlanta, 485 F.3d 1130, 1140 (11th Cir. 2007). Thus, upon discovering a genuine dispute of material fact, the Court must deny summary judgment. See id.
The moving party bears the initial burden of showing the absence of a genuine dispute of material fact. See Shiver v. Chertoff, 549 F.3d 1342, 1343 (11th Cir. 2008) (per curiam). Once the moving party satisfies this burden, "the nonmoving party 'must do more than simply show that there is some metaphysical doubt as to the material facts.'" Ray v. Equifax Info. Servs., LLC, 327 F. App'x 819, 825 (11th Cir. 2009) (per curiam) (quoting Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co., Ltd. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986)). Instead, "[t]he non-moving party must make a sufficient showing on each essential element of the case for which he has the burden of proof." Id. (citing Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986)). Accordingly, the non-moving party must produce evidence, going beyond the pleadings, to show that a reasonable jury could find in his favor. [*13]  See Shiver, 549 F.3d at 1343.

B. Plaintiff's Reasonable Accommodation Claims
In Counts I and II of his Complaint, Lobascio alleges that Broward County discriminated against him in violation of the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act by not providing him with a reasonable accommodation. More specifically, Lobascio contends that Broward County should have allowed him to wear sneakers instead of safety shoes while he performed his job of Maintenance Worker II. See D.E. 13 at ¶ 27.
The ADA prohibits discrimination "against a qualified individual on the basis of disability in regard to job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a).5 "Indeed, the ADA imposes upon employers the duty to provide reasonable accommodations for known disabilities unless doing so would result in undue hardship to the employer." Davis v. FPL, 205 F.3d 1301, 1305 (11th Cir. 2000) (citations omitted).
To successfully assert his discrimination claims, Lobascio must show that (1) he is disabled; (2) he is a "qualified individual;" and (3) he was discriminated against because of his disability. Wood v. Green, 323 F.3d 1309 (11th Cir. 2005); Lucas v. W.W. Grainger, Inc., 257 F.3d 1249, 1255 (11th Cir. 2001); Davis v. FPL, 205 F.3d 1301 (11th Cir. 2000); D'Angelo v. ConAgra Foods, Inc., 422 F.3d 1220, 1225-26 (11th Cir. 2005). An employer discriminates against a qualified individual with a [*14]  disability when the employer fails to provide a reasonable accommodation for the disability, unless doing so would impose an undue hardship on the employer. Lucas, 257 F.3d at 1255. Ultimately, the plaintiff bears the burden of identifying an accommodation and demonstrating that the accommodation allows him to perform the job's essential functions. Id.; McKane v. UBS Financial Svcs., Inc., 363 F. App'x 679, 681 (11th Cir. 2010).

1. Is Lobascio Disabled?
A person is considered disabled if he has "(A) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such individual; (B) a record of such an impairment; or (C) [is] regarded as having such an impairment." 42 U.S.C. 12102(2). A plaintiff is deemed to be "disabled" for ADA purposes if he satisfies any one of these three definitions. Gordon v. E.L. Hamm & Assoc., Inc., 100 F.3d 907, 911 (11th Cir. 1996). The determination of whether a person is disabled is made on a case-by-case basis and "is not necessarily based on the name or diagnosis of the impairment the person has, but rather on the effect of that impairment on the life of the individual." Sutton v. United Air Lines, Inc., 527 U.S. 471, 483, 119 S. Ct. 2139, 144 L. Ed. 2d 450 (1999).
Here, the parties do not dispute that Lobascio's diabetes constitutes a disability under the ADA. Broward County, however, contends that Lobascio has offered no evidence that he was qualified for his position or that his request [*15]  to wear sneakers was a reasonable accommodation. Accordingly, Broward County urges that it is entitled to summary judgment on Lobascio's accommodation claims under the ADA and Rehabilitation Act.

2. Can Lobascio Establish That He is a Qualified Individual?
To be considered a "qualified individual," Lobascio must be able to perform the essential functions of his job with or without a reasonable accommodation. Wood, 323 F.3d at 1312; Davis, 205 F.3d at 1305; Webb v. Donley, 347 F. App'x 443, 445 (11th Cir. 2009). Consequently, if Lobascio is unable to perform an essential function of the job, even with an accommodation, he is not a qualified individual, and therefore, not covered under the ADA. "Determining whether a particular job duty is an essential function involves a factual inquiry to be conducted on a case-by-case basis." Webb, 347 F. App'x at 445 (citing Lucas, 257 F.3d at 1258). In making this determination, courts give consideration to the employer's judgment as to what functions of the job are essential and to the written description of the job. Davis, 205 F.3d at 1305. Other factors such as the amount of time spent on the job performing the essential functions are to be accounted for by the Court as well. Id. Essential functions include the "fundamental job duties of a position that an individual with a disability is actually required to perform." [*16]  Earl v. Mervyns, Inc., 207 F.3d 1361, 1365 (11th Cir. 2000).
Here, Lobascio does not dispute the essential functions of his job as Maintenance Worker II. Instead, he suggests that he encountered heavy machinery and equipment only ten percent of the time while performing his job. Because the essential functions of the job of Maintenance Worker II are not in dispute, the Court finds that in performing his job, Lobascio was required to operate heavy machinery such as riding mowers, forklifts, and trucks, at least part of the time. Lobascio was also required to operate light machinery and to work with various power tools and specialized equipment, materials, and machinery with sharp edges. Lobascio does not dispute that he used a weed wacker, which Lobascio acknowledged sometimes caused rocks to hit him. Additionally, Lobascio operated tire changers, blade sharpeners, and grinding wheels, and he maintained heavy equipment and other tools.
With the essential functions of the job of Maintenance Worker II in mind, the Court turns to whether Lobascio could have performed these essential functions either with or without a reasonable accommodation. Lobascio bears the burden of demonstrating the existence of a reasonable accommodation.
The term "reasonable [*17]  accommodation" means "[m]odifications or adjustments to the work environment, or to the manner or circumstances under which the position held or desired is customarily performed, that enable a qualified individual with a disability to perform the essential functions of that position." Webb, 347 F. App'x at 445-46. An accommodation can be considered to be "reasonable" only if it allows the employee to perform the essential functions of the job. Lucas, 257 F.3d at 1255. The ADA does not require an employer to eliminate an essential function of the employee's job or reallocate job duties to change the functions of the job. See Webb, 347 F. App'x at 446. Examples of reasonable accommodations include "job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, reassignment to a vacant position, acquisition or modification of equipment or devices, . . . and other similar accommodations for individuals with disabilities." Id. at 1256. The ADA does not require an employer to bump another employee from a position in order to accommodate a disabled employee, nor does it require the employer to create another job for the disabled employee. Lucas, 257 F.3d at 1256.
Lobascio admits that he currently cannot perform the job of Maintenance Worker II. But he argues that he would be able to perform the job with [*18]  a reasonable accommodation. After approaching his supervisors about his foot, Lobascio requested that he be able to wear sneakers instead of safety shoes. Lobascio suggests that if he were permitted to wear sneakers, he would not have problems with his foot and would be able to perform the essential functions of the Maintenance Worker II position. Significantly, however, an employee is not entitled to the accommodation of his choice, but only to a reasonable accommodation. Earl, 207 F.3d at 1367 (citation omitted). And, after reviewing the record evidence, the Court finds that Lobascio has failed to show that his requested accommodation — wearing sneakers — is reasonable in light of the County's safety policies and the reasons for them.
Upon completing a job hazard analysis of the maintenance positions for Parks & Recreation, Broward County determined that the Maintenance Worker positions had the highest number of claims for injuries while at work. See D.E. 27-2. Broward County found that the hazards could be minimized or completely eliminated if the workers wore personal protective equipment, such as safety shoes, as recommended by OSHA. Id. Although OSHA does not regulate the County, the County nonetheless [*19]  recognized that OSHA provides the industry standard for personal protective equipment and, thus, relied on OSHA standards in drafting the County's policies, including the requirement that certain workers wear safety shoes. Id. The policy is also encompassed in the collective bargaining agreement between Broward County and its Blue Collar Union. See D.E. 29-5.
Lobascio does not dispute the validity of the County's safety policies, nor does he dispute that the essential functions of his job include handling heavy machinery and using tools and machinery with sharp edges. Instead, Lobascio baldly asserts that he is not around heavy machinery often and declares that wearing sneakers would have worked and, on its face, was "reasonable."
The problem with Lobascio's position, however, arises from the fact that if Lobascio were permitted to wear sneakers, he could not perform the essential functions of Maintenance Worker II while complying with the County's policy that safety shoes must be worn while performing the job. Put simply, Lobascio's suggestion of a reasonable accommodation is really a request to be exempted from Broward County's safety policies. An employer, however, is not required [*20]  to revoke its policies which are linked to the essential performance of the job to grant an individual with a disability an accommodation. See Davis, 205 F.3d at 1307-08 (employee's suggested accommodation of no overtime or limited overtime violated collective bargaining agreement and, thus, was not reasonable nor required by the ADA); Earl, 207 F.3d at 1367 (employee's requested accommodation that she not be held to employer's punctuality policy was not a reasonable accommodation).
Nor is an employer required to ignore safety concerns in order to accommodate one of its employees who has a disability. See, e.g., Allmond v. Akal Security, Inc., 558 F.3d 1312 (11th Cir. 2009) (proposed accommodation that would allow security officer to pass hearing test without a hearing aid was not reasonable since it would destroy the standard that was found to be a business necessity — the hearing-aid ban ensured that all officers could perform their jobs safely and effectively); Hennagir v. Utah Dept. of Corr., 587 F.3d 1255 (10th Cir. 2009) (allowing physician's assistant working in prison to continue with her identical job duties, by eliminating completion of required safety training, was not a reasonable accommodation; potential consequences of an inmate attack were severe, and it was reasonable to require employees who have direct contact with inmates to undergo [*21]  training on responding to dangerous scenarios). Whether Lobascio worked with heavy machinery ten percent of the time or more, this type of machinery could just as easily crush Lobascio's foot if he were not wearing safety shoes during any part of his duties. Similarly, sharp objects or tools would always be capable of puncturing Lobascio's sneakers, causing an injury to his foot, and Lobascio did not indicate that he worked with such tools for only ten percent of the time. Consequently, Lobascio's proposed accommodation of wearing sneakers is not reasonable.
Lobascio contends that the requirement that he wear safety shoes is not an essential function of the job and that it is merely a "dress code." But Lobascio misapprehends the reasons he must wear safety shoes while serving as a Maintenance Worker II. While Lobascio correctly states that wearing safety shoes is not an essential requirement of the job of Maintenance Worker II, in order for Lobascio to be able to perform the essential functions of the job safely, he is required to wear safety shoes. The EEOC Guidance materials are instructive in this regard. In its materials, the EEOC declared,
If the employee cannot meet the dress code [*22]  because of a disability, the employer may still require compliance if the dress code is job-related and consistent with business necessity. An employer also may require that an employee with a disability meet dress standards required by federal law. If an individual with a disability cannot comply with a dress code that meets the "business necessity" standard or is mandated by federal law, even with a reasonable accommodation, he will not be considered "qualified."
EEOC Guidance, The Americans With Disabilities Act: Applying Performance and Conduct Standards to Employees With Disabilities, http://eeoc.gov/facts/perfromance-conduct.html . Here, the requirement that certain employees wear safety shoes is certainly job-related and consistent with business necessity. Accordingly, Broward County can insist that its employees wear safety shoes.6
In his Response in Opposition to the Motion for Summary Judgment, Lobascio also proposes for the first time "other solutions" that he claims might constitute reasonable accommodations. For instance, Lobascio posits that the parties could have "agreed that Lobascio could wear sneakers whenever he was not around [*23]  heavy equipment or otherwise endangered by the lack of safety shoes." See D.E. 33 at 6. But the Court must respectfully reject Lobascio's suggestions.
First, Lobascio has presented no record evidence that supports a finding that such an accommodation would be possible. Second, even assuming Lobascio came into contact with heavy machinery only ten percent of the time, as he suggests, he does not contend that he encountered sharp objects and tools, which could puncture his sneakers and also cause an injury to his foot, only part of the time. Additionally, Lobascio fails to acknowledge that heavy objects other than machinery, such as lumber, rocks, and other items, could crush or cause injury to his foot. Finally, although Lobascio might believe that he would be able to determine precisely when safety shoes were necessary, it is not reasonable to conclude that he would be able to predict when particular hazards would occur. Accordingly, Lobascio's safety would be in jeopardy while he was wearing sneakers even if he thought that he was not. Again, this proposed accommodation merely seeks for Lobascio to be exempted from the safety policy that governs those who perform the job of Maintenance [*24]  Worker II.
Finally, Lobascio suggests that the parties also could have considered "permitting Lobascio to purchase plastic shelled shoes or heavy boots that did not have the steel toe which was the cause of Plaintiff's problem." See D.E. 33 at 7. Again, Lobascio has presented no evidence that this type of accommodation would have worked to alleviate the problems he encountered with his foot. More significantly, however, Lobascio was not prevented from wearing other types of shoes, as long as they complied with Broward County's safety policy. Indeed, the policy requires that Lobascio wear "safety shoes," not steel-tipped shoes. Moreover, in early February 2010, after speaking to his supervisors about the continuing problems with his foot, Lobascio was advised that he could purchase a new pair of safety shoes. On February 12, 2012, Lobascio purchased new work boots. See id. at 129-130. But once again, he bought steel-toed shoes. Although Lobascio submits that the only type of safety shoes that the store carried was steel-toed shoes, no County policy or employee prevented Lobascio from going to a different store and purchasing replacement safety shoes that were not steel-tipped.
Overall, Lobascio's proposed [*25]  accommodation of wearing sneakers, whether full-time or part-time is not reasonable because, for safety reasons, it would not permit Lobascio to perform the essential functions of the job of Maintenance Worker II. Because Lobascio's proposed accommodation is not reasonable, Lobascio was not a qualified individual under the ADA. And, because no genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether Lobascio was a qualified individual, summary judgment should be granted in favor of Broward County. See Earl, 207 F.3d at 1367 (failure to identify a reasonable accommodation is fatal to ADA claim).

C. Broward County's Alleged Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process
In his Response in Opposition to the Motion for Summary Judgment, Lobascio complains that he approached Silvestri, Reinking, and Deal about whether he could wear sneakers instead of work boots but, instead of initiating the interactive process contemplated by 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3), or contacting the County's OEO to initiate discussion, the supervisors simply denied Lobascio's requests on the grounds that everyone in his position must wear work boots. See D.E. 33 at 6. Lobascio argues that had his supervisors or the OEO initiated the interactive procedure, "it is likely [*26]  that the parties would have found a solution that would have permitted Plaintiff to continue to perform his job without incurring damage to his foot." Id. In other words, Lobascio contends that Broward County's alleged failure to engage in the interactive process was the actual cause of Lobascio's damages.
For its part, Broward County urges that Lobascio's arguments with respect to the interactive process are "an entirely new theory of recovery" and must fail because Lobascio cannot raise the theory for the first time in opposition to the Motion for Summary Judgment. Broward County also asserts that the "new claim" cannot succeed because the County had no duty to engage in the interactive process where the accommodation requested by Lobascio (i.e., wearing sneakers) was not reasonable.
The Court disagrees with Broward County that Lobascio has raised the issue of the interactive process for the first time in its Response in Opposition to Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment. In the Amended Complaint, Lobascio alleges that his request for an accommodation was "intentionally denied and he was not informed of any rights he may have to appeal his supervisor's unilateral decision to ignore [*27]  his request." See D.E. 13 at ¶ 14. (emphasis added). Thus, although Lobascio did not specifically identify the interactive process contemplated by 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3), by referring to his "rights to appeal," Lobascio can fairly be said to have raised the issue. Accordingly, the Court finds that Lobascio has not waived this issue.
But Lobascio, nonetheless, cannot prevail on this issue. The Code of Federal Regulations provides, in relevant part, "To determine the appropriate reasonable accommodation it may be necessary for the covered entity to initiate an informal, interactive process with the individual with a disability in need of the accommodation." See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3) (emphasis added). Even assuming, arguendo, that Broward County had an affirmative duty to engage in the interactive process described in 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3), "where a plaintiff cannot demonstrate [a] reasonable accommodation, the employer's lack of investigation into reasonable accommodation is unimportant." Willis v. Conopco, Inc., 108 F.3d 282, 285 (11th Cir. 1997); Lucas, 257 F.3d at 1256 n. 2; Earl, 207 F.3d at 1367; Webb, 347 F. App'x at 446.
Indeed, the ADA provides no cause of action for failure to investigate possible accommodations. McKane, 363 F. App'x at 681 (citing Willis, 108 F.3d at 285). "Moreover, an employer's failure to investigate does not relieve the plaintiff of the burden of proving the availability of a reasonable accommodation." [*28]  Id. (citing Moses v. American Nonwovens, Inc., 97 F.3d 446, 448 (11th Cir. 1996).
Consequently, even assuming that Broward County was required to, and failed to, engage in the interactive process, that deficiency does not constitute a violation of the ADA. Nor does it relieve Lobascio of his burden of demonstrating the availability of a reasonable accommodation. Here, because Lobascio has not come forward with a reasonable accommodation, his claim that Broward County failed to engage in the interactive process must fail.
Second, even if failure to participate in the interactive process could amount to an ADA violation, contrary to Lobascio's contention, Broward County did advise Lobascio of the right to appeal and engage in the interactive process. First, when Lobascio was first hired by Broward County, the County provided Lobascio with materials setting forth the OEO process. Additionally, Broward County advised Lobascio of the OEO process and his ability to obtain a determination of whether he was a qualified individual who could obtain a reasonable accommodation. More specifically, on April 5, 2010, Broward County sent a notice to Lobascio indicating that his prior request for FMLA leave had been approved. The notice stated, "You may wish to request [*29]  that the County's Office of Equal Opportunity ("OEO") determine whether you are eligible to be considered as a "qualified individual with a disability" as defined under Title I of the Americans with Disabilit[ies] Act of 1990 (ADA) and, if so, whether you are eligible for any potential applicable accommodations. Should you wish to request such a determination, we recommend you contact OEO's Internal Investigations and Oversight Division at (954) 357-6500." See D.E. 28-10 at 4.
Likewise, in a notice dated June 21, 2010, Broward County approved Lobascio's leave request and notified him that his FMLA entitlement would be exhausted on July 5, 2010. See D.E. 28-15. The notice again advised Lobascio to contact the OEO to determine whether he was a qualified individual under the ADA and whether he might be eligible for an accommodation. See id. But Lobascio did not avail himself of this opportunity. Thus, even if failure to engage in the interactive process could constitute a violation of the ADA, the facts demonstrate that Broward County performed its duties under the process as set forth in its Policies and Procedures.

IV. Conclusion
For the foregoing reasons, Defendant Broward County's Motion [*30]  for Summary Judgment [D.E. 27] is hereby GRANTED. Pursuant to Rule 58, Fed. R. Civ. P., the Court will enter a separate judgment for Defendant.
DONE and ORDERED at Fort Lauderdale, Florida this 28th day of September 2012.
/s/ Robin S. Rosenbaum
ROBIN S. ROSENBAUM
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE

FINAL JUDGMENT
This matter is before the Court upon the granting of Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment. [D.E. 53]. For the reasons expressed in this Court's Order granting the Motion for Summary Judgment, entered separately, and pursuant to Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 56 and 58, it is hereby ORDERED and ADJUDGED as follows:
1. Final Judgment is ENTERED in favor of Defendant Broward County.
2. To the extent not otherwise disposed of, all pending motions are DENIED AS MOOT.
3. The Clerk shall CLOSE this case.
DONE AND ORDERED at Fort Lauderdale, Florida, this 28th day of September 2012.
/s/ Robin S. Rosenbaum
ROBIN S. ROSENBAUM
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

