Marquez v. Am. Red Cross
United States District Court for the Central District of California
November 5, 2009, Decided; November 5, 2009, Filed
CV 09-6409 GAF (AGRx)

Reporter
2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 139373 *
John Marquez v. American Red Cross et al
Subsequent History: Claim dismissed by, Without prejudice, Motion granted by, in part, Motion denied by, in part Marquez v. Am. Red Cross, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 139367 (C.D. Cal., Dec. 29, 2009)
Counsel:  [*1] For John Marquez an Individual, Plaintiff: Briana M Kim, Henry Hoang Pham, Roger E Haag, Law Offices of Joseph M Lovretovich, Woodland Hills, CA USA; Joseph M Lovretovich, Joseph M Lovretovich Law Offices, Woodland Hills, CA USA.
For American Red Cross Business Entity Form Unknown Erroneously Sued as American Red Cross Services Southern California Region, Defendant: Dawn Kennedy, Ronald J Klepetar, Baker and Hostetler LLP, Los Angeles, CA USA; Margaret Rosenthal, Sabrina L Shadi, Baker & Hostetler LLP, Los Angeles, CA USA.
For Ken Johnson an Individual, Barbara Kay an Individual, Brian Stephens an Individual, Dianna Villarreal an Individual, Jose Franco an Individual, Defendants: Dawn Kennedy, Ronald J Klepetar, Baker and Hostetler LLP, Los Angeles, CA USA; Sabrina L Shadi, Baker & Hostetler LLP, Los Angeles, CA USA.
Judges: GARY ALLEN FEESS.
Opinion by: GARY ALLEN FEESS
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES - GENERAL

Proceedings: (In Chambers)

ORDER RE: MOTION TO DISMISS

A. Introduction
Plaintiff John Marquez ("Plaintiff") filed suit against the American Red Cross, Ken Johnson, Barbara Kaye, Brian Stephens, Dianna Villarreal, Jose Franco, Marlon Aguno, and Vince Doe in Los Angeles Superior Court on June 26, 2009. Defendants properly [*2]  removed the case to this Court on September 3, 2009. Plaintiff alleges violations of the California Fair Employment and Housing Act, California Government Code § 12900 et seq., for age and disability discrimination, age and disability harassment, failure to accommodate, failure to engage in the interactive process, retaliation, failure to prevent discrimination, and wrongful discharge. Plaintiff also asserts claims for defamation and wrongful discharge in violation of public policy.
Presently before the court is Defendants' Motion to Dismiss. Defendants argue that Plaintiff's claims should be dismissed for failure to state a claim and because of the applicable statute of limitations. Defendants have not moved to dismiss Plaintiff's seventh cause of action for retaliation. For the reasons set forth below, Defendants' Motion to Dismiss is GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART.

B. Background
Plaintiff John Marquez ("Plaintiff"), who is currently sixty years old, began working for Defendant American Red Cross ("ACR") as an Inventory Management Specialist on August 30, 2004. (First Am. Compl. ("FAC") ¶¶ 15-16.) In this position, Plaintiff's duties included shipping and receiving blood products to and from different hospitals. (Id.)
During [*3]  the course of Plaintiff's employment, Plaintiff was assigned to work under the direction of Defendant Jose Franco ("Franco") who was a swing shift supervisor. (FAC ¶ 17.) Plaintiff alleges that Franco engaged in harassing conduct towards Plaintiff, which included Franco's refusal to authorize Plaintiff to take time off from work to visit his doctors to treat his medical condition, informing Plaintiff that Defendant Claudia Mata ("Mata"), an administrative assistant, had indicated that the swing shift could not afford to grant Plaintiff time off from work, and failing to address Plaintiff's complaints of harassment by co-workers. (FAC ¶ 18.) Plaintiff further alleges that Franco's indifference to Plaintiff's complaints of harassment resulted in Plaintiff being further subjected to obscenities, name-calling, and inappropriate references about his age and medical condition from Defendants Marlon Aguno ("Aguno") and Vince Doe ("Doe"). (FAC ¶ 19.) Plaintiff attempted to discuss his concerns with upper management, but Plaintiff argues that upper management also acted indifferently toward his complaints. (FAC ¶ 20.)
In May 2007, Plaintiff was hospitalized due to complications involving his [*4]  liver and was on leave for a short period of time. (FAC ¶ 21.) In mid-June 2007, after having returned to work, Plaintiff again became sick and was re-admitted to the hospital. (FAC ¶ 22.) When Plaintiff returned to work, he submitted a doctor's note to Mata. (Id.)
In late December 2007, Plaintiff alleges that he was again subjected to harassment from Defendant Aguno. (FAC ¶ 23.) Plaintiff alleges the harassment included calling Plaintiff a "smelly old man" and yelling at Plaintiff to "retire" and "go die off somewhere." (Id.) Plaintiff alleges that Franco witnessed the harassment, but took no action other than ordering both Plaintiff and Aguno to go home. (Id.) Approximately two days later, Plaintiff and Aguno met with Defendants Dianna Villarreal ("Villarreal"), Director of Blood Services, and Brian Stephens ("Stephens"), Overall Supervisor. (FAC ¶ 24.) Instead of addressing the incident, Plaintiff alleges that Villarreal and Stephens ordered the parties to shake hands and forget what had happened. (Id.) Although Plaintiff again notified Villarreal and Stephens about the regular harassment he faced, Plaintiff alleges they ignored his requests for assistance. (Id.)
In January 2008, [*5]  Plaintiff applied for a position in the graveyard shift, despite the hours, to escape Franco's regular verbal harassment and abuse. (FAC ¶ 25.) In May 2008, Plaintiff experienced severe stomach pains and again required hospitalization. (FAC ¶ 26.) Due to complications with his gall bladder, Plaintiff was hospitalized for approximately one week and was ordered to stay home for at least an additional three weeks. (Id.) Kenneth Johnson ("Johnson"), Plaintiff's graveyard shift supervisor, informed Plaintiff that he was required to check in every day during his absence in order to maintain his sick leave status. (FAC ¶ 27.) Plaintiff alleges he complied with these instructions. (Id.)
In June 2008, Plaintiff returned to work. (FAC ¶ 28.) Plaintiff informed Johnson that his current medications would occasionally require him to leave the work floor without advance notice because Plaintiff may feel the need to vomit, which was a side effect of the required medications. (Id.) On the night of June 12, 2008, Plaintiff felt very sick during the course of his shift and felt like vomiting on more than one occasion. (FAC ¶ 29.) During his shift, as Plaintiff was riding in the elevator, Plaintiff felt [*6]  the urge to gag and coughed up phlegm from his throat. (Id.) Because Plaintiff did not have a tissue or handkerchief, his phlegm involuntarily landed against the elevator wall. (Id.) Although Plaintiff rushed to retrieve paper towels to clean the mess, when Plaintiff returned to the elevator, the mess had disappeared. (Id.) Shortly thereafter, Johnson ordered Plaintiff to see him. (FAC ¶ 30.) Johnson asked Plaintiff whether Plaintiff had spit up phlegm in the elevator and Plaintiff admitted that he had. (Id.) Plaintiff alleges that Johnson said that Plaintiff had "disgusted" him and ordered Plaintiff to return to his work area. (Id.)
On June 13, 2008, Johnson escorted Plaintiff to meet with Defendant Barbara Kaye ("Kaye"), a Human Resources Representative. (FAC ¶ 31.) Plaintiff alleges he requested union representation, but Kaye informed Plaintiff that he no longer had that option. (Id.) Plaintiff notes that Kaye began accusing Plaintiff of spitting in the elevator and in the lunchroom trash cans on multiple occasions. (Id.) Plaintiff denied the accusations. (Id.) At the conclusion of the meeting, Kaye ordered Plaintiff to return his work badge and go home immediately on "administrative [*7]  paid leave" until contacted. (Id.)
On June 20, 2008, Plaintiff received a call from Human Resources to come into the office. (FAC ¶ 32.) Kaye, Villarreal, and Stephens were present to meet with Plaintiff. (Id.) Plaintiff alleges that he again requested union representation, but defendants refused. (Id.) Kaye, Villarreal, and Stephens informed Plaintiff that they were terminating him because of his spitting in the elevator and in lunchroom trash cans. (Id.) Plaintiff further alleges that defendants prevented him from attempting to contact the shop steward on the ground that he was no longer an employee. (Id.) Security was then contacted to escort Plaintiff out of the building. (Id.)
On June 15, 2009, Plaintiff filed charges with the State of California, Department of Fair Employment and Housing. (FAC ¶ 13.) Subsequently, the Department of Fair Employment and Housing closed Plaintiff's case in order to allow Plaintiff to pursue his civil remedies under the Fair Employment Housing Act and issued Plaintiff right to sue letters. (FAC ¶ 14.)
Subsequently, Plaintiff filed two grievances with his union, alleging wrongful termination and other violations. (FAC ¶ 33.) On June 26, 2008, Kaye sent [*8]  Plaintiff's union representative a letter indicating that defendants had terminated Plaintiff based on his disciplinary status and misconduct. (FAC ¶ 34.)

C. Discussion

1. Legal Standard
On a motion to dismiss brought pursuant to Rule 12(b)(6), a court must accept as true all factual allegations pleaded in the complaint, and construe those facts and draw all reasonable inferences therefrom "in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party." Cahill v. Liberty Mut. Ins. Co., 80 F.3d 336, 337-38 (9th Cir. 1996); see also Stoner v. Santa Clara County Office of Educ., 502 F.3d 1116, 1120-21 (9th Cir. 2007). A court may dismiss a complaint under Rule 12(b)(6) only if it appears beyond doubt that the alleged facts, even if true, will not entitle the plaintiff to relief on the theories asserted. See Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 560-61, 127 S. Ct. 1955, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929 (2007); Stoner, 502 F.3d at 1120-21; see also Cahill, 80 F.3d at 338.
While a complaint need not contain detailed factual allegations, "a plaintiff's obligation to provide the grounds of his entitlement to relief requires more than labels and conclusions, and a formulaic recitation of the elements of a cause of action will not do." Twombly, 550 U.S. at 555 (citation, alteration, and internal quotation marks omitted). Likewise, the court is not "required to accept as true allegations that are merely conclusory, unwarranted deductions of fact, or unreasonable inferences." Sprewell v. Golden State Warriors, 266 F.3d 979, 988 (9th Cir. 2001). In other words, "the tenet that a court must accept as true all of the allegations [*9]  contained in a complaint is inapplicable to legal conclusions. . . . While legal conclusions can provide the framework of a complaint, they must be supported by factual allegations." Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 129 S. Ct. 1937, 1949-50, 173 L. Ed. 2d 868 (2009) (citing Twombly, 550 U.S. at 555); see also Warren v. Fox Family Worldwide, Inc., 328 F.3d 1136, 1139 (9th Cir. 2003). Moreover, the Supreme Court recently clarified in Ashcroft that "only a complaint that states a plausible claim for relief survives a motion to dismiss. . . . [W]here the well-pleaded facts do not permit the court to infer more than the mere possibility of misconduct, the complaint has alleged—but it has not 'shown'—that the pleader is entitled to relief." 129 S. Ct. at 1950.

2. Application

a. Age Discrimination
Plaintiff alleges that Defendants discriminated against Plaintiff on the basis of age in violation of FEHA. (FAC ¶ 37.) To establish a claim for age discrimination in violation of FEHA, Plaintiff must prove (1) he was a member of a protected class (age 40-70); (2) he was performing competently in the position he held; (3) he suffered an adverse employment action such as termination; and (4) some other circumstance suggests discriminatory motive such as being replaced by a substantially younger employee with equal or inferior qualifications. Guz v. Bechtel Nat. Inc., 24 Cal. 4th 317, 100 Cal. Rptr. 2d 352, 8 P.3d 1089, 1113 (Cal. 2000); see also Nidds v. Schindler Elevator Corp., 113 F.3d 912, 917 (9th Cir. 1996). With regard to the fourth element, the [*10]  Ninth Circuit has held that "the failure to prove replacement by a younger employee is not necessarily fatal to an age discrimination claim where the discharge results from a general reduction in the work force due to business conditions." Rose v. Wells Fargo & Co., 902 F.2d 1417, 1421 (9th Cir. 1990.) Rather, only evidence that the discharge occurred under circumstances giving rise to an inference of age discrimination is required. Id. This inference "can be established by showing the employer had a continuing need for his skills and services in that his various duties were still being performed, Wallis v. J.R. Simplot Co., 26 F.3d 885, 891 (9th Cir. 1994), or by showing that others not in the protected class were treated more favorably. Washington v. Garrett, 10 F.3d 1421, 1434 (9th Cir. 1994.)
As a fifty-nine year old, Plaintiff was undeniably a member of a protected class at the time of his termination, and alleged that he was competently performing his job duties. (Compl. ¶¶ 37-38.) However, Plaintiff has not alleged any facts that indicate he was replaced by someone, or that the age of the replacement was younger than he was at the time of his termination. While that is not necessarily required, as indicated above, he has not alleged other facts to establish either directly or through reasonable inference a discriminatory [*11]  animus for his termination. Moreover, Plaintiff's opposition to Defendants' motion to dismiss this claim omits any discussion of the age discrimination claim. Having failed to plead facts that would create an inference of discriminatory animus or to show that others outside the protected class were treated more favorably, Plaintiff fails to state a claim for age discrimination. Defendants' Motion to Dismiss Plaintiff's first cause of action for age discrimination is therefore GRANTED WITH LEAVE TO AMEND.

b. Harassment Based on Age
Plaintiff argues that Defendants engaged in conduct designed to harass and intimidate Plaintiff based on age. (FAC ¶ 46.) To state a FEHA claim for harassment based on age, Plaintiff must show: (1) he was subjected to verbal or physical conduct because of his age; (2) the conduct was unwelcome; and (3) the conduct was sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of employment and create an abusive working environment. Juell v. Forest Pharm., Inc., 456 F. Supp. 2d 1141, 1157 (E.D. Cal. 2006) (citing Manatt v. Bank of America, NA, 339 F.3d 792, 798 (9th Cir. 2003).
The statute of limitations under FEHA is one year from the date upon which the alleged unlawful practice or prohibited conduct occurred. Cal. Gov't Code § 12960(d). Here, Plaintiff filed charges with FEHA on June 15, 2009. Thus, any claims of harassment [*12]  based on age before June 15, 2008 are barred. Because Plaintiff was sent home from work on administrative paid leave on June 13, 2008 and then terminated on June 20, 2008, Plaintiff was not present at work to suffer any harassment at work with respect to his age within the one-year statutory period. The most recent incident of harassment based on age was Plaintiff's encounter with Defendant Aguno in December 2007 when Aguno allegedly directed age-based insults at Plaintiff. Thus, because Plaintiff's alleged incidents of harassment fall outside the statutory period and Plaintiff has not alleged any incidents within the statutory period, Plaintiff's claim for age harassment is barred. Plaintiff has also failed to include any argument based on this claim in his opposition. Defendants' Motion to Dismiss Plaintiff's second cause of action is GRANTED WITHOUT LEAVE TO AMEND.

c. Disability Discrimination
Plaintiff alleges that Defendants engaged in unlawful employment practices in violation of FEHA by terminating Plaintiff from his position on the basis of his disability. In order to state a claim for disability discrimination under FEHA, a plaintiff must allege facts that show: (1) he has a [*13]  disability; (2) the employer took an adverse employment action against him; and (3) the adverse employment action was taken because of his disability. Deschene v. Pinole Point Steel Co., 76 Cal. App. 4th 33, 90 Cal. Rptr. 2d 15 (Ct. App. 1999).
California law contains broad definitions of physical disability and medical conditions. The intent of the legislature was to protect employees from "discrimination due to an actual or perceived physical or mental impairment that is disabling, potentially disabling, or perceived as disabling or potentially disabling." Cal. Gov't Code § 12926.1(b). The definition of physical disability requires a "limitation" upon a major life activity; "working" is a major life activity. Cal. Gov't Code § 12926.1(c). To proceed as a physically disabled person under the statutory definition, a plaintiff must demonstrate that his injury or physical condition makes "difficult" the achievement of work or some other life activity. Gelfo v. Lockheed Martin Corp., 140 Cal. App. 4th 34, 43 Cal. Rptr. 3d 874, 884 (Ct. App. 2006). Here, Plaintiff has alleged a number of facts indicating that he suffered from a physical condition that made the achievement of work difficult. In May 2007, Plaintiff was hospitalized because of liver-related complications and was required to take a leave of absence. He returned to work, but was again re-admitted to the hospital soon after. Plaintiff also provided Defendants with [*14]  a doctor's note. In May 2008, Plaintiff became so ill at work that he was again hospitalized for one week. The doctor then ordered Plaintiff to stay at home for an additional three weeks due to complications related to his gall bladder. During this period, Plaintiff allegedly checked in with Defendants every day during the three weeks to maintain his sick leave status. Thereafter, in June 2008, Plaintiff informed Defendant Johnson that his current medications would occasionally require him to leave the work floor without advance notice because Plaintiff may feel the need to vomit, which was a side effect of the required medications. All these facts show that Plaintiff's physical condition constituted a limitation on his ability to work, meeting the first prong regarding the existence of a disability.
Plaintiff has also established that Defendants took an adverse employment action against him by terminating him. With regard to whether the termination was due to Plaintiff's disability, Plaintiff specifically alleged that Defendant terminated Plaintiff because he spit in the elevator, even though he had previously advised that one of the side effects of the medications would include sudden [*15]  and unanticipated nausea and vomiting. Plaintiff has alleged sufficient facts indicating that Defendants terminated Plaintiff based on conduct related to his alleged disability. Therefore, at this stage, the Court recognizes that Plaintiff has alleged sufficient facts to state a claim for disability discrimination in violation of FEHA. Defendant's Motion to Dismiss Plaintiff's third cause of action is DENIED.

d. Failure to Accommodate
Plaintiff seeks to show that Defendants knew of Plaintiff's medical condition but refused to accommodate his disability. (Compl. ¶ 66.) It is an unlawful practice for an employer to fail to make reasonable accommodation for the known physical or mental disability of an employee. Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(m). To establish a prima facie case of failure to accommodate, a plaintiff must allege facts that show that the employer failed to accommodate the plaintiff's known disability. Avila v. Continental Airlines, Inc., 165 Cal. App. 4th 1237, 82 Cal. Rptr. 3d 440, 453 (Ct. App. 2008). The employee bears the burden of giving the employer notice of his disability. Id. Although no particular form of request is required, Prilliman v. United Air Lines, Inc., 53 Cal. App. 4th 935, 62 Cal. Rptr. 2d 142, 152 (Ct. App. 1997), the duty of an employer to reasonably accommodate an employee's handicap does not arise until the employer is "aware of respondent's disability and physical limitations." [*16]  Id. at 149 (internal citation omitted). The employee cannot expect the employer to "read his mind and know he secretly wanted a particular accommodation and sue the employer for not providing it." Id. at 152. An employer is not liable for failing to accommodate a disability of which it had no knowledge. Id. "It is an employee's responsibility to understand his or her own physical or mental condition well enough to present the employer at the earliest opportunity with a concise list of restrictions which must be met to accommodate the employee." King v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 152 Cal. App. 4th 426, 60 Cal. Rptr. 3d 359, 374 (Ct. App. 2007) (quoting Jensen v. Wells Fargo Bank, 85 Cal. App. 4th 245, 102 Cal. Rptr. 2d 55 (Ct. App. 2000)). Plaintiff must tender a specific request for a necessary accommodation. Id.
Plaintiff has provided numerous facts indicating that Defendants were on notice of his medical condition. In May 2007, Plaintiff was required to take two leaves of absence for liver-related complications. When Plaintiff returned to work, he provided Defendants with a doctor's note, indicating that they were at least aware that Plaintiff had medical issues. In May 2008, after Plaintiff was hospitalized for one week, Plaintiff was ordered by his doctor to stay at home for an additional three weeks due to complications related to his gall bladder. Plaintiff alleges that during the [*17]  three-week period of his absence, he checked in with Defendants every day regarding his need to maintain sick leave status. Furthermore, in June 2008, Plaintiff informed Defendant Johnson that his medications would occasionally require him to leave the work floor without advance notice because Plaintiff may feel the need to vomit, which was a side effect of the required medications. Therefore, it is clear that Plaintiff put Defendants on some notice regarding his medical condition.
Defendants argue that Plaintiff's claim for failure to accommodate falls outside the one-year statute of limitations under FEHA. It is clear that Plaintiff has only a narrow window to assert a failure to accommodate claim. Plaintiff was sent home on administrative leave on June 13, 2008 and was terminated on June 20, 2008. Moreover, because Plaintiff filed his initial complaint on June 15, 2009, FEHA claims can only be asserted for the time period between June 15, 2008 (the start of the one-year statutory period) and June 20, 2008 (the date of his termination).1 Here, Plaintiff has not alleged sufficient facts that Defendants failed to accommodate his disability during this five-day period. Even if the Court [*18]  finds that Plaintiff requested a reasonable accommodation when he asked Defendant Johnson for permission to leave the work floor unannounced at times when he felt the need to vomit, this incident of refusal to accommodate falls outside the one-year statutory period. As Plaintiff has not shown that Defendants failed to accommodate his disability within the one-year limitations period, Plaintiff's claim is GRANTED WITH LEAVE TO AMEND.

e. Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process
California Government Code § 12940(n) provides that it is an unlawful practice for an employer to fail to engage in a timely, good faith, interactive process with the employee to determine reasonable accommodations, if any, in response to a request for reasonable accommodation with a known physical or mental disability or known medical condition. Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(n). Defendants argue that Plaintiff has failed to allege sufficient facts showing that Plaintiff (1) did not put Defendant American Red Cross on notice of his disability and (2) failed to make a request for reasonable accommodation for a known physical disability or medical condition.
As previously discussed, the Court finds that Plaintiff has provided sufficient facts indicating that Defendants [*19]  were on notice of his medical condition. However, the analysis to determine whether Defendants' failed to engage in the interactive process is similar to the discussion regarding Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim. Here, Plaintiff has not alleged facts indicating that Defendants refused to engage in the interactive process at any time, let alone the one year period prior to the filing of the action. While it is true that Plaintiff alleges that he requested a reasonable accommodation when he asked Defendant Johnson for permission to leave the work floor unannounced at times when he felt the need to vomit, he does not allege that his request was denied. Moreover, even if it were denied, the request and denial occurred outside the one year limitations period, and cannot be properly asserted. Plaintiff must show that Defendants failed to engage in the interactive process through specific conduct at some point within the statute of limitations period beginning on June 15, 2008. Because Plaintiff has not alleged facts indicating that this is the case, Defendants' Motion to Dismiss Plaintiff's claim for failure to engage in the interactive process is GRANTED WITH LEAVE TO AMEND.

f. Harassment [*20]  Based on Disability
Plaintiff alleges that Defendants' conduct subjected him to a hostile work environment based on his disability. (Compl. ¶ 79.) To state a FEHA claim for harassment based on disability, Plaintiff must show: (1) she was subjected to verbal or physical conduct because of her age; (2) the conduct was unwelcome; and (3) the conduct was sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of employment and create an abusive working environment. Juell v. Forest Pharm., Inc., 456 F. Supp. 2d 1141, 1157 (E.D. Cal. 2006) (citing Manatt v. Bank of America, NA, 339 F.3d 792, 798 (9th Cir. 2003).
The statute of limitations under FEHA is one year from the date upon which the alleged unlawful practice or refusal to cooperate occurred. Cal. Gov't Code § 12960(d). Here, Plaintiff filed charges with FEHA on June 15, 2009. Thus, any allegations of harassment based on disability before June 15, 2008 are barred. Because Plaintiff was sent home on June 13, 2008 from work on administrative paid leave and then terminated on June 20, 2008, Plaintiff was not present at work to suffer any harassment at work with respect to his disability within the one-year statutory period. Furthermore, Plaintiff has not alleged any facts that indicate he was subjected to harassment based on his disability within the one-year statutory period. In addition, any of [*21]  Plaintiff's claims of harassment outside the one-year statutory period are barred. Defendants' Motion to Dismiss Plaintiff's sixth cause of action is GRANTED WITHOUT LEAVE TO AMEND.

g. Failure to Prevent Discrimination
Plaintiff alleges that Defendants violated FEHA by failing to take immediate and appropriate corrective action to end the discrimination and harassment that Plaintiff suffered. (Compl. ¶ 102; Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(j)-(k).) However, a plaintiff may not assert a claim for a failure to prevent discrimination or harassment where, as a preliminary matter, a claim for discrimination or harassment has not been established. Trujillo v. North County Transit Dist., 63 Cal. App. 4th 280, 73 Cal. Rptr. 2d 596, 601-02 (Ct. App. 1998).
Here, a claim for harassment has not been established because all of the alleged harassment occurred prior to the one-year statutory limitations period. Furthermore, during the short period of time within the statutory period that Plaintiff was still employed by Defendant American Red Cross, Plaintiff was at home on administrative leave. Defendants could not have failed to prevent discrimination or harassment during the time Plaintiff was on administrative leave because it was impossible for Plaintiff to be subjected to harassment or discrimination while he was not at work. Therefore, [*22]  Plaintiff has not established a claim for failure to prevent discrimination within the statutory period. Thus, Defendants' Motion to Dismiss Plaintiff's eighth cause of action is GRANTED WITHOUT LEAVE TO AMEND.

h. Defamation
Plaintiff argues that Defendants have made false and defamatory statements that Plaintiff engaged in misconduct and was an unsatisfactory employee (Compl. ¶ 109.) To assert a claim for defamation, Plaintiff must show: (1) a publication that is (2) false, (3) unprivileged, and (4) tends directly to injure a person in respect to his office or profession by imputing to him general disqualification in those respects which the office or other occupation peculiarly requires. Cal. Civ. Code §§ 44, 46. A publication of a defamatory statement occurs when a statement is communicated to any person other than the defamed party. Kelly v. Gen. Tel. Co., 136 Cal. App. 3d 278, 186 Cal. Rptr. 184, 186 (Ct. App. 1982). Furthermore, an essential element of defamation is that the publication be of a false statement of fact rather than opinion. Eisenberg v. Alameda Newspapers, Inc., 74 Cal. App. 4th 1359, 88 Cal. Rptr. 2d 802, 821 (Ct. App. 1999). "The issue of whether a communication was a statement of fact or of opinion is a question of law to be decided by the court." Id.
The California Civil Code recognizes a privilege where the communicator and the recipient share a common interest and [*23]  the communication is of a kind reasonably calculated to protect or further that interest. Cal. Civ. Code § 47; Deaile v. Gen Tel. Co. of California, 40 Cal. App. 3d 841, 115 Cal. Rptr. 582, 585 (Ct. App. 1974). Because an employer and its employees have a common interest in protecting the workplace from abuse, an employer's statements to employees regarding the reasons for termination of another employee are generally privileged. King v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 152 Cal. App. 4th 426, 60 Cal. Rptr. 3d 359 (Ct. App. 2007). However, the privilege may be lost if the defendant abuses the privilege by excessive publication or the inclusion of immaterial matters which have no bearing upon the interest sought to be protected, or if the uttered statements are actuated by malice. Dealie, 115 Cal. Rptr. at 585.
Plaintiff's Complaint contains conclusory allegations regarding Defendants' defamatory conduct. Plaintiff alleges that Defendants made "excessive unsolicited internal and external publications of defamation, of and concerning Plaintiff, to third persons." (Compl. ¶ 109.) Plaintiff further alleges that these statements included "express and implied accusations that Plaintiff engaged in misconduct and was an unsatisfactory employee." Id. Here, Plaintiff has not asserted any facts describing specific instances of Defendants' defamatory publications. Plaintiff makes general conclusions that Defendants have made false publications [*24]  that are injurious to his business or profession. Furthermore, Plaintiff has not asserted facts that overcome the privilege that employers enjoy in disclosing the reasons for an employee's termination. Plaintiff has alleged legal conclusions, but has not satisfied the burden of showing a plausible claim for relief. Therefore, Defendant's Motion to Dismiss Plaintiff's claim for defamation is GRANTED WITH LEAVE TO AMEND.

j. Wrongful Termination in Violation of FEHA
Defendants argue that Plaintiff's claim for wrongful termination in violation of FEHA should be dismissed because Plaintiff has also asserted a claim for wrongful termination in violation of public policy. Defendants rely on Stevenson v. Superior Court, 16 Cal. 4th 880, 66 Cal. Rptr. 2d 888, 941 P.2d 1157 (Cal. 1997), and City of Moorpark v. Superior Court. 18 Cal. 4th 1143, 77 Cal. Rptr. 2d 445, 959 P.2d 752 (Ct. App. 1998), for the proposition that a plaintiff cannot assert parallel claims for wrongful termination under both FEHA and state tort law. Defendants have misread the holdings of these two cases. In Stevenson, the California Supreme Court held that a plaintiff may bring a common law wrongful discharge claim in addition to a statutory FEHA claim for wrongful discharge. 941 P.2d at 1168. Specifically, the court reiterated its holding from Rojo v. Kliger, 801 P.2d 373 (Cal. 1990), that FEHA was not intended to displace state laws relating to employment discrimination. [*25]  Id. The holding of Stevenson indicated that a common law wrongful termination claim does not broaden the scope of prohibited conduct or expand the array of available remedies; it merely provides another legal theory on which employees may pursue remedies in addition to those already available to them under FEHA. Id. at 1174. Nowhere in the California Supreme Court's decision does it suggest that a claim for wrongful termination in violation of public policy displaces that statutory claim for wrongful termination under FEHA. Defendant's Motion to Dismiss as to this cause of action is DENIED.

k. Wrongful Termination in Violation of Public Policy
To establish a claim for wrongful termination in violation of public policy, a plaintiff must allege facts that show: (1) an employer-employee relationship; (2) the termination of plaintiff's employment was a violation of public policy; (3) the termination was a legal cause of plaintiff's damage; and (4) the nature and the extent of his damage. Holmes v. Gen. Dynamics Corp., 17 Cal. App. 4th 1418, 22 Cal. Rptr. 2d 172, 177 (Ct. App. 1993).
Here, FEHA has stated a clear public policy of preventing discrimination based on disability. Plaintiff has sufficiently alleged facts showing that Defendants terminated him because of conduct related to his alleged [*26]  disability or medical condition. Specifically, Plaintiff notes that Defendants terminated him because of his spitting in the elevator and in lunchroom trash cans. (Compl. ¶ 32.) Because Plaintiff alleges that his involuntary actions in the elevator were due to his medical condition or disability, Plaintiff has properly shown that the termination was a violation of public policy. Moreover, Plaintiff alleges in the Complaint that Defendants' actions resulted in Plaintiff's loss of salary and benefits. (Compl. ¶ 132.) Thus, Defendants' alleged conduct is the cause of Plaintiff's actual damage. Therefore, Plaintiff has stated a plausible claim for relief for wrongful termination in violation of public policy. Defendant's Motion to Dismiss Plaintiff's eleventh cause of action is DENIED.

D. Conclusion
For the foregoing reasons, Defendants' Motion to Dismiss is GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART. Specifically, Plaintiff's second, sixth, and eighth causes of action are DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE. Defendants' Motion to Dismiss as to Plaintiff's third, tenth, and eleventh causes of action is DENIED. Plaintiff is given leave to amend his first, fourth, fifth, and ninth causes of action. Plaintiff [*27]  may file an amended complaint by no later than November 23, 2009. Accordingly, the hearing previously scheduled for November 9, 2009 is hereby VACATED. Fed. R. Civ. P. 78; C.D. Cal. R. 7-15.
IT IS SO ORDERED.


End of Document

