McClelland v. Ruffing Montessori Sch.
United States District Court for the Northern District of Ohio, Eastern Division
December 15, 2015, Decided; December 15, 2015, Filed
CASE NO. 1:15 CV 1997

Reporter
2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 186103 *
REBEKAH MCCLELLAND, et al., Plaintiffs, vs. RUFFING MONTESSORI SCHOOL, et al., Defendants.
Counsel:  [*1] For Rebekah McClelland, Individually and as next friend of other, M. D., IV, Plaintiff: Michael C. Asseff, Westlake, OH; Scott J. Orille, Kahn Kruse, Cleveland, OH.
For Ruffing Montessori School, John McNamara, individually and in his official capacity as Administrator of Ruffing Montessori School, Lori Coticchia, individually and in her official capacity as Administrator of Ruffing Montessori School, Defendants: Christina Henagen Peer, Darrell A. Clay, James M. McWeeney, II, Kathryn I. Perrico, Walter & Haverfield, Cleveland, OH; Gregory V. Mersol, Baker & Hostetler - Cleveland, Cleveland, OH.
For United States of America, Intervenor: Michelle L. Heyer, Office of the U.S. Attorney - Cleveland, Northern District of Ohio, Cleveland, OH.
Judges: Dan Aaron Polster, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Dan Aaron Polster
Opinion



ORDER
On September 25, 2015, Plaintiff Rebekah McClelland, individually and as next friend of Manuel Dejesus IV, a minor, filed a Complaint against his former school, Ruffing Montessori, and administrators John McNamara and Lori Coticchia. (Doc #: 1) The Complaint alleged that Manuel attended first grade at Ruffing Montessori School during the 2011-2012 school year. During this year that Manuel [*2]  was diagnosed with Asperger's Syndrome. The School made some reasonable accommodations for Manuel over the next few years that allowed him to blossom. Prior to school year 2016-2017, however, Defendants informed McClelland that Manuel could no longer attend the School. This prompted McClelland to filed a Complaint alleging various federal and state claims against the aforementioned School and administrators: a violation of Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12181(7)(J), a violation of constitutional rights under 42 U.S.C. §§ 1981 and 1983, a violation of O.R.C. 4112.02(G), and intentional infliction of emotional distress. Five days later, Plaintiffs, of right, filed a First Amended Complaint that contained the same claims. (Doc #: 4.)
On November 20, 2015, Defendants filed a Motion to Dismiss First Amended Complaint, asking the Court to dismiss all but the state discrimination claim on the merits, and recommending that the Court decline to exercise supplemental jurisdiction over the state discrimination claim. (Doc #: 9.)
On December 4, 2015, Plaintiffs filed a Second Amended Complaint that appears to be a modest effort to respond to arguments raised in the Motion to Dismiss First Amended Complaint. (Doc #: 10.) [*3]  The Second Amended Complaint alleges claims for "Declaratory Judgment under the ADA" and "Injunctive Relief and Appointment of Monitor"—along with state discrimination and emotional distress claims. (Id.)
On December 14, 2015, Defendants filed a Joint Motion to Strike the Second Amended Complaint. (Doc #: 11.) Therein, Defendants ask the Court to strike the Second Amended Complaint because it was filed without leave of Court or Defendants' consent, ignoring the procedures set forth under Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(f) and Local Civil Rule 7.1. (Id.) In the event the Court denies the Joint Motion, Defendants ask the Court to grant them leave to move, answer, plead, or otherwise respond to the Second Amended Complaint within thirty (30) days after the date on which the Court rules on this motion. (Id. at 2.)
As the Second Amended Complaint appears to be a response, however tenuous, to the Motion to Dismiss First Amended Complaint, the Court would have granted leave if Plaintiffs had requested it. Because the Second Amended Complaint contains arguably new claims, the Court denies as moot the Motion to Dismiss First Amended Complaint. (Doc #: 9.) The Court notes, however, that Plaintiffs' attempt to file any future amended complaints with new claims [*4]  will be denied. As such, the Court denies Defendants' Joint Motion to Strike the Second Amended Complaint. (Doc #: 11.)
Defendants are hereby directed to move, answer, plead, or otherwise respond to Plaintiffs' Second Amended Complaint no later than January 13, 2016.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
/s/ Dan A. Polster December 15, 2015
Dan Aaron Polster
United States District Judge


End of Document

