McClure v. Amtrak
United States District Court for the Central District of California
June 10, 2021, Decided; June 10, 2021, Filed
CV 19-7699-MWF (JPRx)

Reporter
2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 193432 *; 2021 WL 4395812
Jay McClure v. National Railroad Passenger Corporation
Counsel:  [*1] For Jay McClure, an individual, Plaintiff: Matthew Ellsworth Roston, LEAD ATTORNEY, Roston Law Group, Beverly Hills, CA; Schuyler Brooke Sorosky, Roston Law Group APC, Beverly Hills, CA.
For National Railroad Passenger Corporation, a District of Columbia Corporation, doing business as Amtrak, Defendant: Sevag M Shirvanian, LEAD ATTORNEY, Littler Mendelson, P.C., Los Angeles, CA; Brandie N Charles, Littler Mendelson PC, Los Angeles, CA.
Judges: MICHAEL W. FITZGERALD, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: MICHAEL W. FITZGERALD
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES—GENERAL

Proceedings (In Chambers): ORDER RE: PLAINTIFF'S MOTION FOR PARTIAL SUMMARY JUDGMENT [28]; DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT [30]
Before the Court are two motions:
The first is Plaintiff Jay McClure's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment (the "P MSJ"), filed on May 10, 2021. (Docket No. 28). Defendant National Railroad Passenger Corporation d/b/a Amtrak ("Amtrak") filed an opposition (the "P MSJ Opp.") on May 17, 2021. (Docket No. 40). Plaintiff filed a reply (the "P MSJ Reply") on May 24, 2021. (Docket No. 45).
The second is Amtrak's Motion for Summary Judgment (the "D MSJ"), filed on May 10, 2021. (Docket No. 30). Plaintiff filed an opposition (the "D MSJ Opp.") [*2]  on May 17, 2021. (Docket No. 37). Amtrak filed a reply (the "D MSJ Reply") on May 24, 2021. (Docket No. 44).
The Court has read and considered the papers filed in connection with the Motions and held a telephonic hearing on June 7, 2021, pursuant to the General Order 21-07 arising from the COVID-19 pandemic.
For the reasons that follow, Amtrak's Motion is GRANTED with respect to Plaintiff's failure to accommodate, failure to engage in the interactive process, and punitive damages claims. Plaintiff fails to point to a scintilla of evidence supporting these three claims. Amtrak's Motion is DENIED with respect to Plaintiff's disability discrimination claim because triable issues exist, and a reasonable jury could find in Plaintiff's favor on this claim.
For the same reasons, Plaintiff's Motion is DENIED with respect to Plaintiff's failure to accommodate and failure to engage in the interactive process claims and DENIED in part with respect to his disability discrimination claim. Plaintiff's Motion is GRANTED with respect to the fact that Plaintiff was suffering from a disability at the time of the Violation. Amtrak has pointed to no evidence to dispute this fact.

I. BACKGROUND
The following [*3]  facts are undisputed unless otherwise noted.

A. Plaintiff's Employment at Amtrak
Plaintiff began working as a locomotive engineer in 1998. (Defendant's Statement of Genuine Disputes ("DSGD") ¶ 1 (Docket No. 42)). Plaintiff worked for Amtrak as an off-corridor engineer from 2002 and 2005 and as a locomotive engineer from 2010 and 2016. (Id.; Plaintiff's Statement of Genuine Disputes ("PSGD") ¶¶ 5-6 (Docket No. 38)). Between 2005 and 2010, Plaintiff was employed as a locomotive engineer for a different company. (Id.).
During his employment with Amtrak, Plaintiff committed signal violations on three separate occasions while operating a locomotive. (DSGD ¶¶ 3, 5, 16).
The first violation occurred on or about August 15, 2012, when Plaintiff ran a locomotive past a stop signal in violation of Amtrak's Operating Rules. (PSGD ¶¶ 13-14). Following the first violation, Plaintiff waived his right to a hearing and accepted a thirty-day suspension with fifteen days deferred. (DSGD ¶ 4). Plaintiff also underwent remedial instruction before he returned to work. (Id.).
The second violation occurred on or about October 15, 2012, when Plaintiff failed to stop at a red stop signal without authorization. ( [*4] Id. ¶ 4). Plaintiff waived his right to a hearing and accepted a six-month suspension. (Id. ¶ 7). Plaintiff also underwent remedial instruction before he returned to work. (Id.).
On October 27, 2015, approximately three years after the second violation and one month before the third violation, Plaintiff was operating a train when he saw a teenage boy in the distance lie down on the railroad tracks. (Id. ¶ 10). Plaintiff was unable to stop the train, which struck and killed the boy (the "Incident"). (Id.). After the train struck the boy and the train stopped, observers yelled angrily at Plaintiff that Plaintiff had killed the boy. (Id.). The boy's death was later confirmed as a suicide. (Id.). The Incident was the first time in Plaintiff's career that he had witnessed a fatality. (Id.).
For engineers involved in fatality incidents, Amtrak maintains a Critical Assistance and Response Program ("CARE") as part of its Employee Assistance Program ("EAP"). (PSGD ¶ 32). The day after the Incident, in accordance with the CARE Program, Plaintiff spoke over the phone with Miles Murdaugh from the Amtrak EAP. (DSGD ¶ 12). During this conversation, Murdaugh asked Plaintiff how he was feeling, to which [*5]  Plaintiff replied he did not know what he was supposed to be feeling. (Id.). Murdaugh advised Plaintiff to avoid alcohol, eat a lot of fruits and vegetables, and drink a lot of water, but did not offer to refer Plaintiff to a medical professional. (Id.). Murdaugh did not follow up with Plaintiff after this call, even though Murdaugh told Plaintiff that he would. (Id.). Plaintiff returned to work after getting three days off (pursuant to the CARE Program), but was not seen by a mental health professional for clearance to return to work. (Id. ¶ 13).
Plaintiff points to evidence showing that, following Plaintiff's return to work, Plaintiff frequently thought about the Incident at work and at home, and became anxious and depressed, believing that he was responsible for the boy's death. (Id. ¶ 14). Plaintiff became withdrawn, lost his appetite, lost weight, and had difficulties concentrating and sleeping. (Id.).
Amtrak produces evidence that Plaintiff never called out sick or asked for time off work after the Incident because of depression or anxiety arising from the Incident. (PSGD ¶¶ 48-50). Amtrak also points to evidence showing that Plaintiff underwent his annual physical exam only a [*6]  few days after the Incident and did not indicate to the examiner or other staff that he was unable to work and unwell. (Id. ¶¶ 38-41). Plaintiff does not dispute these facts, but responds that the annual exam was routine, physical in nature, and had nothing to do with the Incident or being cleared to return to work. (Id.).
On November 28, 2015, at approximately 6:30 a.m., Plaintiff committed his third signal violation (the "Violation"). (DSDG ¶ 16). Plaintiff stopped the train at a stop signal waiting for the signal to change in order to move the locomotive forward. (Id.). Plaintiff was familiar with this signal, having stopped at the signal approximately fifty to one hundred times without any problems during his career. (Id.). Before the stop signal changed, Plaintiff looked at a different signal and mistakenly believed that it was the signal allowing him to move the locomotive forward. (Id. ¶ 17). As a result, Plaintiff started to move the train forward past the stop signal. (Id.). Plaintiff realized that he had seen the wrong signal, immediately stopped the train, and notified dispatch that he had made an error by calling out "emergency." (Id.). The train went through the red signal [*7]  by approximately one foot. (Id.). There were no trains near his vicinity and no damage or injuries occurred as a result of the Violation. (Id.).
That same day, after the Violation, Plaintiff did not mention to his supervisor Ryan Peterson that he was suffering from depression and anxiety, or that he needed a disability accommodation because of the Incident. (PSGD ¶¶ 58-59).

B. Plaintiff's Mental Health Diagnosis and Treatment
Plaintiff contends that two or three days after the Violation, he contacted Amtrak's EAP department to seek mental health treatment. (DSGD ¶ 19). According to Plaintiff, he spoke to an EAP representative over the phone (who he believes was Miles Murdaugh), and informed the representative that Plaintiff believed that he was experiencing psychological trauma as a result of the Incident. (Id.). When the EAP representative asked Plaintiff whether he had other stressors in his life, Plaintiff told him that he was also going through a divorce. (Id.). Amtrak disputes that Plaintiff ever informed Amtrak of any need for mental health accommodations. (Id.).
In early December 2015 up until late January 2016, Plaintiff began undergoing therapy sessions with Luis Resendez, a marriage [*8]  and family therapist, per EAP's referral. (Id. ¶ 21). McClure informed Resendez that he was having lingering thoughts about the Incident and that he could not sleep. (Id.). Resendez's mental health records reflect that Plaintiff was having lingering thoughts about the Incident, "fluctuating levels of energy and fatigue," and "difficult maintaining concentration and attention." (Id. ¶ 22). The records from Resendez suggest that McClure was suffering from "unspecified depressive disorder." (Id.).
On January 28, 2016, Plaintiff started undergoing psychotherapy sessions with psychologist Laura Hodge, Ph.D., who specializes in PTSD treatment. (Id. ¶ 23). On or about February 29, 2016, Dr. Hodge provided a letter to Plaintiff's union representative Chad Skinner, summarizing Plaintiff's mental health care and treatment due to anxiety and depression arising from the Incident. (Id. ¶ 26).

C. Amtrak's Response to the Violation
Following the Violation, Amtrak removed Plaintiff from service. (Id. ¶ 19). On December 1, 2015, after Plaintiff had contacted the EAP Department, Amtrak sent Plaintiff a letter that he was being charged with rules violations arising from the November 28, 2015 Violation, [*9]  that a disciplinary hearing would take place on December 5, 2015, and that his certification would be suspended pending the hearing taking place. (Id. ¶ 20). The hearing date was postponed at Plaintiff's request. (Id.).
On February 1, 2016, Amtrak assistant superintendent Danny O'Connell e-mailed Skinner to inquire about re-setting Plaintiff's disciplinary hearing. (Id. ¶ 24). Skinner responded on the same day stating that he had spoken with Amtrak superintendent Tim Cooper and that Plaintiff had been referred to a psychologist who believed that Plaintiff may have been suffering from PTSD as a result of the Incident. (Id.). Skinner indicated that he had asked Cooper to hold off on the hearing while Plaintiff received the psychological help he needed. (Id.). O'Connell responded the same day by copying Cooper to the e-mail chain and stating, "I agree. We all agree. We need to get Jay the help he needs." (Id.).
On or about March 16, 2016, Skinner sent a letter to Cooper explaining that Plaintiff may be suffering from PTSD because of the Incident, which may have impaired Plaintiff's ability to properly and safely perform his duties. (Id. ¶ 27). The letter also asserted that the CARE Program [*10]  failed to assess Plaintiff for symptoms of PTSD after the Incident before allowing him to return to work. (Id.). Skinner also enclosed Dr. Hodge's February 29, 2016 letter and requested that the parties meet to discuss disposition of the disciplinary charges against Plaintiff "through informal handling." (Id.).
According to Plaintiff, he was never contacted by anyone at Amtrak regarding Skinner's March 16, 2016 email. (Id. ¶ 31). Amtrak disputes this assertion and points to Cooper's deposition testimony in which Cooper testified that he did not remember whether Amtrak responded to Skinner's March 16, 2016 email. (Id.).
On May 4, 2016, Plaintiff attended his disciplinary hearing with Skinner as his union representative. (Id. ¶ 32). The purpose of the hearing was to decide whether Plaintiff's license should be decertified pursuant to the operative federal regulations. (Id. ¶ 33). At the hearing, despite acknowledging the relevance of any mitigating factors present during the Violation, the hearing officer refused to admit as an exhibit Dr. Hodge's letter confirming that Plaintiff was receiving psychological treatment for depression and anxiety arising from the Incident, and was suffering [*11]  from symptoms like difficulty concentrating. (Id. ¶ 38).
On May 9, 2016, the hearing officer issued a decision finding that Plaintiff had committed rule violations by operating a train past the stop signal without authority and concluding that decertification of Plaintiff's license was warranted. (Id. ¶ 39). The hearing officer rejected Plaintiff's defense that the Incident was a mitigating factor, reasoning that (1) since Skinner had argued that the signal was poorly placed, it appeared that the Violation was the result of Plaintiff reading and acting upon the wrong signal, and (2) prior to the Violation, Plaintiff had operated the route at the location of the Incident on several occasions after the Incident. (Id.). In reaching the decision, the hearing officer did not consult with any medical professionals or conduct any medical research. (Id. ¶ 40).
On May 12, 2016, Amtrak issued Plaintiff a letter signed by Tim Cooper stating that Plaintiff's locomotive engineer certification was revoked as outlined under 49 CFR § 240.117. (Id. ¶ 42). The letter also stated: "Based on the charges being proven in this case and the fact that your work history reflects (2) two other proven major rules violations, your [*12]  employment with Amtrak is terminated effective immediately." (Id.). Pursuant to 49 CFR § 240.117, Plaintiff's license was to be decertified for a one-month period. (Id. ¶ 45).

D. This Action
Plaintiff initiated this action in Los Angeles Superior Court on July 23, 2019. (Complaint (Docket No. 2-2)). Amtrak removed the action to this Court on September 5, 2019. (Notice of Removal ("NoR") (Docket No. 2)).
Plaintiff brings three claims against Amtrak: (1) discrimination in violation of the California Fair Employment and Housing Act ("FEHA"); (2) failure to accommodate disability in violation of FEHA; and (3) failure to engage in an interactive process in violation of FEHA. (See Complaint). Plaintiff also seeks punitive damages against Amtrak. (See id.).

II. EVIDENTIARY OBJECTIONS
The parties advance various objections to the evidence submitted in connection with the Motions. (Docket Nos. 39, 41, 43-2, 44-1). Many of these objections are garden variety evidentiary objections based on hearsay, vagueness, lack of foundation/authentication, best evidence, and relevance.
While these objections may be cognizable at trial, on a motion for summary judgment, the Court is concerned only with the admissibility of the relevant facts at trial, and not the form of these [*13]  facts as presented in the Motions.
"[A]t the summary judgment stage, we do not focus on the admissibility of the evidence's form. We instead focus on the admissibility of its contents." See Sandoval v. Cty. of San Diego, 985 F.3d 657, 666 (9th Cir. 2021) (citations omitted). Where "the contents of a document can be presented in a form that would be admissible at trial — for example, through live testimony by the author of the document — the mere fact that the document itself might be excludable hearsay provides no basis for refusing to consider it on summary judgment." Id. (citations omitted); see also Fraser v. Goodale, 342 F.3d 1032, 1036-37 (9th Cir. 2003) (holding that the plaintiff's diary could be considered on summary judgment because she could testify consistent with its contents at trial); Hughes v. United States, 953 F.2d 531, 543 (9th Cir. 1992) (IRS litigation adviser's affidavit may be considered on summary judgment despite hearsay and best evidence rule objections; the facts underlying the affidavit are of the type that would be admissible as evidence even though the affidavit itself might not be admissible).
To the extent that the Court relies upon evidence to which the parties object, the objections are OVERRULED. To the extent the Court does not, the objections are DENIED as moot.

III. LEGAL STANDARD
In deciding a motion for summary judgment under [*14]  Rule 56, the Court applies Anderson, Celotex, and their Ninth Circuit progeny. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986); Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). "The court shall grant summary judgment if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a).
The Ninth Circuit has defined the shifting burden of proof governing motions for summary judgment where the non-moving party bears the burden of proof at trial:
The moving party initially bears the burden of proving the absence of a genuine issue of material fact. Where the non-moving party bears the burden of proof at trial, the moving party need only prove that there is an absence of evidence to support the non-moving party's case. Where the moving party meets that burden, the burden then shifts to the non-moving party to designate specific facts demonstrating the existence of genuine issues for trial. This burden is not a light one. The non-moving party must show more than the mere existence of a scintilla of evidence. The non-moving party must do more than show there is some "metaphysical doubt" as to the material facts at issue. In fact, the non-moving party must come forth with evidence from which a jury could reasonably render [*15]  a verdict in the non-moving party's favor.
Coomes v. Edmonds Sch. Dist. No. 15, 816 F.3d 1255, 1259 n.2 (9th Cir. 2016) (quoting In re Oracle Corp. Sec. Litig., 627 F.3d 376, 387 (9th Cir. 2010)). "A motion for summary judgment may not be defeated, however, by evidence that is 'merely colorable' or 'is not significantly probative.'" Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249-50.
"When the party moving for summary judgment would bear the burden of proof at trial, 'it must come forward with evidence which would entitle it to a directed verdict if the evidence went uncontroverted at trial.'" C.A.R. Transp. Brokerage Co. v. Darden Restaurants, Inc., 213 F.3d 474, 480 (9th Cir. 2000) (quoting Houghton v. South, 965 F.2d 1532, 1536 (9th Cir. 1992)).
"[W]hen parties submit cross-motions for summary judgment, each motion must be considered on its own merits." Fair Hous. Council of Riverside Cty., Inc. v. Riverside Two, 249 F.3d 1132, 1136 (9th Cir. 2001) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted) (holding that the district court erred in failing to consider evidence submitted on the plaintiffs' motion before ruling on the defendants' motions).

IV. AMTRAK'S MOTION
Amtrak moves for summary judgment on Plaintiff's claims for (1) disability discrimination, (2) failure to accommodate, (3) failure to engage in the interactive process, and (4) punitive damages. (D MSJ at 13-24).

1. Disability discrimination
FEHA prohibits discrimination based on disability. Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(a). The three-stage burden shifting test articulated in McDonnell Douglas v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973), applies to discrimination claims under FEHA. Means v. City & County of San Francisco, 749 F. Supp. 2d 998, 1004 (N.D. Cal. 2010) (applying McDonnell Douglas to FEHA claims); Guz v. Bechtel Nat'l Inc., 24 Cal. 4th 317, 354, 100 Cal. Rptr. 2d 352, 8 P.3d 1089 (2000) (same).
Under [*16]  the McDonnell Douglas burden shifting framework, a plaintiff must first establish a prima facie case of disability discrimination. Means, 749 F. Supp. 2d at 1004. "The prima facie burden is light; the evidence necessary to sustain the burden is minimal." Sandell v. Taylor-Listug, Inc., 188 Cal. App. 4th 297, 310, 115 Cal. Rptr. 3d 453 (2010). To establish a prima facie case of disability discrimination, the plaintiff must show that he: (1) suffered from a disability; (2) was otherwise qualified to perform the essential functions of the job with or without accommodation; and (3) was subjected to an adverse employment action because of his disability. King v. United Parcel Service, Inc., 152 Cal. App. 4th 426, 432, 60 Cal. Rptr. 3d 359 (2007).
If the plaintiff succeeds in establishing a prima facie case, the burden then shifts to the defendant to assert a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse employment action. Means, 749 F. Supp. 2d at 1004. Where the defendant carries its burden, the plaintiff must demonstrate that the stated reasons are merely a pretext for discrimination. Id. at 1005.
Amtrak attacks the second and third prongs of the prima facie case, asserting that Plaintiff cannot establish that he was a "qualified individual" or that he was terminated "because of" a disability. (D MSJ at 13-16).
Under FEHA, a "qualified individual" is defined as "an applicant or employee who has the requisite skill, experience, [*17]  education, and other job-related requirements of the employment position such individual holds or desires, and who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of such position." Cal. Code Regs. Tit. 2, § 11065(o); see also Green v. State of California, 42 Cal. 4th 254, 261, 64 Cal. Rptr. 3d 390, 165 P.3d 118 (2007).
Amtrak contends that Plaintiff's history of signal violations indicates that he was not able to meet the minimal reasonable safety requirements for a locomotive engineer. (D MSJ at 15-16). Plaintiff responds that Amtrak has the burden to prove that Plaintiff's disability posed a threat to others' safety, and Amtrak failed to produce even a scintilla of evidence suggesting that Plaintiff was unable to perform his job functions with accommodations. (D MSJ Opp. at 20-21) (citing Raytheon Co. v. Fair Emp. & Hous. Com., 212 Cal. App. 3d 1242, 1252, 261 Cal. Rptr. 197 (1989) (explaining that the employer has the burden of proving the defense that the employee's disability posed a threat to the health and safety of others)). Amtrak does not rebut Plaintiff's argument in its reply brief. (See D MSJ Reply at 13-17) (failing to address whether Plaintiff was a "qualified individual" under FEHA).
The Court agrees with Plaintiff that Amtrak has failed to show as a matter of law that no accommodations could have allowed Plaintiff to keep his job as a locomotive engineer [*18]  without threatening the safety of others, for example, by offering mental health treatment and giving Plaintiff leave to recover from his condition. See Lambert v. Nat'l R.R. Passenger Corp., CV 13-8316-DDP (MANx), 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 56998, 2015 WL 1967044, at *5 (C.D. Cal. Apr. 29, 2015) ("Because this is Amtrak's motion for summary judgment, Plaintiff need not prove conclusively that she could [perform the essential duties of her job with reasonable accommodations]. Rather, it is up to the employer to show that she could not." (citing Avila v. Cont'l Airlines, Inc., 165 Cal. App. 4th 1237, 1247, 82 Cal.Rptr.3d 440 (2008))).
Accordingly, Amtrak's Motion with respect to whether Plaintiff was a "qualified individual" under FEHA is DENIED.
With respect to the third prong, Amtrak argues that Plaintiff cannot prove that he was terminated "because of" a disability because there is no evidence that Amtrak knew about his disability before levying formal charges and initiating disciplinary proceedings against Plaintiff. (D MSJ at 16-17). Amtrak reiterated this point at the hearing. Amtrak asserted that because Plaintiff did not raise the issue of his disability until after the disciplinary process had already been initiated, Plaintiff cannot prove that Amtrak's decision to discipline him was motivated by discriminatory animus. In doing so, Amtrak compared this case to Alamillo v. BNSF Ry. Co., in which the Ninth [*19]  Circuit held that no reasonable jury could conclude that the employer intentionally discriminated against the employee because of a disability where the employer "did not know that [the plaintiff] was disabled when the decision to initiate disciplinary proceedings was made[.]" 869 F.3d 916, 922 (9th Cir. 2017).
The problem with Amtrak's argument is that Plaintiff puts forth evidence showing that, after the Violation but before Amtrak initiated formal disciplinary proceedings on December 1, 2015, Plaintiff contacted Amtrak's EAP Department and informed the EAP representative that Plaintiff believed that he was experiencing psychological trauma as a result of the Incident. (See DSGD ¶ 20).
In addition, disciplinary proceedings did not necessarily have to culminate in Plaintiff's termination, and there is no dispute that Amtrak was aware of Plaintiff's disability when it terminated Plaintiff on May 12, 2016. Plaintiff's union representative Skinner emailed Amtrak supervisors on February 1, 2016, explaining that Plaintiff had been suffering from PTSD as a result of the Incident and asking to postpone the hearing while Plaintiff received psychological treatment; Amtrak assistant superintendent O'Connell agreed to postpone [*20]  the hearing and stated, "We need to get Jay the help he needs." (DSGD ¶ 24). Skinner contacted Amtrak supervisors again on March 16, 2016, attaching Dr. Hodge's letter and requesting informal handling of the charges against Plaintiff due to his disability. (Id. ¶ 27). Finally, during the disciplinary hearing on May 4, 2016, Skinner attempted to introduce Dr. Hodge's letter into evidence and argued that it showed that the Violation was caused by Plaintiff's mental health disability. (Id. ¶¶ 32, 38). A reasonable jury could find that Amtrak's decision to terminate Plaintiff was "because of" his disability.
Accordingly, Amtrak's Motion with respect to whether Plaintiff was terminated "because of" a disability is DENIED.
As a result, the burden shifts to Amtrak to articulate a legitimate business reason for terminating Plaintiff. See Means, 749 F. Supp. 2d at 1004. Amtrak's burden is easily satisfied. It is undisputed that Plaintiff committed signal violations on three separate occasions while operating a locomotive. (DSGD ¶¶ 3, 5, 16).
Because Amtrak has articulated a legitimate business reason for terminating Plaintiff, the burden shifts to Plaintiff to "offer evidence that the employer's stated reason is either false [*21]  or pretextual, or evidence that the employer acted with discriminatory animus, or evidence of each which would permit a reasonable trier of fact to conclude the employer intentionally discriminated." Sandell, 188 Cal. App. 4th at 314 (citations omitted).
"In demonstrating that an employer's proffered nondiscriminatory reason is false or pretextual, an employee cannot simply show that the employer's decision was wrong or mistaken, since the factual dispute at issue is whether discriminatory animus motivated the employer, not whether the employer is wise, shrewd, prudent, or competent." Id. (citation and internal alterations omitted). "Rather, the employee must demonstrate such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, incoherencies, or contradictions in the employer's proffered legitimate reasons for its action that a reasonable fact finder could rationally find them 'unworthy of credence,' and hence infer that the employer did not act for the asserted nondiscriminatory reasons." Id. (citation and internal alterations omitted).
Plaintiff asserts that Amtrak cannot rely on the Violation as a legitimate reason for termination because "'conduct resulting from a disability is considered part of the disability, rather [*22]  than a separate basis for termination.'" (D MSJ Opp. at 25) (quoting Humphrey v. Memorial Hospitals Ass'n, 239 F.3d 1128, 1139-40 (9th Cir. 2001). In Humphrey, the Ninth Circuit held that plaintiff's ADA disability discrimination claim survived summary judgment because a reasonable jury could find a causal link between plaintiff's OCD disability and her attendance problem and conclude that the employer fired plaintiff because of her disability. Alamillo distinguished Humphrey, explaining that "no reasonable jury could find 'the requisite causal link' between Alamillo's [sleep apnea disability] and his attendance violations[,]" and in contrast, "[i]n Humphrey, the plaintiff's absenteeism was the direct result of her OCD." Alamillo, 869 F.3d at 921. The Ninth Circuit went on to explain that the evidence showed that "Alamillo's [disability] may have been a contributing factor to his attendance violations, but only due to his own non-[disability]-related carelessness and inattention." Id. at 922 (emphasis in original).
Here, a reasonable jury could find the "requisite causal link" between Plaintiff's mental health disability triggered by the Incident and the Violation that happened one month later.
Lambert is instructive. 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 56998, 2015 WL 1967044. Lambert was terminated by Amtrak from her position as a customer service [*23]  telephone operator after a hearing officer found that she had violated Amtrak policies on several different occasions by stepping away from her phone without authorization. 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 56998, [WL] at *3. Lambert brought a FEHA disability discrimination claim against Amtrak, alleging that her disability was the driving force behind her rule violations, and that Amtrak was aware of her disability and knew that her disability required her to take short, unscheduled breaks. Id. at *5.
In denying Amtrak's summary judgment motion, the Lambert court identified "several grounds" on which a jury could find that Amtrak's proffered reasons for termination were pretextual. 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 56998, [WL] at *8. One such ground was the fact that Lambert had a several-years-long employment history with Amtrak and had several prior disciplinary violations during that period that had not resulted in termination, which could convince a jury that "such offenses were not termination-worthy, and that the only thing that had changed in this situation was Plaintiff's disability." 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 56998, [WL] at *9. Another ground was "the fact that the hearing officer seemed entirely unwilling to accept Plaintiff's explanation for most of the alleged July violations," which would support a finding that [*24]  the hearing officer "was motivated by animus and determined to find that [the plaintiff] had violated the policy regardless of evidence to the contrary." Id.
The court concluded that the plaintiff created a triable issue because a rational jury crediting her evidence could "find that Amtrak fired [the plaintiff] both because she violated policy and because of discriminatory animus. 'In such cases, a plaintiff may prevail on a FEHA claim by proving that discrimination was a substantial factor motivating a particular employment decision, even if the decision was also based on non-discriminatory criteria.'" Id. (quoting McInteer v. Ashley Distribution Servs., Ltd., EDCV 13-268-JGB, 40 F. Supp. 3d 1269, 2014 WL 4105262 (C.D. Cal. Aug. 19, 2014)) (emphasis in original).
Similarly here, although Plaintiff had two prior signal violations, the fact that Plaintiff was not terminated for those violations could persuade a jury that "the only thing that had changed" between the second and third violations "was Plaintiff's disability." See id. at *9. Especially considering that the federal regulations did not impose a particularly harsh sanction on Plaintiff for committing the Violation — mandating decertification of Plaintiff's license for only a one-month period — a reasonable jury could determine that Amtrak was substantially [*25]  motivated by Plaintiff's disability in terminating Plaintiff's decade-long employment as an engineer. (See DSGD ¶ 45) (citing 49 CFR § 240.117).
In addition, the hearing officer expressly acknowledged that she was to consider mitigating factors when making the decertification determination; yet, the hearing officer thereafter refused to admit as an exhibit the letter from Dr. Hodge explaining how Plaintiff's mental health disability had been impacting his sleep, memory, and concentration — symptoms that could have caused or contributed to the Violation. (DSGD ¶ 38). A reasonable jury could deduce from the hearing officer's inexplicable refusal to consider potentially mitigating evidence that Amtrak was "motivated by animus" and "determined to find" that Plaintiff was wholly responsible for committing the Violation, "regardless of evidence to the contrary." See Lambert, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 56998, 2015 WL 1967044, at *9.
In sum, the Court determines that Plaintiff presents evidence sufficient to create a triable issue of material fact on the question of Amtrak's reason for terminating Plaintiff.
Accordingly, Amtrak's Motion with respect to FEHA disability discrimination is DENIED.

2. Failure to accommodate and engage in the interactive process
Under FEHA, an employer [*26]  must "make reasonable accommodation for the known physical or mental disability of an applicant or employee." Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(m). In addition, an employer must "engage in a timely, good faith, interactive process with the employee or applicant to determine effective reasonable accommodations" for her disability. Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(n).
Amtrak argues that Plaintiff never requested an accommodation, nor gave any signs that he needed an accommodation which would have triggered the interactive process to determine a reasonable accommodation. (D MSJ at 22). Amtrak also argues that, to the extent that Plaintiff intends to rely on Skinner's email requesting informal handling of the disciplinary charges against Plaintiff, Skinner's email does not amount to a request for a reasonable accommodation, but rather, an improper request to excuse his past misconduct because of a disability. (Id. at 23) (citing Alamillo, 869 F.3d at 922).
The Court agrees with Amtrak that Plaintiff cannot rely on Skinner's request to handle the disciplinary charges informally as the factual basis for his failure to accommodate and engage in the interactive process claims. "'Reasonable accommodation' does not include excusing a failure to control a controllable disability or giving [*27]  an employee a 'second chance' to control the disability in the future." Alamillo, 869 F.3d at 922 (affirming district court's order granting employer summary judgment on employee's failure to accommodate and failure to engage in the interactive process claims because the employer was not required to excuse employee's past misconduct even if it is the result of the individual's disability") (citing Wills v. Superior Court, 195 Cal. App. 4th 143, 166 n.4, 125 Cal. Rptr. 3d 1 (2011) (quotation marks omitted)). And "FEHA does not impose liability for failure to engage in the interactive process when no reasonable accommodation is possible." Id. at 923 (citation omitted). The Court also agrees with Amtrak that it did accommodate Plaintiff by postponing the disciplinary hearing for several months so that Plaintiff could seek mental health treatment. (See D MSJ at 23).
At the hearing, Plaintiff argued that what constitutes "past misconduct" as discussed in Alamillo is vague and therefore susceptible to two interpretations: (1) conduct in violation of an employer's policy that is caused by a disability; or (2) conduct that has already been determined to be in violation of an employer's policy. Plaintiff asserted that this second interpretation should prevail because, in Alamillo, the employee had already been [*28]  disciplined for being tardy when he claimed that his tardiness was caused by a disability. Plaintiff then contrasted Lambert, in which the district court determined that a "rational jury could find that Amtrak should have reasonably accommodated Plaintiff's disability in June 2012 by not holding her responsible for the alleged policy violations" because the disciplinary hearing occurred "long after Amtrak had whatever notice it had of Plaintiff's alleged disability." 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 56998 2015 WL 1967044, at *11.
The Court is unpersuaded that Plaintiff's interpretation of Alamillo is correct. Alamillo does not limit its reasoning to situations in which the employer has already made a conclusive finding of misconduct. To the contrary, Alamillo expressly states that employers are not required to give an employee a "second chance to control the disability in the future," suggesting that asking for forgiveness for conduct already committed — regardless of whether an official finding of misconduct already exists — is not a type of reasonable accommodation. See 869 F.3d at 922. The Court is also unconvinced that the Lambert court was aware of California law limiting reasonable accommodations under FEHA to prospective relief. Lambert does not make [*29]  the "past misconduct" distinction that Plaintiff propounds, nor does it cite Wills or any other California case explaining that employers are not required to excuse past rule violations even when they are caused by a disability. See Lambert, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 56998, 2015 WL 1967044, at *11.
Accordingly, Amtrak's Motion with respect to Plaintiff's failure to accommodate and failure to engage in the interactive process claims is GRANTED.

3. Punitive damages
To recover punitive damages, Plaintiff must demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that an officer, director, or managing agent of Amtrak acted with oppression, fraud, or malice, or ratified such conduct. Cal. Civ. Code § 3294(a)-(b).
Plaintiff's claim for punitive damages fails for two reasons. First, as Amtrak correctly points out, Plaintiff points to no evidence demonstrating that anyone at Amtrak acted with oppression, fraud, or malice with respect to Plaintiff's disability. (See D MSJ Reply at 24). Second, even if there were evidence showing that Knisley (Plaintiff's supervisor), O'Connell, Sanford (the hearing officer), or Cooper did act with oppression, fraud, or malice, Plaintiff offers no evidence showing that these employees are officers, directors, or managing agents of Amtrak. (See D MSJ Opp. at 29 (arguing [*30]  that Knisley O'Connell, Sanford and Cooper acted in conscious disregard of Plaintiff's rights)).
"Managing agent" refers "only those corporate employees who exercise substantial independent authority and judgment in their corporate decision making so that their decisions ultimately determine corporate policy." White v. Ultramar, Inc., 21 Cal. 4th 563, 566-567, 88 Cal. Rptr. 2d 19, 981 P.2d 944 (1999). "In order to demonstrate that an employee is a true managing agent under section 3294, subdivision (b), a plaintiff seeking punitive damages would have to show that the employee exercised substantial discretionary authority over significant aspects of a corporation's business." Id.
Because Plaintiff has failed to identify any managing agent that committed or ratified the conduct at issue, Plaintiff's punitive damages claim fails as a matter of law. See Cal. Civ. Code § 3294; White, 21 Cal. 4th at 577 (explaining that supervisory status, even with authority to hire and fire, is insufficient to qualify as a "managing agent"). At the hearing, Plaintiff submitted on the Court's tentative ruling that Plaintiff had not pointed to oppressive, fraudulent, or malicious conduct of any managing agent.
Accordingly, Amtrak's Motion with respect to punitive damages is GRANTED.

V. PLAINTIFF'S MOTION
Plaintiff moves for partial summary judgment on his FEHA claims for [*31]  (1) disability discrimination, (2) failure to accommodate, and (3) failure to engage in the interactive process. (P MSJ at 20-31).
With respect to Plaintiff's disability discrimination claim, Amtrak initially did not dispute that Plaintiff suffered from a disability. (See D MSJ at 13-17). However, in opposing Plaintiff's Motion, Amtrak latches onto Plaintiff's assertion that he would have been able to work without any accommodations between early 2016 and early 2018, as his condition had resolved by then. (See P MSJ Opp. at 13 (citing P MSJ at 24)). According to Amtrak, this admission precludes Plaintiff's FEHA claims to the extent that they are based on Amtrak's conduct between early 2016 and early 2018 — including its termination of Plaintiff on May 12, 2016 — since Plaintiff was admittedly not disabled during this time period. (Id. at 13-14). Plaintiff responds that the relevant time period of Plaintiff's disability is not the date of termination, but the date of the Violation; Plaintiff additionally requests summary adjudication of the fact that Plaintiff was disabled at the time of the Violation. (P MSJ Reply at 3-4).
The Court agrees with Plaintiff. The fact that Plaintiff was [*32]  able to work without any accommodations between early 2016 and early 2018 does not foreclose his disability discrimination claim, which focuses on whether Plaintiff's mental disability contributed to or caused the November 2015 Violation — the primary reason that Plaintiff was terminated by Amtrak. Amtrak has pointed to no evidence to dispute the fact that Plaintiff was, in fact, suffering from a mental health disability during the Violation, which had been triggered by the Incident. Accordingly, Plaintiff's request for summary adjudication of the fact that Plaintiff was disabled at the time of the Violation is GRANTED.
Plaintiff's request for summary adjudication of the fact that Plaintiff was a "qualified individual" under FEHA is DENIED. Plaintiff points to evidence showing that he had performed the essential job functions of a locomotive engineer for nearly two decades, and that he was able to perform these functions again beginning in early 2016 after receiving mental health treatment to alleviate the symptoms of his disability. However, as Amtrak correctly points out, a reasonable jury could find that Plaintiff was not able to perform the essential functions of an engineer because [*33]  the Violation was his third signal violation. (See P MSJ Opp. at 16).
Plaintiff's request for summary adjudication of the fact that Plaintiff was terminated "because of" his disability is also DENIED. Although Plaintiff has produced uncontroverted evidence that he was suffering from a disability at the time of the Violation, it does not necessarily follow that Plaintiff's disability caused the Violation as a matter of law. A reasonable jury could find that the Violation was caused by something other than Plaintiff's disability, like an unrelated lack of attentiveness, which Plaintiff had exhibited on two occasions prior the onset of his disability. See Pyramid Techs., Inc. v. Hartford Cas. Ins. Co., 752 F.3d 807, 818 (9th Cir. 2014) ("Where conflicting inferences may be drawn from the facts, the case must go to the jury.") (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
With respect to the remainder of the disability discrimination claim, as noted above, triable issues exist as to whether Amtrak had discriminatory intent in terminating Plaintiff. (See supra 14-15).
Accordingly, the remainder of Plaintiff's Motion with respect to disability discrimination is DENIED.
With respect to Plaintiff's failure to accommodate and failure to engage in the interactive process [*34]  claims, Plaintiff has not met his burden of showing that he is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Rather, as explained above, Skinner's request to informally handle the disciplinary violations does not constitute a request for a reasonable accommodation. See Alamillo, 869 F.3d at 922 ("Since reasonable accommodation is always prospective, an employer is not required to excuse past misconduct even if it is the result of the individual's disability.") (citation omitted). Plaintiff has not pointed to any other evidence suggesting that he requested from Amtrak and did not receive a reasonable accommodation due to his alleged disability.
Accordingly, Plaintiff's Motion with respect to his failure to accommodate and failure to engage in the interactive process claims is DENIED.

VI. CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated above, Amtrak's Motion is GRANTED with respect to Plaintiff's failure to accommodate, failure to engage in the interactive process, and punitive damages claims. Amtrak's Motion is DENIED with respect to Plaintiff's disability discrimination claim.
Plaintiff's Motion is DENIED with respect to Plaintiff's failure to accommodate and failure to engage in the interactive process claims. Plaintiff's Motion [*35]  is also DENIED with respect to Plaintiff's disability discrimination claim. However, Plaintiff's Motion is GRANTED with respect to the fact that Plaintiff was suffering from a disability at the time of the Violation.
IT IS SO ORDERED.


End of Document

