Miller v. Saul
United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois, Eastern Division
August 6, 2019, Decided; August 6, 2019, Filed
Case No. 17 C 8884

Reporter
2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 247701 *; 2019 WL 13249554
KEVIN D. MILLER, Plaintiff, v. ANDREW M. SAUL,1 Acting Commissioner of Social Security, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] Kevin D Miller, Plaintiff, Pro se, Schererville, IN.
For Carolyn Colvin, Commissioner of Social Security Administration, Defendant: Alex Harms Hartzler, LEAD ATTORNEY, Chicago, SSA, United States Attorney's Office (NDIL - Chicago), Chicago, IL.
Judges: John Z. Lee, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: John Z. Lee
Opinion



ORDER
Plaintiff Kevin D. Miller has sued his employer, the Social Security Administration ("SSA"), alleging that it discriminated against him, retaliated against him, and failed to accommodate his disability. He also seeks review of a decision of the Merit Systems Protection Board ("MSPB"). The SSA has filed a motion for summary judgment. For the reasons stated herein, the motion [38] is granted.

Background2

I. Miller's Employment at the SSA
Miller is an African-American man who worked as a paralegal specialist3 for the SSA from 2011 to January 2017, when he was demoted to "senior case technician." Def.'s LR 56.1 Stmt. ("Def.'s SOF") ¶¶ 3, 6-7, 50, ECF No. 40. "Paralegal specialists" are one of two types of decision-writers employed by the SSA; they, along with "attorney advisors," draft decisions for administrative law judges ("ALJs"). Id. ¶¶ 7-8. Paralegal specialists are not required to be licensed [*2]  to practice law, while attorney advisors must be licensed. Id. ¶ 8. The positions have different job descriptions, but Miller states that employees in the two roles "perform the same job functions." Id.; Pl.'s Resp. Def.'s LR 56.1 Stmt. ("Pl.'s Resp. Def.'s SOF") ¶ 8, ECF No. 45.
Paralegal specialists are evaluated using a three-tier rating system for various performance elements: outstanding employees are rated "5," employees who successfully meet expectations are rated "3," and employees who are not meeting expectations are rated "1." Def.'s SOF ¶ 11. One category used to reach this rating considers whether the employee "achieves business results"--in other words, whether he meets the SSA's expectations regarding timeliness and productivity. Id. ¶ 12. Performance is also evaluated using a Decision Writer Statistical Index ("DWSI") score, which quantifies a decision-writer's productivity; the DWSI is calculated by comparing "the number of decision writing hours versus [a decision-writer's] number of hours of work." Id., Ex. H, MSPB Hr'g Tr., at 63:7-64:2, ECF No. 40. According to the SSA, the expectation is that a decision-writer will spend about eight hours or less on an unfavorable or partially [*3]  favorable decision, and about four hours or less on a fully favorable decision. Def.'s SOF, Ex. I, 10/15/15 Mem. at 3, ECF No. 40. Thus, for example, a decision-writer who writes 10 favorable decisions is considered to have completed 80 hours of decision writing; if the employee completed that amount of work in only 70 hours, his DWSI would be over 100%. MSPB Hr'g Tr. at 63:17-64.2.
In general, Miller claims that his performance was evaluated using invalid or illegitimate standards. Pl.'s Resp. Def.'s SOF ¶¶ 13-20, 23, 29-34, 37, 40-47. For instance, he contends that the "4/8" standard (concerning the amount of time to be spent on favorable and unfavorable decisions) has been "disavowed" by the SSA. Id. ¶¶ 10, 23, 34, 37. Furthermore, he disputes that "'timely' decision writing equated to a DWSI of 100[%]," because in reality (he contends), a DWSI of 80% was acceptable. Id. ¶¶ 19-20.

II. Transfer to Orland Park and Subsequent Performance Issues
Miller requested and received reassignment to a position as a paralegal specialist in Orland Park, Illinois, in November 2014. Def.'s SOF ¶ 7. Between November 2014 and January 2017, Miller's supervisor was Ann Doorhy, and her supervisor was Ron [*4]  Gryga. Id. ¶ 9.
Concerns about the timeliness of Miller's work arose shortly after his transfer to Orland Park. Id. ¶ 13. Doorhy discussed her concerns with Miller in February 2015, and Miller agreed that he needed to improve. Id. ¶ 14. Miller's timeliness did not significantly improve after this conversation, however, and when Doorhy met with him again in April 2015, she reiterated her concerns. Id. ¶¶ 15-16. The next month, Doorhy assigned a mentor to work with Miller, but Miller was not cooperative. Id. ¶¶ 17-18.
By June 2015, the timeliness of Miller's work had improved, but it was still not considered to be "timely." Id. ¶ 19. Doorhy suggested to Miller that he work on drafts one at a time. Id. Doorhy and Miller met again to discuss his timeliness issues in August 2015, and Miller acknowledged that he was not meeting the SSA's timeliness guidelines. Id. ¶ 20. At that point, Doorhy informed him that the SSA was considering placing him on a "formal assistance plan." Id.
Miller continued to work on multiple drafts simultaneously. Id. ¶ 21. When Doorhy and Miller met again in September 2015, she informed him that his decisions were still untimely and that he would be placed on a 30-day [*5]  performance-assistance plan. Id. ¶ 22. She also told him that if the plan was unsuccessful, the next step would be a 120-day "Opportunity to Perform Successfully" ("OPS") plan. Id. In response, Miller told Doorhy that "personal distractions" were affecting his timeliness. Id. Doorhy emphasized that working on multiple decisions at a time and printing decisions was slowing Miller's performance. Id.
Miller received his annual performance appraisal in October 2015. Id. ¶ 23. It described his work as "egregiously delinquent," and explained that Doorhy had repeatedly told him that printing decisions, editing hard copies, and then typing revisions into the computer, was not "an acceptable or successful practice." Id. ¶¶ 24-25. Doorhy again informed Miller that a "performance assistance plan" may be necessary. Id. ¶ 25. Despite the concerns about Miller's timeliness, he received a rating of "3" (reflecting that he had met expectations) for "achieves business results," because an employee will not receive a rating of "1" until he has unsuccessfully completed an OPS program. Id. ¶ 26.

III. Placement on Performance-Assistance and OPS Plans
Doorhy placed Miller on a 30-day performance-assistance [*6]  plan on October 15, 2015. Id. ¶ 27. Miller's performance-assistance plan memo explained that he had consistently failed to produce work in a timely manner. Id. ¶ 28. For example, in January 2015, Miller completed 3 decisions, compared to the office average of 18.01, and in August 2015, Miller completed 11 decisions, compared to the office average of 20.5. Id. Miller disputes that the comparison of his monthly total to the office average is a "valid metric" because he frequently took leave and did not work overtime. Pl.'s Resp. Def.'s SOF ¶ 28. The memo further explained that Miller took "an inordinate amount of time to complete each draft." Def.'s SOF ¶ 29. While an unfavorable decision should generally take eight hours or less and a favorable decision should generally take four hours or less, Miller often spent days or even weeks on a draft. Id. ¶¶ 29-30.
Throughout the 30-day performance-assistance plan, Miller received cases that were smaller than average; however, he still did not meet timelines for completing drafts. Id. ¶ 31. The plan was extended for another 30 days, but Miller did not achieve timeliness by the end of the second 30-day period. Id. ¶¶ 31, 33. When he met with [*7]  Doorhy in December 2015, she told him that more assistance may be necessary because his work was still untimely. Id. ¶ 32.
Because Miller continued to struggle with timelines, Doorhy initiated an OPS plan to run from February 1 to May 31, 2016. Id. ¶¶ 34-35. The plan was aimed at "start[ing] the employee out to achieve success with smaller assignments and then build[ing] their way up . . . [to] where they can independently accomplish the job and sustain successful performance." Id. ¶ 35. Doorhy explained that the plan was necessary because Miller routinely failed to complete drafts in a timely manner. Id. ¶ 36. She reiterated that an unfavorable decision should generally take no more than eight hours, while a favorable decision should take no more than four hours. Id. ¶ 37. Doorhy informed Miller that if his performance was not acceptable by the end of the OPS period, he could be reassigned, reduced in grade, or removed from federal service. Id. ¶ 39.
Miller's work continued to be untimely throughout the first half of 2016, and by the time the OPS period ended, he had still not consistently met timeliness requirements. Id. ¶¶ 41-43. Indeed, Miller's DWSI score was the lowest in the office [*8]  for the first half of 2016. Id. ¶ 43.

IV. Post-OPS Plan Performance and Demotion
Doorhy met with Miller again in August 2016 and informed him that he was still failing to complete his work in a timely fashion and that he had not successfully completed the OPS period. Id. ¶ 44. And, even after that conversation, Miller's performance continued to deteriorate. He submitted no drafts in September and received a "1" rating for "achieves business results" in his October 2016 performance appraisal. Id. ¶¶ 45-46. He also failed to submit any drafts in the first two weeks of November 2016. Id. ¶ 47.
In December 2016, Doorhy issued a "Proposed Reduction in Grade," proposing to demote Miller to the position of senior case technician. Id. ¶ 48. The proposal cited his failure to maintain an acceptable rating for "achieves business results" despite an extended performance-assistance plan and OPS plan. Id. Miller then sought Equal Employment Opportunity ("EEO") counseling, alleging harassment and discrimination on the basis of age, race, and disability. Id. ¶ 49. He also submitted a response to the demotion proposal. Id. After considering the response, Doorhy issued a "Decision to Reduce in Grade" in [*9]  January 2017, demoting Miller to senior case technician. Id. ¶ 50. Gryga concurred in the decision. Id.
It is undisputed that, throughout his time as a paralegal specialist in Orland Park, Miller failed to meet performance deadlines, did not conform to the expectation of 100% timeliness, and did not meet the 80% timeliness threshold with regularity. Id. ¶ 51. Between October 2015 and November 2016, he consistently completed fewer decisions than the average decision-writer in the Orland Park office. Id. ¶ 52. In fiscal year 2015, Miller's DWSI was 58%, ranking him #273 out of 282 decision-writers in his region. Id. ¶ 53. That year, his DWSI was the second-lowest in the Orland Park office. Id. The following fiscal year, his DWSI was the lowest in the office. Id.

V. Alleged Race Discrimination
Miller contends that the SSA demoted him based upon his race. However, Miller admits that he has never heard Doorhy or Gryga make a negative comment about his--or anyone else's—race. Id. ¶ 54. Furthermore, Miller can point to only one non-African-American comparator who Miller claims was treated better than African-American decision-writers, even though her performance was comparably poor. Id. ¶ 55. [*10]  That employee, however, was an attorney advisor in Orland Park, not a paralegal specialist (although Miller contends that he and she "perform[ed] the same job functions"). Id.; Pl.'s Resp. Def.'s SOF ¶ 55. What is more, the attorney advisor in question was not supervised by Doorhy, Def.'s SOF ¶ 56, and her timeliness was consistently better than Miller's. For example, in 2015, her performance rating was 81% as compared to Miller's 58%, and in 2016, her rating was 83% as compared to Miller's 65%. Id. ¶ 57. That said, Gryga did testify that, to his knowledge, no non-African-American decision-writers in Orland Park were placed on performance-assistance plans or demoted between November 2014 and January 2017. Pl.'s Stmt. Add'l Facts ("Pl.'s SOAF") ¶ 27, ECF No. 44.

VI. Alleged Retaliation
Miller also claims that the SSA retaliated against him for engaging in statutorily protected activity. According to the SSA, Miller first engaged in protected EEO activity only after Doorhy issued the proposal to demote him. Def.'s SOF ¶¶ 58-59. Miller contends, however, that he "informally objected to conduct that he perceived to be discriminatory before Doorhy issued the proposal," by objecting to Doorhy's [*11]  insistence that he edit drafts electronically. Pl.'s Resp. Def.'s SOF ¶ 58.

VII. Alleged Disability Discrimination
Additionally, Miller contends that the SSA failed to accommodate his visual and mental disabilities. He states that he experiences blurry vision and headaches on a near-daily basis, as well as other symptoms including itching, burning eyes and a "foreign body" sensation. Pl.'s SOAF ¶ 1. He has been diagnosed with compound myopic astigmatism and presbyopia and states that he has 20/400 vision, which is corrected with bifocal lenses. Id. ¶ 2. Miller also has diabetes, the symptoms of which include blurry vision and headaches. Id. ¶ 3. He also was diagnosed with Major Depressive Disorder approximately 15 years ago. Id. ¶ 4.
According to Miller, his "eye strain, blurry vision and headaches" are "exacerbated by reviewing and editing documents on [a] computer." Id. ¶ 6. He states that these symptoms are alleviated by "printing, reviewing and editing documents in hard copy." Id. ¶ 7. Miller characterizes this as an "accommodation" that allowed him to perform his job successfully prior to his transfer to Orland Park, while the SSA disputes that he ever sought or received such an [*12]  accommodation. Pl.'s SOAF ¶ 7; Def.'s Resp. Pl.'s Stmt. Add'l Facts ("Def.'s Resp. Pl.'s SOAF") ¶ 7, ECF No. 51.
Doorhy and Miller first discussed the issue of his printing documents in February 2015. Def.'s SOF ¶ 63. In the following months, Doorhy repeatedly told Miller not to print documents, but he would "stop for a while" before resuming the practice. Id. It is disputed whether Miller ever told Doorhy that "printing, reviewing . . . and editing documents in hard copy was the only means by which he could manage/alleviate" his symptoms. Pl.'s SOAF ¶ 10; Def.'s Resp. Pl.'s SOAF ¶ 10. Miller contends that he "objected to the revocation of his accommodation," while the SSA disputes that he ever sought or was given an accommodation in the first place. Pl.'s SOAF ¶¶ 12-14; Def.'s Resp. Pl.'s SOAF ¶¶ 12-14.
In September 2015, Miller told his assigned mentor, Charles Ott, that he was experiencing headaches while using the computer. Def.'s SOF ¶ 64. Ott suggested that he have an eye exam and discussed with him "the importance of getting used to doing the job electronically" because printing decisions "would only slow him down." Id. Doorhy reiterated this in September 2015, telling Miller [*13]  that he should edit drafts electronically, rather than printing them out. Id. ¶ 65. Miller responded that he would be "very uncomfortable" doing that. Id.
Around the same time, Doorhy relayed Miller's preference for printing to SSA regional attorneys Ancheska English-Wilson and Deborah Giesen. Giesen followed up with English-Wilson, asking whether Miller may be making an implied request for accommodation. Pl.'s SOAF, Ex. 19, September 2015 Emails at 1-2, ECF No. 46. English-Wilson responded that Miller "couldn't be asking for an accommodation to print his decision drafts, because he can already do that." Id. at 1.
In Miller's October 2015 performance appraisal, Doorhy again stated that Miller's practice of "printing out [his] decisions to edit in hard copy is a major obstacle for [him] to achieve timeliness in [his] decision writing," and encouraged him to "strive to work in an electronic environment." Def.'s SOF ¶ 66. Doorhy also noted that Miller had told her that editing drafts on the computer "gives [him] headaches, and also bothers [his] eyes," and that she "discussed with [him] . . . if there is anything the office can do to assist [him] in doing [his] job, so far as the headaches [*14]  and eye issues," but that Miller had declined. Id. ¶ 67. She offered Miller a glare screen for his computer in October 2015, which he also declined. Id. ¶ 68.
Between October 2015 and September 2016, Miller did not raise the issue of his alleged vision problems. Id. ¶ 69. Doorhy repeatedly asked if there was anything the SSA could do to help improve his timeliness, but Miller never asked for an accommodation related to a vision-related disability, nor did he again ask for the ability to print his decisions. Id. In September 2016, an eye doctor assessed Miller as having compound myopic astigmatism and presbyopia. Id. ¶ 70. Miller did not tell the SSA about his diagnosis, but merely stated that he would need "a couple of days off" because his eyes had been dilated. Id. Miller told Doorhy that he had broken his glasses, had headaches, and was experiencing blurred vision. Id. ¶ 72. He provided a note from his optometrist, showing that his eyes had been dilated; however, he did not submit any other documentation related to his vision problems. Id.
According to the SSA, Miller never explicitly asked for a disability accommodation; never told Doorhy that he had a vision-related disability; [*15]  and never told Doorhy that he was experiencing more than "routine" eye problems. Id. ¶ 73. Miller, by contrast, contends that his "eye strain, blurry vision and headaches" were not routine problems, and that he and other individuals (such as his mentor, Ott) informed Doorhy of the "severity" of his issues. Pl.'s Resp. Def.'s SOF ¶ 73.
As for Miller's depression, he states that he told Doorhy and Gryga in the summer of 2015 that he was having difficulty concentrating and staying focused, and that they told him to take advantage of the SSA's Employee Assistance Program ("EAP"), which provides free counseling. Def.'s SOF ¶ 77. In September 2016, Miller told Doorhy that he was in EAP counseling for depression. Id. ¶ 78. He did not submit any medical documentation of his diagnosis. Id. ¶ 76. Miller has not identified any particular accommodation that the SSA could have offered for his depression. Id. ¶ 79.

VIII. EEO Counseling, Complaint, and MSPB Appeal
After initially seeking EEO counseling on December 28, 2016, Miller eventually filed a formal complaint of discrimination on March 2, 2017. Def.'s SOF ¶¶ 48-49; Admin. R. at MSPB_1970, ECF No. 36-3. In addition, Miller appealed his demotion [*16]  to the MSPB on February 13, 2017. Admin R. at MSPB_1971. The MSPB held hearings on June 19 and July 21, 2017, and issued a decision affirming the SSA's actions on October 11, 2017. Id. at MSPB_1961-62. This lawsuit followed on December 11, 2017. See Compl., ECF No. 1.

Legal Standard
"The court shall grant summary judgment if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). To survive summary judgment, the nonmoving party must "do more than simply show that there is some metaphysical doubt as to the material facts," Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586 (1986), and instead must "establish some genuine issue for trial such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict in her favor." Gordon v. FedEx Freight, Inc., 674 F.3d 769, 772-73 (7th Cir. 2012).
In reviewing a motion for summary judgment, the Court gives the nonmoving party "the benefit of conflicts in the evidence and reasonable inferences that could be drawn from it." Grochocinski v. Mayer Brown Rowe & Maw, LLP, 719 F.3d 785, 794 (7th Cir. 2013). The Court must not make credibility determinations or weigh conflicting evidence. McCann v. Iroquois Mem'l Hosp., 622 F.3d 745, 752 (7th Cir. 2010).

Analysis

I. Disability Discrimination
Miller claims that the SSA discriminated against him due to his disabilities of visual impairment and depression and failed to reasonably accommodate them. These claims [*17]  are governed by the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), which prohibits an employer from discriminating against a qualified individual on the basis of disability. 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). A plaintiff can establish disability discrimination under the ADA by showing that: (1) the defendant intentionally acted on the basis of the plaintiff's disability; (2) the defendant refused to provide the plaintiff with a reasonable accommodation; or (3) the defendant's rule disproportionately affects people who are disabled. A.H. by Holzmueller v. Ill. High Sch. Ass'n, 881 F.3d 587, 592-93 (7th Cir. 2018).

A. Failure to Accommodate
To establish a failure-to-accommodate claim, Miller must show that: (1) he is a qualified individual with a disability; (2) the SSA was aware of his disability; and (3) the SSA failed to reasonably accommodate that disability. Preddie v. Bartholomew Consol. Sch. Corp., 799 F.3d 806, 813 (7th Cir. 2015). "[A] plaintiff typically must request an accommodation for his disability in order to claim that he was improperly denied an accommodation under the ADA." Id. (emphasis in original) (citing Fleishman v. Cont'l Cas. Co., 698 F.3d 598, 608 (7th Cir. 2012)). This request, however, need not be formal or explicit. EEOC v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 417 F.3d 789, 803-04 (7th Cir. 2005). Ordinarily, the request triggers an "interactive process" between the employer and employee to "determine the extent of the disability and what accommodations are appropriate and available." Id. at 804 (internal quotation marks omitted).
Here, even [*18]  assuming that Miller can satisfy the first two elements of a failure-to-accommodate claim, nothing in the record would permit a reasonable factfinder to conclude that the SSA failed to reasonably accommodate his disabilities.
First, it is undisputed that Miller did not explicitly ask for an accommodation for his visual impairment. Although he repeatedly characterizes his practice of printing decisions in hard copy as an "accommodation" that was "revoked," see Pl.'s SOAF ¶¶ 12-14, the record is absent of any evidence that he had ever requested or received such an accommodation. In his response to the SSA's statement of facts, Miller does not dispute that he "never asked for an accommodation related to a vision-related disability"--including printing decisions to edit in hard copy--despite Doorhy "repeatedly" asking him if there was anything the SSA could do to help him improve his timeliness. Def.'s SOF ¶ 69; Pl.'s Resp. Def.'s SOF ¶ 69.
There is, however, some evidence that SSA management considered whether Miller's complaints about the computer hurting his eyes could constitute an "implied" request for accommodation. See September 2015 Emails at 1-2. But even assuming that Miller did [*19]  make such an implied request, the evidence shows that Doorhy made repeated attempts to determine how the SSA might alleviate Miller's vision problems, but Miller declined her overtures. See Def.'s SOF ¶¶ 67-69. Accordingly, any responsibility for the breakdown in the interactive process lies with Miller. See, e.g., Jackson v. City of Chi., 414 F.3d 806, 813-14 (7th Cir. 2005) (finding that plaintiff caused breakdown in interactive process when she failed to respond to the employer's requests for information on the extent of her limitations); Sears, 417 F.3d at 806 ("[W]hen an employer takes an active, good-faith role in the interactive process, it will not be liable if the employee refuses to participate or withholds essential information."); Beck v. Univ. of Wis. Bd. of Regents, 75 F.3d 1130, 1135 (7th Cir. 1996) (holding that when the parties are "missing information . . . that can only be provided by one of the parties, . . . the party withholding the information may be found to have obstructed" the interactive process for determining a reasonable accommodation). No reasonable factfinder could conclude that the SSA failed to accommodate Miller's visual impairment when he failed to engage with the agency's numerous efforts to assist him. Accordingly, the SSA is entitled to summary judgment on Miller's failure-to-accommodate claim concerning [*20]  his visual impairment.
As for Miller's depression, the SSA was not aware that he had depression until September 2016, when he told Doorhy that he was in counseling; before then, he only had told supervisors that he had "problems concentrating and maintaining focus." Def.'s SOF ¶¶ 76-78. Such a vague statement is insufficient to provide the SSA with notice that Miller was suffering from a specific condition. And after Miller informed Doorhy of his depression, there is no evidence that he requested any accommodation for that condition. This is further supported by the fact that, at his deposition, Miller could not think of any reasonable accommodation that the SSA could have offered him to assist him with this condition. Id. ¶ 79. As noted, the general rule is that to succeed on a failure-to-accommodate claim, a plaintiff must request an accommodation. Preddie, 799 F.3d at 813. And while the Seventh Circuit has recognized an exception to this rule for cases where the plaintiff's disability impairs his ability to communicate effectively regarding his need for an accommodation, see Bultemeyer v. Fort Wayne Cmty. Schs., 100 F.3d 1281, 1285 (7th Cir. 1996), Miller has offered no evidence that would support the application of that exception in this case. Because no reasonable factfinder [*21]  could conclude that the SSA failed to accommodate Miller's depression when he did not request an accommodation, the SSA is entitled to summary judgment on Miller's claim of failure to accommodate his depression.

B. Discrimination
Although it is not addressed in the parties' submissions, the Court notes that Miller's amended complaint alleges that the SSA "discriminated against [him] on the basis of disability in that it reassigned [him] to a less desirable position . . . and reduced him in pay grade." Am. Compl. ¶ 6, ECF No. 19. To the extent Miller attempts to set forth a disability-discrimination claim in addition to his failure-to-accommodate claims, the SSA is entitled to summary judgment on such a claim.
Here, Miller has not established that he was "qualified to perform the essential functions of the job with or without reasonable accommodation." Monroe v. Ind. Dep't of Transp., 871 F.3d 495, 503 (7th Cir. 2017). Critically, even when Miller was availing himself of the "accommodation" he sought--printing and editing drafts in hard copy—his work was still untimely. The record shows that although Doorhy did not discourage Miller from printing until September 2015, there were concerns about his timeliness as early as February 2015. See Def.'s SOF [*22]  ¶¶ 13-22. In short, whether Miller was printing and editing decisions in hard copy or not, he could not meet the SSA's timeliness expectations. And with respect to his depression, Miller does not identify any accommodation that he had requested or that the SSA could have provided him. Id. ¶ 79.

II. Race Discrimination
In addition to an ADA claim, Miller brings a race-discrimination claim under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-2, et seq., alleging that the SSA discriminated against him on the basis of his race by holding him to a higher standard than non-African-American employees.
To evaluate Miller's Title VII claim, the Court considers whether the evidence in the record would permit a reasonable factfinder to conclude that racial discrimination caused the adverse employment action--in Miller's case, the demotion. Ortiz v. Werner Enters., Inc., 834 F.3d 760, 765 (7th Cir. 2016). Although the Seventh Circuit has held that courts should "no longer divide[] evidence into formal categories of 'direct' and 'indirect,' a plaintiff may still use the McDonnell-Douglas burden-shifting test to make the required showing." Henderson v. Shulkin, 720 F. App'x 776, 781 (7th Cir. 2017) (citing McKinney v. Off. of Sheriff of Whitley Cty., 866 F.3d 803, 807 (7th Cir. 2017)). Under that framework, a plaintiff can establish a prima facie case of discrimination by producing evidence that: "(1) [he] is a member of a protected class, (2) [his] job [*23]  performance met [the employer's] legitimate expectations, (3) [he] suffered an adverse employment action, and (4) another similarly situated individual who was not in the protected class was treated more favorably than the plaintiff." Burks v. Wis. Dep't of Transp., 464 F.3d 744, 750-51 (7th Cir. 2006) (citation omitted). This creates a presumption of discrimination, and the burden then shifts to the employer to articulate a "legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason" for the employment action. McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 802 (1973). If the employer articulates such a reason, the burden shifts back to the plaintiff, who must present evidence that the reason is a "pretext" for unlawful discrimination. Id. at 804.
The SSA argues that Miller cannot establish the second and fourth elements of a prima facie case, because he failed to meet the agency's legitimate expectations and has not identified a non-African-American decision-writer whose work was as untimely as his, but who was not placed on performance-assistance plans or demoted.
Even drawing all reasonable inferences in Miller's favor, the undisputed facts show that he consistently failed to meet the SSA's legitimate expectations for timely submission of drafts, despite the agency's numerous attempts to assist him in improving the timeliness of his work. [*24]  See Def.'s SOF ¶¶ 13-39, 51-53.4 Miller does not dispute that he repeatedly failed to meet performance deadlines and that he consistently completed fewer decisions than the average decision-writer in the Orland Park office. See Pl.'s Resp. Def.'s SOF ¶¶ 51-53. Miller argues, however, that the SSA's expectations were not "legitimate" because they were based on the "4/8" standard, which (Miller contends) had previously been "disavowed" by the SSA. But even if Miller is correct that the SSA's Orland Park office was applying an outdated standard, that does not render the agency's expectations illegitimate; rather, an employer's expectations are "legitimate" as long as they are "bona fide" and not "phony." Coco v. Elmwood Care, Inc., 128 F.3d 1177, 1179-80 (7th Cir. 1997) (stating that it is "no business of a court in a discrimination case to decide whether an employer demands 'too much' of [its] workers"). Here, Miller has adduced no evidence that the "4/8" standard was "phony" or that it was not applied to all decision-writers with equal force regardless of race.
On the contrary, the evidence shows that all decision-writers were evaluated using a DWSI based on the expectation that they would generally spend four hours or less on favorable decisions [*25]  and eight hours or less on unfavorable ones. Similarly, while he contends that the SSA held him to an illegitimate 100% DWSI standard when, in fact, an 80% DWSI was acceptable, it is undisputed that he regularly failed to meet even the 80% mark. See Def.'s SOF ¶ 51; Pl.'s Resp. Def.'s SOF ¶ 51. Accordingly, Miller has failed to demonstrate an issue of fact with respect to whether he was meeting the SSA's legitimate expectations.
Miller also fails to make out a prima facie case of discrimination because he has not identified a similarly situated non-African-American decision-writer whose work was similarly untimely but who was treated more favorably. Miller points to a white decision-writer who he says produced similarly untimely work but was not placed on a performance-assistance plan and then demoted. See Def.'s SOF ¶ 55. But that employee was not similarly situated to Miller. "Similarly situated employees must be directly comparable to the plaintiff in all material respects, yet this is a flexible inquiry with no magic formula." Khowaja v. Sessions, 893 F.3d 1010, 1015 (7th Cir. 2018) (internal quotation marks omitted). "Factors relevant to the determination of whether employees are similarly situated include whether the employees reported [*26]  to the same supervisor, whether they were subject to the same standards and whether they had comparable education, experience and qualifications." Lauderdale v. Ill. Dep't of Human Servs., 876 F.3d 904, 910 (7th Cir. 2017) (internal quotation marks omitted). "An employee who does not have a similar disciplinary history and performance record as the plaintiff is not similarly situated." Simpson v. Franciscan All., Inc., 827 F.3d 656, 662 (7th Cir. 2016).
Here, the undisputed facts show that (1) attorney advisors and paralegal specialists have different job descriptions; (2) attorney advisors and paralegal specialists have different qualifications, because attorney advisors must be licensed to practice law; and (3) the white attorney advisor in question was supervised by Beatrice Sziler and Candace Fortuna, while Miller was supervised by Doorhy. See Def.'s SOF ¶¶ 55-56. Miller contends, however, that employees in the two positions perform the same job functions, and that they answer to a common decisionmaker—Gryga. But even assuming those things to be true, Miller has not established that the white attorney advisor is "directly comparable" to him in "all material respects," Khowaja, 893 F.3d at 1015, because he has failed to show that he and the other employee had a "similar disciplinary history and performance record," Simpson, 827 F.3d at 662. In fact, it is undisputed [*27]  that the white attorney advisor in question performed significantly better than Miller: in 2015, her performance rating was 81%, while Miller's was 58%; and in 2016, her performance rating was 83%, while Miller's was 65%. Def.'s SOF ¶ 57. Notably, for both years, her performance exceeded the 80% level that Miller contends other employees were expected to meet. In light of this disparity in job performance, Miller has not shown that the white attorney advisor was a similarly situated employee who was treated more favorably. Accordingly, he has failed to make out a prima facie case of race discrimination.
In sum, Miller has failed to show that he was meeting the SSA's legitimate performance expectations or that another similarly situated non-African-American decision-writer was treated more favorably. Nor are there any facts in the record, taken as a whole, from which a reasonable jury could conclude that the SSA's placement of Miller on the performance assistance plans or his subsequent demotion was on account of his race, rather than his dissatisfactory performance. Nor are there any facts from which a jury could conclude that the SSA's reliance on Miller's underperformance for its [*28]  action was a pretext for race discrimination. See Ortiz, 834 F.3d at 765. Thus, the SSA is entitled to summary judgment on Miller's race-discrimination claim.

III. Retaliation
Miller also claims that his demotion was retaliatory. To survive summary judgment on his Title VII retaliation claim, Miller must show that the evidence, considered as a whole, would permit a reasonable factfinder to conclude that (1) he engaged in protected activity, (2) he suffered an adverse employment action, and (3) there was a causal connection between the protected activity and the adverse action. Id.; Williams v. Off. of Chief Judge of Cook Cty., Ill., 839 F.3d 617, 626 (7th Cir. 2016). For the following reasons, the Court concludes he has failed to make that showing.
As an initial matter, Miller's response in opposition to the SSA's motion for summary judgment makes no mention of his retaliation claim. Accordingly, any argument on this claim is waived. C & N Corp. v. Kane, 756 F.3d 1024, 1026 (7th Cir. 2014) (stating that arguments not made in response to summary-judgment motion are waived). Regardless, the SSA is entitled to summary judgment because Miller has not established a causal connection between the protected activity (EEO counseling) and the adverse employment action (the demotion5).
First, Miller did not initiate EEO counseling until after Doorhy issued [*29]  her proposal to demote him. See Def.'s SOF, Ex. C, Miller Dep. at 69:11-70:13, ECF No. 40. This is not indicative of a causal link; indeed, "[i]t is axiomatic that a plaintiff engage in statutorily protected activity before an employer can retaliate against [him]" for engaging in such activity. Durkin v. City of Chi., 341 F.3d 606, 614-15 (7th Cir. 2003) (emphasis added). And while the actual demotion occurred after Miller engaged in protected activity, he has failed to show a causal link between these events. A plaintiff cannot establish retaliation simply by showing that the protected activity preceded the adverse action. Brown v. Ill. Dep't of Nat. Res., 499 F.3d 675, 685 (7th Cir. 2007) (stating that "timing alone is insufficient" to establish a genuine issue of material fact on a retaliation claim). It is clear that Doorhy proposed Miller's demotion before he began EEO counseling, and he points to no evidence that following through on that proposal after he took that step was retaliatory. In fact, the evidence shows that Doorhy repeatedly voiced concerns to Miller and tried to help him improve his performance for nearly two years before issuing the proposal. Only then did Miller involve the EEO. On this record, the Court concludes that no reasonable factfinder could conclude that the demotion was in retaliation [*30]  for Miller engaging in protected activity.
Miller attempts to show that he engaged in protected activity prior to the demotion proposal by "informally object[ing]" to Doorhy's efforts to get him to stop printing documents. Pl.'s Resp. Def.'s SOF ¶ 58. These "objections" included (1) continuing to print after being asked to stop, and (2) informing Doorhy that he was "very uncomfortable" with editing drafts electronically. Id. But Miller has not provided sufficient detail about these "objections" to allow a reasonable factfinder to conclude that they constituted protected activity under 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-3(a) and, in any event, he has not adduced evidence of a causal connection between these actions and his demotion. As described above, the undisputed facts show that Doorhy made numerous attempts to address Miller's performance issues with him over a significant period of time prior to issuing the proposal to demote him. Accordingly, no reasonable factfinder could conclude that his demotion was in retaliatory. The SSA is entitled to summary judgment on Miller's retaliation claim.

IV. Review of MSPB Decision
Finally, Miller seeks review and reversal of the MSPB's decision upholding his demotion, arguing that [*31]  the SSA "employed invalid performance standards" to evaluate him, and contending that the SSA "committed harmful procedural error" by violating a provision of his collective-bargaining agreement ("CBA"). Pl.'s Resp. Opp. Mot. Summ. J. at 6-14, ECF No. 49.
Typically, only the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit is authorized to hear appeals from MSPB proceedings. See 5 U.S.C. § 7703(b)(1). But district courts have jurisdiction over "mixed cases" that include both a discrimination claim and a claim for judicial review of an MSPB ruling. Kloeckner v. Solis, 568 U.S. 41, 56 (2012). This Court must affirm the MSPB's decision unless the Court concludes that it was (1) arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with the law; (2) obtained without following procedures required by law, rule, or regulation; or (3) unsupported by substantial evidence. Bland v. Dep't of Health & Human Servs., 652 F. App'x 959, 961 (Fed. Cir. 2016) (citing 5 U.S.C. § 7703(c)). Here, the MSPB's decision is not any of those things, and the decision is affirmed.
First, Miller takes issue with the MSPB's conclusion that the SSA had "shown by substantial evidence" that the SSA's performance standards "were valid." Admin. R. at MSPB_1975. He contends that it was arbitrary and capricious for the MSPB to reach that conclusion [*32]  without "provid[ing] any analysis" of "whether the 4/8 standard had been disavowed." Pl.'s Resp. Opp. Mot. Summ. J. at 7-8. But the MSPB decision reflects that the administrative law judge ("ALJ") presiding over the appeal did consider the "4/8" standard, insofar as it was a "general guideline" that Doorhy communicated to Miller. Admin. R. at MSPB_1975 (emphasis added). The ALJ concluded that the use of that guideline did not "materially alter the expectations" for Miller's employment that were repeatedly and clearly communicated to him. Id. In light of Doorhy's testimony that "the 4-8 expectation was to be used as a tool to assist [her] in identifying issues of performance," id. at MSPB_1778, the MSPB's conclusion was not arbitrary or capricious.
Miller also argues that the MSPB made an "erroneous finding of material fact" when it stated that a "DWSI result of 100% generally reflects acceptable performance" for decision-writers. Pl.'s Resp. Opp. Mot. Summ. J. at 9; Admin. R. at MSPB_1964. He argues that this is a mischaracterization of Gryga's testimony, because Gryga stated that a DWSI of 80% was acceptable. But, as previously discussed, whether the goal was 80% or 100%, it is uncontested [*33]  that Miller did not meet either standard. And what is more, even if a DWSI of 80% was acceptable, that does not mean that a DWSI of 100% was not also considered acceptable performance. Accordingly, the MSPB's characterization of Gryga's testimony provides no grounds for reversal.
Miller also argues that the SSA committed "harmful procedural error" by reassigning him to a new position and reducing him in grade, which he contends violated his CBA. Pl.'s Resp. Opp. Mot. Summ. J. at 9-14. According to Miller, the MSPB decision was based on an "erroneous interpretation" of the CBA, and it was an abuse of discretion for the ALJ to affirm his demotion. Id. at 12-14. The CBA contains a provision stating that, in the case of poor employee performance, "[m]anagers will initiate a performance-based action . . . [that] will result in the employee's reassignment to another position; . . . or reduction in grade, or termination." Id., Attachment 1, National Agreement at 146. Miller argues that the correct interpretation of this provision is that an employee can be reassigned, or reduced in grade, but not both. The MSPB disagreed, concluding that Miller had not demonstrated a violation of the CBA. [*34]  Admin. R. at MSPB_1979.
The MSPB's determination in this regard was not arbitrary or capricious. Contrary to Miller's argument that the word "or" in the CBA provision at issue can only be interpreted disjunctively, it is well established that "or" can be interpreted conjunctively when context supports such an interpretation. Cf. Encino Motorcars, LLC v. Navarro, 138 S. Ct. 1134, 1141 (2018) (stating that, in interpreting statutory language, "context can overcome the ordinary, disjunctive meaning of 'or'"). Here, the CBA contained other provisions referring to federal regulations indicating that "reduction in grade" encompasses reassignment to any position at a lower paygrade, not just a reduction in grade within the employee's current position. Admin. R. at MSPB_1951-52. What is more, the SSA explained that "[i]n order to reduce an employee in grade, the employee must necessarily be reassigned to a different position." Id. at MSPB_1952. The MSPB's decision to credit these explanations was not arbitrary or capricious, nor was it an abuse of discretion.
Because Miller has not established grounds for reversal of the MSPB decision, the SSA is entitled to summary judgment on his claim for judicial review.

Conclusion
For the reasons stated herein, the [*35]  SSA's motion for summary judgment [38] is granted.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
ENTERED: 8/6/19
/s/ John Z. Lee
John Z. Lee
United States District Judge


End of Document

