Miranda v. State DOT
United States District Court for the District of Wyoming
March 2, 2018, Decided; March 2, 2018, Filed
Case No: 16-CV-118-ABJ

Reporter
2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 231524 *; 2018 WL 4677792
RICHARD G. MIRANDA, Plaintiff, vs. STATE OF WYOMING DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Richard G Miranda, Plaintiff: Lauretta J Young Welch, LEAD ATTORNEY, ROBINSON STELTING WELCH BRAMLET LLC, Jackson, WY.
For Wyoming Department of Transportation, Defendant: Jesse Naiman, LEAD ATTORNEY, WYOMING ATTORNEY GENERAL, Cheyenne, WY; Elizabeth Teigen Gagen, WYOMING ATTORNEY GENERAL, Cheyenne, WY.
Judges: Alan B. Johnson, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Alan B. Johnson
Opinion



ORDER GRANTING DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
This matter is before the Court on Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment (ECF No. 42) ("Motion"), Defendant's Memorandum in Support of Motion for Summary Judgment (ECF No. 43) ("Memo"), Plaintiff's Opposition to Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment (ECF No. 44) ("Response"), and Defendant's Reply in Support of Motion for Summary Judgment (ECF No. 50) ("Reply"). Having considered the parties' written submissions, all matters of record, and the applicable law, the Court hereby GRANTS Defendant's Motion (ECF No 42).

Background
Richard Miranda ("Mr. Miranda") has three pending claims against the Wyoming Department of Transportation ("WYDOT"): (1) failure to accommodate under § 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, (2) retaliation under § 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, and (3) breach of [*2]  contract. This Court previously dismissed Mr. Miranda's claims for FMLA Retaliation and Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress. Order on Defendant's Motion to Dismiss at 23, ECF No. 20.
Mr. Miranda worked for WYDOT in Sheridan, Wyoming as a rural striper from August 2011 to July 2014. Response at 2, ECF No. 44. After working for WYDOT for over a year, Mr. Miranda began suffering from chronic neck pain that intensified his previously diagnosed post-traumatic stress disorder ("PTSD"). Plaintiff's First Amended Complaint (ECF No. 11 at 4) ("Complaint"). Mr. Miranda was also diagnosed with cervical spine and lumbar degenerative disc disorder. Id. at 10. Mr. Miranda first disclosed his concerns about his disabilities to WYDOT in October 2012. Id. at 4. On November 19, 2012, Mr. Miranda requested accommodations for his disabilities through his vocational rehabilitation counselor. Id. Following the request, WYDOT requested additional information regarding Plaintiff's disabilities. Id. at 5. Mr. Miranda provided additional information, which WYDOT said was out of date. Id. WYDOT continued to request additional evaluations and information for two years, until Mr. Miranda was terminated. Id.
Mr. Miranda continued [*3]  to perform his job responsibilities and alleges that stress caused by his supervisors and co-workers exacerbated his PTSD. Id. In April 2013, Mr. Miranda obtained approved leave under the Family Medical Leave Act ("FMLA") due to the increased stress caused by his work environment. Id. In May 2013, Mr. Miranda engaged in the interactive process with WYDOT as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Id. at 6. Mr. Miranda requested the following accommodations:
1. A transfer to a different position within WYDOT
2. A mentor coach
3. Time out periods to calm anger
4. Written instructions or daily task lists
5. More bathroom breaks
6. The ability to continue building relationships with authority figures
7. Continued counseling
Id. WYDOT refused to accommodate Mr. Miranda, citing that his requests were not reasonable and would cause undue hardship.
In July 2013, Mr. Miranda suffered a work related injury and received Wyoming Worker's Compensation benefits. Id. at 7. Mr. Miranda's doctor released him to work on September 23, 2013. Id. WYDOT refused to allow Mr. Miranda to return to his previous position or any other position within the department, even though his work restrictions were the same as they [*4]  were before Mr. Miranda's July 2013 injury. Id. While Mr. Miranda was out on worker's compensation leave, WYDOT filled his position. Id. Mr. Miranda applied for a variety of positions within WYDOT and has not been hired or interviewed for any position. Id. at 6-7.
On July 7, 2014, Mr. Miranda received a Notice of Intent to Dismiss letter. Id. at 8. The letter cited a June 5, 2014 physician's certification stating that Mr. Miranda could no longer physically perform the duties required by his previous job or any other position at WYDOT. Id. Mr. Miranda was given ten days to respond. Id. Mr. Miranda requested more time to respond but did not receive a response from WYDOT. Id. at 9. On July 24, 2014, Mr. Miranda was dismissed from employment with WYDOT. Id. Mr. Miranda sent a letter appealing his dismissal on July 30, 2014 but did not receive a response from WYDOT. Id.

Standard of Review
Summary judgment is appropriate where "there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). A dispute of fact is genuine if a reasonable juror could resolve the disputed fact in favor of either side. See Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). A dispute of fact is material if under the substantive law it is [*5]  essential to the proper disposition of the claim. Adler v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 144 F.3d 664, 670 (10th Cir. 1998). When the Court considers the evidence presented by the parties, "[t]he evidence of the non-movant is to be believed, and all justifiable inferences are to be drawn in the non-movant's favor." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 255.
The party moving for summary judgment has the burden of establishing the nonexistence of a genuine dispute of material fact. Lynch v. Barrett, 703 F.3d 1153, 1158 (10th Cir. 2013). The moving party can satisfy this burden by either (1) offering affirmative evidence that negates an essential element of the nonmoving party's claim, or (2) demonstrating that the nonmoving party's evidence is insufficient to establish an essential element of the nonmoving party's claim. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(1)(A)—(B).
Once the moving party satisfies this initial burden, the nonmoving party must support its contention that a genuine dispute of material fact exists either by (1) citing to particular materials in the record, or (2) showing that the materials cited by the moving party do not establish the absence of a genuine dispute. See id. The nonmoving party must "do more than simply show that there is some metaphysical doubt as to material facts." Matsushita Elec. Indus. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986). Rather, to survive a summary judgment motion, the nonmoving party must "make a showing sufficient [*6]  to establish the existence of [every] element essential to that party's case, and on which that party will bear the burden of proof at trial." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). Further, when opposing summary judgment, the nonmoving party cannot rest on allegations or denials in the pleadings but must set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine dispute of material fact for trial. See Travis v. Park City Mun. Corp., 565 F.3d 1252, 1258 (10th Cir. 2009).
When considering a motion for summary judgment, the court's role is not to weigh the evidence and decide the truth of the matter, but rather to determine whether a genuine dispute of material fact exists for trial. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249. Credibility determinations are the province of the fact-finder, not the court. Id. at 255.

Discussion
The Rehabilitation Act of 1973, § 501 et seq., prohibits a state or local government entity that receives federal financial assistance from discriminating against a qualified individual with a disability. 29 U.S.C. § 794. The government has an obligation to provide reasonable accommodations to disabled employees. Sanchez v. Vilsack, 695 F.3d 1174, 1177 (10th Cir. 2012). The standards used to determine whether the Rehabilitation Act has been violated are the same standards applied under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Jarvis v. Potter, 500 F.3d 1113, 1121 (10th Cir. 2007); see also 29 U.S.C. § 794(d).

1. Failure to Accommodate
Mr. Miranda alleges that WYDOT discriminated [*7]  against him because it failed to accommodate his disabilities. Complaint at 10, ECF No. 11. Mr. Miranda's failure to accommodate claims are based on the fact that he did not receive a transfer to another position at WYDOT and that WYDOT failed to grant Mr. Miranda's requests for accommodations in his position as a rural striper. Id. at 10-11.
For a plaintiff to prevail on a failure to accommodate claim, the plaintiff must demonstrate that (1) he or she is disabled, (2) he or she is 'otherwise qualified[,]' and (3) he or she requested a plausible accommodation. Sanchez, 695 F.3d at 1177. WYDOT does not dispute that Mr. Miranda is disabled. WYDOT challenges that Mr. Miranda was otherwise qualified. Memo at 1, ECF No. 43.

A. Otherwise Qualified Employee: Rural Striper
Under the ADA:
No covered entity shall discriminate against a qualified individual with a disability because of the disability of such individual in regard to job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment.
42 U.S.C. § 12112(a) (emphasis added).
Under the ADA:
The term "covered entity" means an employer, employment agency, labor organization, or joint labor-management [*8]  committee.
42 U.S.C. § 12111(2).
The ADA defines discriminate to include:
[N]ot making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who is an applicant or employee, unless such covered entity can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business of such covered entity . . .
42 U.S.C. § 12111(5)(A) (emphasis added).
Under the ADA, a qualified individual is a person who can perform the essential functions of a job with or without a reasonable accommodation, and that includes a person who is unable to perform his or her existing job but can perform an available job within the company or agency. Smith v. Midland Brake, Inc., 180 F.3d 1154, 1161 (10th Cir. 1999).
A job function may be considered essential for a variety of reasons, including (1) the reason the position exists is to perform that function; (2) there are a limited number of employees available among whom the performance of that job function can be distributed; and/or (3) the incumbent in the position is hired for his or her expertise or ability to perform a highly specialized function. Evidence showing that a particular function is essential may include:
(i) The employer's judgment as to which functions are essential; [*9] 
(ii) Written job descriptions prepared before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job;
(iii) The amount of time spent on the job performing the function;
(iv) The consequences of not requiring the incumbent to perform the function;
(v) The terms of a collective bargaining agreement;
(vi) The work experience of past incumbents in the job; and/or
(vii) The current work experience of incumbents in similar jobs.
Iselin v. Bama Cos., Inc., 690 F. App'x 593, 595 (10th Cir. 2017) (unpublished) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). While all these considerations are meaningful, the Court finds the most applicable considerations for this case are the reason the position exists, the employer's judgment, the amount of time spent performing the function, the consequences of not requiring the function, and the work experience of past and current incumbents in the job. The parties do not discuss what makes a job function an essential function in their briefings.
Mr. Miranda was not a qualified individual in his job as a rural striper. Mr. Miranda's disabilities resulted in Mr. Miranda not being able to perform two essential functions of the job: Mr. Miranda could not work the ten hour or longer shifts required, and he struggled with the weight requirements. [*10]  Memo at 3, ECF No. 43. Mr. Miranda's physician, Dr. Gregory McDowell, found that Mr. Miranda could not do the rural striper job after Mr. Miranda's worker's compensation injury and that Mr. Miranda's injury was permanent. ECF No. 43-12. While the report states that Mr. Miranda can lift up to 50 pounds, it also says that Mr. Miranda cannot operate the heavy striping equipment and that his work should involve "no heavy lifting." Id.
Mr. Miranda argues that he was a qualified employee to work as a rural striper. Response at 11, ECF No. 44. Mr. Miranda asserts that the standard schedule for the rural striper position was five eight hour shifts and that the four ten hour shifts schedule was actually a modified schedule. Id. at 12. Mr. Miranda argues that he was able to work seven to eight hour shifts, so he could work the required hours of a rural striper. Id. at 11-12. WYDOT admits that the standard schedule for a rural striper is five eight hour shifts and that the five eight hour shifts is the winter schedule. James Evensen Depo. at 74-75, 90, ECF No. 43-11. WYDOT asserts that employees prefer the four ten hour shifts over the five eight hour shifts and that the four ten hour shifts result in a financial savings of [*11]  $50,000 for WYDOT. Id. at 74-76. WYDOT has approved the four ten hour shifts on a seasonal basis since 2010. Id. at 75. Furthermore, employees have to drive up to two hours to a site location in order to complete their work. Id. at 73. Mr. Miranda's doctor's report noted that he needed to frequently alternate between standing and sitting. ECF No. 43-12. This kind of accommodation would not be feasible for the rural striper position. James Evensen Depo. at 72-73, ECF No. 43-11. The Court comes to two conclusions: (1) WYDOT's requiring the four ten hour shifts is an essential function of the job and has been since before Mr. Miranda reported his disabilities to WYDOT and (2) requiring WYDOT to eliminate the modified four ten hour schedule to accommodate Mr. Miranda would result in an undue hardship to WYDOT because it would cost WYDOT $50,000. Furthermore, if Mr. Miranda was only able to work seven hours on any given day, then even the non-modified eight hour schedule would be too long for Mr. Miranda.
Mr. Miranda was also not a qualified individual because the rural striper position required that employees be able to regularly lift 50 pounds. Memo at 3, ECF No. 43. Mr. Miranda argues that he was qualified because he could lift as much as 50 [*12]  pounds, so he therefore met the minimum requirement. Response at 11-12, ECF No. 44. The Court disagrees. Mr. Miranda is correct that his doctor allowed him to lift up to 50 pounds. ECF No. 43-12. However, Mr. Miranda stated in his deposition that he was unsure if he could do the job. Miranda Depo. at 65, ECF No. 44-1. Mr. Miranda stated that the crew he worked on had to lift heavy objects "[p]retty much every day." Miranda Depo. at 19, ECF No. 43-4. Mr. Miranda admitted that he needed help with the lifting. Response at 14, ECF No. 44. The Court FINDS that Mr. Miranda was not able to perform the essential requirement of being able to regularly lift 50 pounds. The Court FINDS that Mr. Miranda was not a qualified employee for the rural striper position because he could not perform essential requirements of the job.

B. Transfer to a Different Position
An employer might be required to provide a disabled employee a job reassignment to a vacant position as a reasonable accommodation under the ADA. Smith, 180 F.3d at 1161; See also 42 U.S.C. § 12111(9)(B). Reassignment is only required when there is no accommodation that would allow the disabled employee to perform his or her current job or that any accommodation that would allow the employee [*13]  to continue in his or her current job would require undue hardship on the employer. Smith, 180 F.3d at 1166.
Looking at the language of the ADA, the Tenth Circuit has determined that a reasonable accommodation of a reassignment to a vacant position should be read literally. Smith, 180 F.3d at 1164. An employer has to do more than merely consider the employee for reassignment. Id. Reassignment means that "the employee gets the vacant position if s/he is qualified for it." Id. at 1166-67. The employee does not need to be the best qualified applicant for the vacant position. Sanchez, 695 F.3d at 1180. Reassignment of an employee to a vacant position is a reasonable accommodation that must be considered and offered to a disabled employee who cannot perform his or her existing job. Smith, 180 F.3d at 1167. As discussed, Mr. Miranda could not perform his job as a rural striper. WYDOT was required to transfer Mr. Miranda to a vacant position if he was qualified. WYDOT does not dispute that there were vacant positions available.
There are limitations on an employer's obligation to provide a disabled employee with a job reassignment. The employee must be qualified, the employer does not have to change the job requirements to fit the disabled employee, the job must actually be vacant, and the transfer [*14]  must not impose an undue burden on the employee. Smith, 180 F.3d at 1169. Vacant positions include positions that are currently open and any positions that an employer reasonably anticipates will become available in the "fairly immediate future." Id. at 1175. The employer has discretion to choose which appropriate vacant position to offer to the qualified disabled employee. Id. at 1170. If the employee rejects the employer's choice of assignment and that selection was reasonable (e.g. the employee was qualified and the position was not a demotion unless no equivalent positions were available), the employer has no obligation to offer the employee any further assignments. Id. at 1177. The employer cannot refuse to transfer an employee because there are other more qualified applicants available for the position. Id. at 1169.
Reassignment of an employee is an interactive process. Id. at 1171. The process usually starts with an employee notifying an employer of his or her disability and resulting limitations and requesting a reassignment if there is no reasonable accommodation that would allow the employee to remain in his or her existing job. Id. at 1171-72. The employee needs to provide enough information about his or her disability and any limitations to at least suggest that [*15]  reassignment may be a reasonable accommodation. Id. at 1172. There is no specific language the employee is required to use. Id. Both parties need to communicate with each other in good faith as part of the interactive process, but there are no specific rules about how the parties must communicate. Id. at 1172-73.
Mr. Miranda fulfilled his role under the interactive process. He informed WYDOT of his disability and limitations and made it clear that he was seeking another position with WYDOT. Complaint at 4, 6, ECF No. 11; see also Miranda Depo. at 101-04, ECF No. 44-1. WYDOT, however, did not communicate with Mr. Miranda in good faith about him obtaining a transfer. See Mark Gillett Depo. 45-47, ECF No. 44-1.
The Tenth Circuit noted that even if an employer fails to proceed through the interactive process in good-faith to help a disabled employee secure a reassignment position, the employee is not entitled to recovery unless he can show that a reasonable accommodation was possible and that he or she would have received a reassignment position. Smith, 180 F.3d at 1174.
To survive a motion for summary judgment on a failure to accommodate by offering reassignment to a vacant position claim, the employee has the initial burden to present [*16]  a prima facie case. Id. at 1179. To make a prima facie case the employee must show:
(1) The employee is a disabled person within the meaning of the ADA and has made any resulting limitations from his or her disability known to the employer;
(2) The preferred option of accommodation within the employee's existing job cannot reasonably be accomplished.
(3) The employee requested the employer reasonably to accommodate his or her disability by reassignment to a vacant position, which the employee may identify at the outset or which the employee may request the employer identify through an interactive process, in which the employee in good faith was willing to, or did, cooperate;
(4) The employee was qualified, with or without reasonable accommodation, to perform one or more appropriate vacant jobs within the company that the employee must, at the time of the summary judgment proceeding, specifically identify and show were available within the company at or about the time the request for reassignment was made; and
(5) The employee suffered injury because the employer did not offer to reassign the employee to any appropriate vacant position.
Id. at 1179.
Once the employee presents enough evidence to make a prima facie [*17]  case, the burden of production shifts to the employer to present evidence "(1) conclusively rebutting one or more elements of plaintiff's prima facie case or (2) establishing an affirmative defense, such as undue hardship or one of the other affirmative defenses available to the employer." Id. If the employer makes such a showing, summary judgment for the employer is appropriate unless the employee then presents evidence establishing a genuine dispute regarding any affirmative defenses and/or rehabilitating any elements of his or her prima facie case that the employer challenged to show a genuine dispute of material fact. Id.
Mr. Miranda has not presented a prima facie case for failure to accommodate by transferring to another position. He does not demonstrate that he was qualified for a vacant position. Mr. Miranda claims he was qualified for maintenance positions, but those positions have the same requirements of longer hours (up to 15 hours in a single day) and heavy lifting. James Evensen Depo. 85-88, ECF No. 44-1. WYDOT claims that Mr. Miranda was not qualified for any position at WYDOT because he was insubordinate. Memo at 18, ECF No. 43. In the past, Mr. Miranda had difficulty following [*18]  instructions: He walked off the job in June 2013; he refused to plow snow for a particular maintenance foreman; he would be on his cell phone instead of working; he often showed up late to work; and he almost walked during one of his employee evaluations. Id. WYDOT also asserts that Mr. Miranda did not receive certain positions because he lacked the education required, did not have appropriate customer service experience, and/or applied late. See Exhibit N, ECF No. 43-14; see also Exhibit Q, ECF No. 43-17; see also Exhibit I at 14, ECF No. 43-9.
Mr. Miranda alleges (without providing a citation or explaining who made the statement) that WYDOT admitted Mr. Miranda was qualified for a driver's license examiner position. Complaint at 7, ECF No. 11. Mr. Miranda provided an application showing his prior work history. ECF 44-1 at 26-45. Mr. Miranda alleges that he was qualified for this position because of his previous experience in fire service and his involvement in helping people get their commercial driver's licenses. Response at 12, ECF No. 44. WYDOT asserts that customer service is a big part of the job. Memo at 4, ECF No. 43. Mr. Miranda argues that he has customer service experience through [*19]  his time when he was self-employed running a construction business. Miranda Depo. at 8, ECF No. 44-1. However, in the application he submitted in Exhibit 2, Mr. Miranda does not list customer service in the "Duties Summary" section for his self-employment position. ECF No. 44-1 at 34. Mr. Miranda only describes tangential customer service experience in his briefing.
The Court disagrees that Mr. Miranda has shown he has customer service experience. However, even if Mr. Miranda had demonstrated a prima facie case that he was qualified for the driver's license examiner position, WYDOT conclusively rebuts that evidence. WYDOT explained that the driver's license examiner position requires that an employee have strong customer service skills and that the employee be able to deal with irate customers. Memo at 4, ECF No. 43. Mr. Miranda has demonstrated poor customer service skills. One of the problems Mr. Miranda had with WYDOT was on a particular occasion, Mr. Miranda's supervisor Lynden Mills was yelling at him. Miranda Depo. at 53-54, ECF No. 43-4. In response, Mr. Miranda walked away and went to work somewhere else without telling anyone where he we went. Id. Mr. Miranda explained that he was taught [*20]  to walk away from confrontation. Id. at 54. Other WYDOT employees described Mr. Miranda as someone who was difficult to work with and would easily take offense to any kind of criticism and become angry. Evensen Depo. at 38-39, 79-80, ECF No. 43-11; see also Mike Hoover Affidavit at 3, ECF No. 43-2. In response to a negative performance evaluation, Mr. Miranda almost walked out on the evaluation. Hoover Affidavit at 3, ECF No. 43-2. The Court FINDS that WYDOT has rebutted Mr. Miranda's prima facie case. Mr. Miranda was not qualified for the driver's license examiner position because he had poor customer service skills. Mr. Miranda would not be able to respond to an angry customer by walking away or getting angry back. Because there is no job within WYDOT that Mr. Miranda has shown that he could have performed, WYDOT did not discriminate against Mr. Miranda by failing to transfer him to another position.

C. Mr. Miranda's Other Accommodation Requests
Mr. Miranda requested six other accommodations from WYDOT while he was employed as a rural striper. Those requests are that WYDOT give Mr. Miranda a mentor coach, allow Mr. Miranda time out periods, provide Mr. Miranda daily tasks lists, additional [*21]  bathroom breaks, relationship building, and continued counseling.
The Court FINDS that Mr. Miranda was not "otherwise qualified" to work as a rural striper and that these accommodations would not have affected that fact. None of these accommodations change the fact that Mr. Miranda could not work the ten hour or longer shifts necessary for rural stripers or that he struggled with the weight requirement. Even if these accommodations were plausible (and the Court is skeptical that they are), Mr. Miranda would still not be qualified to work as a rural striper or in any of the other jobs he applied for due to the previously discussed reasons.
The Court FINDS that Mr. Miranda was not an otherwise qualified employee. Therefore, the Court GRANTS summary judgment on Mr. Miranda's failure to accommodate claim.

2. Retaliation
Under Title VII retaliation claims, the plaintiff must first establish a prima facie case of retaliation by showing that (1) he or she engaged in protected opposition to Title VII discrimination; (2) he or she suffered an adverse employment action; and (3) there is a causal connection between the protected activity and the adverse employment action. Meiners v. Univ. of Kansas, 359 F.3d 1222, 1229 (10th Cir. 2004). For conduct to be an adverse [*22]  action, the employer's conduct must be 'materially adverse' to the employee's job status, meaning it must amount to a 'significant change in employment status' or benefits. Id. at 1230. Adverse action can also include acts that carry 'a significant risk of humiliation, damage to reputation, and a concomitant harm to future employment prospects.' Annett v. Univ. of Kansas, 371 F.3d 1233, 1241 (10th Cir. 2004). Disciplinary action from the employer can constitute adverse employment action. Dick v. Phone Directories Co., Inc., 397 F.3d 1256, 1270 (10th Cir. 2005).
After the plaintiff makes a prima facie showing, the employer must "articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse employment action." Meiners, 359 F.3d at 1229. The plaintiff must then demonstrate that the employer's asserted reasons for the adverse action are pretextual. Id.
A plaintiff may establish pretext by showing such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, incoherencies, or contradictions in the employer's proffered legitimate reasons for its action that a reasonable factfinder could rationally find them unworthy of credence and hence infer that the employer did not act for the asserted non-discriminatory reasons. However, mere conjecture that [an] employer's explanation is a pretext for intentional discrimination is an insufficient basis for denial of summary [*23]  judgment.
Santana v. City and Cty. of Denver, 488 F.3d 860, 864-865 (10th Cir. 2007) (internal citations and quotation marks omitted) (brackets in original). "[A]n employee's opinion about his or her qualifications does not give rise to a material factual dispute." Id. at 866. "Mere conjecture that the [employer] acted with discriminatory reasons will not suffice to establish pretext." Annett v. Univ. of Kansas, 371 F.3d 1233, 1241 (10th Cir. 2004). The plaintiff needs to present evidence that the employer did not believe the reasons it offered and therefore may have been pursuing a hidden agenda based on discrimination. Dewitt v. Southwestern Bell Telephone Co., 845 F.3d 1299, 1307 (10th Cir. 2017). When evaluating a plaintiff's claim of pretext, the Court examines the facts as they appear to the employer. Id. The Court does not ask whether the employer's decision was correct, fair, or wise but whether the employer honestly believed the nondiscriminatory reasons it provided for its actions and acted in good faith on its beliefs. Id.
Mr. Miranda has engaged in protected activity. He reported his disability to WYDOT. Complaint at 4, ECF No. 11. He requested accommodations based on his PTSD and chronic neck pain. Id. WYDOT does not dispute Mr. Miranda engaged in protected activity. Mr. Miranda argues that he faced adverse action when he received his first letter of reprimand for failing to plow snow, a negative [*24]  performance evaluation, his second letter of reprimand when he walked off the job, and when he was terminated. Complaint at 9, 12, ECF No. 11; see also Response at 6, ECF No. 44.
The Court finds that the first letter of reprimand regarding the failure of Mr. Miranda to plow snow is not an adverse action. After a discussion, Mr. Miranda signed a snow plow clarification agreement, and WYDOT removed the reprimand from Mr. Miranda's file. Memo at 6, ECF No. 43. Once the reprimand was removed, it no longer affected Mr. Miranda's employment options with WYDOT, and WYDOT treated the incident as if it never happened. Id. at 2.
Mr. Miranda argues that this is an adverse action because it caused embarrassment and humiliation. Response at 16, ECF No. 44. Mr. Miranda argues that there is a causal connection between the adverse action and protected activity because the reprimand occurred on the same day he requested accommodations for his disabilities. Complaint at 4-5, ECF No. 11. The timing of an adverse action can establish the causation between a protected activity and an adverse employment action if the adverse action occurs very shortly after protected activity. Meiners, 359 F.3d at 1231. Even if the Court were to find that the reprimand [*25]  were adverse action (at which point the Court would agree that Mr. Miranda has established a causal connection), WYDOT has offered a nondiscriminatory reason for the reprimand. Mr. Miranda refused to plow snow when ordered by a supervisor, and that was part of Mr. Miranda's job requirement. Memo at 6, ECF No. 43. Although Mr. Miranda disputes whether he was required to plow snow, he has not presented any evidence demonstrating that WYDOT did not believe that he was required to plow snow when instructed. Miranda Depo. at 43-44. Mr. Miranda even admits that it was possible that someone not on the snow plow list could be called in to plow snow. Id. This admission shows that WYDOT had a non-pretextual reason for issuing the written reprimand. From WYDOT's prospective, Mr. Miranda refused to do his job, and WYDOT issued a written reprimand in response.
After discussing the first written reprimand, Mr. Miranda argues that his negative performance evaluation was an adverse action because it caused humiliation and embarrassment. Response at 16, ECF No. 44. Mr. Miranda does not explain how this negative evaluation was connected to discrimination and merely seems to assume that anything unfavorable that [*26]  happened to him at work must be discrimination. The Court finds this conduct was not retaliation as Mr. Miranda has not shown a causal connection to discrimination.
The other written reprimand was for Mr. Miranda walking off the job. Memo at 6, 20-21 ECF No. 43. This reprimand was not removed from Mr. Miranda's file and could have affected Mr. Miranda's employment options within WYDOT. This reprimand is an adverse employment action. The Court is not sure how Mr. Miranda means to establish a causal connection to discrimination. In his Response, Mr. Miranda argues that Mr. Mills started the argument and that he (Mr. Miranda) walked away as he was taught to do. Id. at 17. Mr. Miranda claims all his adverse actions took place the same day he made an accommodation request. Id. at 18. He does not identify what request he made the same day as his second reprimand. Assuming Mr. Miranda has established a prima facie case, WYDOT has provided a nonpretexual reason for the written reprimand. Mr. Miranda walked away from his supervisor after being told to get off his cell phone and get to work. Second Reprimand Letter, ECF No. 43-21. Mr. Miranda did not say where he was going, and WYDOT considered Mr. Miranda's actions to be job [*27]  abandonment, which was a violation of WYDOT policy. Id. Even if Mr. Miranda requested an accommodation the same day as the reprimand (whatever that request may have been), the reprimand was issued the very day after the incident. Id.
Mr. Miranda tries to argue that his supervisor frequently treated him badly. Response at 6, ECF No. 44. Mr. Miranda does not present any evidence that the reason why Mr. Mills treated Mr. Miranda poorly was due to Mr. Miranda's disability and retaliation over accommodation requests. Based on Mr. Miranda's evidence, Mr. Mills treated everyone beneath him at work poorly. Id. at 5; see also Ronald Hartwig Depo. at 10, 15-16, ECF No. 44-1. As Ron Hartwig (Mr. Miranda's co-worker) explained it, Mr. Mills "was an ass." Id. at 16. Treating everyone poorly is not discrimination or retaliation based on disability. See 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). It may be poor management. Furthermore, Mr. Miranda argues that he was treated poorly because he reported safety concerns. Miranda Depo. at 104, 112 ECF No. 44-1. That is not a protected activity under the Rehabilitation Act or the ADA and is unrelated to Mr. Miranda's disabilities.
The next alleged act of retaliation was Mr. Miranda's termination. This action is [*28]  clearly adverse as Mr. Miranda no longer has his job. There is no causal connection though. WYDOT terminated Mr. Miranda because he was unable to perform the essential functions of his rural striper job. Memo at 7, ECF No. 43. The essential functions of the job at issue are the ten hour shifts and the weight requirements. Memo at 3, ECF No. 43. The job Mr. Miranda had required four ten hour shifts and would sometimes involve longer shifts depending on the project. Evensen Depo. at 73-75, 90, ECF No. 43-11. Mr. Miranda could not work more than seven or eight hour shifts. ECF No. 43-12. The Court finds that this was a modified schedule, but it was still an essential requirement because it saved WYDOT $50,000, saved time, and was how the employees (past and present) normally worked. Evensen Depo. at 73-76, ECF No. 43-11. Given that it could take two hours get to a work location, it would not make sense for employees to work eight hours when they could work ten hours or more and get the job done the same day. Furthermore, it is clear that the four ten hour shifts were not related to Mr. Miranda's disability. Mr. Miranda worked this shift arrangement during an earlier employment stint with WYDOT before he [*29]  left employment with WYDOT to be self-employed. Miranda Depo. at 9, ECF No. 44-1; see also Response at 2, ECF No. 44. According to Mr. Evensen in his deposition, WYDOT has been using ten hour shifts for Mr. Miranda's position at specific times of the year since 2010. Evensen Depo. at 75, ECF No. 43-11. Changing the ten hour shifts to five eight hour shifts all year round would have resulted in an undue financial hardship to WYDOT. Furthermore, while Mr. Miranda argues that his doctor's restrictions allowed him to lift up to 50 pounds which was what his job required, he also admits struggling with lifting the 50 pounds required. Miranda Depo. at 65-66, ECF No. 44-1. Mr. Miranda has failed to show a genuine dispute of material fact that he was terminated based on discrimination. Mr. Miranda was terminated because he could not perform the essential functions of his job, with or without a reasonable accommodation. In fact, even Mr. Miranda does not seem too convinced that he was terminated based on disability discrimination.
Q. Do you think you were really fired for not being able to perform your job?
A. No.
Q. Why do you think you were really fired?
A. I feel like they selectively enforced [*30]  their rules and made an example out of me because I questioned their authority, for example, with the safety issues.
Q. Do you think it was a result of you disclosing your disability?
A. Very easily could have been.
Q. Do you think that it was because you requested accommodations?
A. Yes.
Miranda Depo. at 104, ECF No. 44-14 (emphasis added).

3. Breach of Contract
Mr. Miranda claims WYDOT breached his employment contract in three respects: Mr. Miranda did not receive paid administrative leave on time, Mr. Miranda requested an appeal but was denied, and WYDOT allegedly did not follow its own policies in dismissing Mr. Miranda. Complaint at 14-16, ECF No. 11. "The elements for a breach of contract claim consist of a lawfully enforceable contract, an unjustified failure to timely perform all or any part of what is promised therein, and entitlement of injured party to damages." Halling v. Yovanovich, 2017 WY 28, ¶ 13, 391 P.3d 611, 616-17 (Wyo. 2017).
The paid administrative leave claim is moot. See Case Management Plan (ECF No. 29) at 4. WYDOT admits that it paid Mr. Miranda late but that it paid him with interest. Memo at 1, n.1, ECF No. 43. Furthermore, Mr. Miranda never explained how being paid late caused him damages, how late he was paid, or why he was paid late. It could have [*31]  been a simple error in payroll. Mr. Miranda claims the late payment shows bad faith at the time of termination. Response at 20, ECF No. 44. The Court disagrees. The Court FINDS that the claim for administrative pay is moot, and, in any event, Mr. Miranda has not established damages.
With regards to Mr. Miranda's appeal, there was no breach. Mr. Miranda argues that he sent a letter appealing his termination to Mark Gillett and that Mr. Gillett did not respond to his letter. Id. WYDOT explained that Mr. Miranda was required to send his appeal to the human resources administrator, Lon Pfau1, and that there is no evidence that he did. Memo at 2-3, 28, ECF No. 43; see also ECF NO. 43-8. Mr. Miranda stated that he could not remember if he sent his appeal to anyone other than Mr. Gillett. Miranda Depo. at 57-58, ECF No. 43-4. The Court FINDS that Mr. Miranda has failed to establish a genuine issue of fact regarding whether WYDOT breached its employment contract by failing to respond to Mr. Miranda's appeal of his termination because Mr. Miranda has not shown he properly appealed his termination.
Whether WYDOT breached Mr. Miranda's employment contact in not following its own policies requires some discussion. [*32]  Under Wyoming law, the hiring of an employee occurs by contract. Wilder v. Cody Cty. Chamber of Commerce, 868 P.2d 211, 216 (Wyo. 1994). Employment contracts are either express or implied in fact contacts. Id. Express contracts have terms that are declared by the parties in writing or orally at the time a contract is formed. Id. An implied in fact employment contract "arises from a mutual agreement and intent to promise which is found in the acts or conduct of the party sought to be bound." Id. Employment contracts from employee handbooks or policies are implied in fact contracts. Id. at 217. Whether a contract is ambiguous is a question of law for the court. Id. at 216. If the meaning of a contract is ambiguous, the court may have to determine the parties' intentions from evidence outside the contract, and the interpretation becomes a mixed question of law and fact. Id.
All employment contracts contain an implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing. Id. at 220. Good faith means 'faithfulness to an agreed common purpose and consistency with the justified expectations of the other party; it excludes a variety of types of conduct characterized as involving bad faith because they violate community standards of decency, fairness or reasonableness.' Id. (internal quotation marks and [*33]  emphasis removed).
WYDOT asserts that the policy Mr. Miranda claims it violated (SEMM policy 7-9) is not mandatory but only a guideline. Memo at 29, ECF No. 43. WYDOT provides the following excerpt:
Following are the guidelines to use when legitimate concerns arise concerning an employee's ability to perform the responsibilities and duties of his or her position adequately.
Id. The policy states that:
[W]hen an employee cannot continue to perform the critical elements of the job, but can perform at a reduced level, the following personnel actions will be considered: voluntary reappointment, involuntary reappointment, transfer, permanent part-time work, disability retirement, regular retirement, and resignation or termination for physical or mental inability to perform duties.
Response at 21, ECF No. 44 (emphasis added).
WYDOT did not follow this policy in terminating Mr. Miranda because it did not consider options outside of termination. WYDOT does not even attempt to argue that it followed SEMM policy 7-9. Response at 29, ECF No. 43. The Court is not persuaded by WYDOT's argument that the policy is not mandatory because it uses the word guidelines. WYDOT did not act in good faith when it failed to [*34]  follow SEMM policy 7-9. However, damages are a problem for Mr. Miranda. The economic damages that Mr. Miranda lays out appear to assume that he would have been able to continue working with WYDOT at the same pay. See ECF No. 34-1. The Court has already found that Mr. Miranda has not demonstrated that he was a qualified individual for any of the positions at WYDOT. Mr. Miranda has not directed the Court to what damages he suffered for not being able to resign or retire, if retirement was even an option (which Mr. Miranda does not address). The Court FINDS that Mr. Miranda has not demonstrated a genuine issue of material fact regarding whether he suffered damages as a result of WYDOT failing to follow its SEMM policy 7-9.

Conclusion
Mr. Miranda argues that WYDOT failed to accommodate him, retaliated against him, and breached his employment contract on the basis of his disabilities. Mr. Miranda has not shown that the adverse actions he experienced were due to his disabilities rather than legitimate nondiscriminatory reasons.
Mr. Miranda has not met his burden to show a genuine issue of material fact that any of the adverse actions that he experienced were because of disability discrimination. [*35]  He was not able to perform his rural striper position. His accommodation requests have nothing to do with the actual functions of the job he had trouble performing. He lacked the education, experience, or customer service skills to transfer to another position. He applied late for some positions. Mr. Miranda has not established a state breach of contract claim.
Upon reviewing the briefings and the record, for the above stated reasons, the Court hereby ORDERS Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment (ECF No. 42) is GRANTED. It is further ORDERED that all other pending motions are hereby DENIED as moot.
Judgment will be entered accordingly.
Dated this 2nd day of March, 2018.
/s/ Alan B. Johnson
Alan B. Johnson
United States District Judge

JUDGMENT
The Court has entered its "Order Granting Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment," finding that the relief sought by Wyoming Department of Transportation should be granted. Accordingly, it is hereby
ORDERED, ADJUDGED, AND DECREED that the parties shall bear their own attorneys' fees, except that Wyoming Department of Transportation may recover costs pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 54.
Dated this 2nd day of March, 2018
/s/ Alan B. Johnson
Alan B. Johnson
United States District [*36]  Judge




End of Document

