Mobley v. St. Luke's Health Sys.
United States District Court for the Western District of Missouri, Western Division
June 1, 2021, Decided; June 1, 2021, Filed
Case No. 4:19-CV-00764-BCW

Reporter
2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 124718 *; 2021 WL 2665455
JOSEPH MOBLEY, Plaintiff, v. SAINT LUKE'S HEALTH SYSTEM, INC., Defendant.
Subsequent History: Affirmed by Mobley v. St. Luke's Health Sys., Inc., 2022 U.S. App. LEXIS 31585 (8th Cir. Mo., Nov. 16, 2022)
Counsel:  [*1] For Joseph Mobley, Plaintiff: Henry Warren Tanner, Jr, LEAD ATTORNEY, The Law Firm of Henry Tanner LLC, Kansas City, MO; Reginald Lee Stockman, LEAD ATTORNEY, Stockman & Boyda, North Kansas City, MO; Dione C Greene, DCG Law Firm, Lee's Summit, MO.
For Saint Luke's Health System, Inc., Defendant: Curtis R. Summers, Jeffrey D Hanslick, Jennifer Schorgl, Littler Mendelson, PC-KCMO Walnut, Kansas City, MO.
Judges: BRIAN C. WIMES, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: BRIAN C. WIMES
Opinion



ORDER
Before the Court is Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment (Doc. #57). The Court, being duly advised of the premises, grants said motion.
Plaintiff Joseph Mobley, a former employee of Defendant Saint Luke's Health System, Inc. ("St. Luke's"), alleges claims for employment discrimination under state and federal law. Mobley's amended complaint alleges the following: (1) disability discrimination in violation of the Missouri Human Rights Act, Mo. Rev. Stat. §§ 213.010, et seq., ("MHRA"); (2) disability discrimination in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 12102, et seq., ("ADA"); (3) failure to accommodate in violation of the MHRA; (4) failure to accommodate under the ADA; (5) retaliation in violation of the MHRA; (6) retaliation in violation of the ADA; (7) race and gender discrimination in violation of the MHRA: (8) [*2]  race and gender discrimination in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000e-2, et seq., ("Title VII"); and (9) race discrimination in violation of 42 U.S.C. § 1981.
St. Luke's argues there is no genuine issue of material fact and it its entitled to judgment on each of Mobley's claims. First, St. Luke's argues it is entitled to summary judgment on Mobley's Counts I, II, V, VI, VII, VIII, and IX because Mobley cannot show that he suffered an adverse employment action during the applicable limitation periods. Second, St. Luke's argues it is entitled to summary judgment on Counts III and IV because there is no genuine issue of material fact and St. Luke's is entitled to judgment as a matter of law that the record does not demonstrate St. Luke's denied a reasonable accommodation.

LEGAL STANDARD
A party is entitled to summary judgment "if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986) (citing Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)).
A party who moves for summary judgment bears the burden to establish that there is no genuine issue of material fact. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 247, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). When considering a motion for summary [*3]  judgment, the court must evaluate the evidence in the light must favorable to the nonmoving party and the nonmoving party is entitled to "the benefit of all reasonable inferences." Mirax Chem. Prods. Corp. v. First Interstate Commercial Corp., 950 F.2d 566, 569 (8th Cir. 1991).

UNCONTROVERTED FACTS
Mobley, an African American male, was hired by St. Luke's in June 2012 to work as a Customer Relations Specialist.
In July 2015, St. Luke's Patient Access Manager Jessica Lillard promoted Mobley to Reimbursement Coordinator. Lillard rated Mobley's overall work performance for 2015 a 3 on a scale of 5.
In July 2016, Lillard promoted Mobley from Reimbursement Coordinator to Patient Access Supervisor. In this role, Mobley's co-supervisor was Margarita Valdez. Mobley and Valdez both reported to Lillard, and Lillard reported to Paul Knudtson.
As Patient Access Supervisor, Mobley had employees who reported directly to him. This position was the first time Mobley had ever had direct reports. Fifteen to twenty employees reported directly to him within the Patient Access Department, which is a call center through which St. Luke's communicates with patients about insurance coverage and out-of-pocket costs for medical treatment. Work in the department did not require interactions with patients face-to-face; [*4]  department employees communicated with patients by phone and in writing. Most of the employees directly reporting to Mobley worked from home, i.e. telecommuted, five days per week. As a supervisor, Mobley was eligible to regularly telecommute one scheduled day per week but was also allowed to telecommute more than one day per week.
In 2016, Mobley was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis (MS) by Dr. Younger and began a treatment relationship for his MS with Dr. Jassan. Mobley continued in his role as Patient Access Supervisor after this diagnosis and Lillard rated his overall work performance in 2016 a 4 on a scale of 5.
In 2017, Lillard again rated Mobley's overall work performance in his role as Patient Access Supervisor a 4 out of 5.
In December 2017, Mobley asked Lillard whether he could telecommute more than one day per week. Lillard said she would consider the request and if Mobley needed to work from home more than his scheduled one day per week he could request to telecommute as the need arose.
In February 2018, Mobley sought permission to work from home "only when his condition flared," with a letter from Dr. Jassan.
In March 2018, Mobley met with Lillard and Ashley Callow from St. [*5]  Luke's human resources department (HR) to discuss Mobley's request to telecommute on workdays when "his condition flared." After the meeting, St. Luke's notified Mobley it was denying his request to telecommute when his condition flared "at this time." After this notification, Callow told Mobley he could reach back out to her if he needed to follow up on anything related to the March 2018 meeting. Mobley responded, thanking Callow for her support and indicating a follow up conversation about telecommuting might be necessary, and in the event it was, Mobley would discuss the issue with Lillard first. Mobley did not follow up or seek further discussion of the request to telecommute. Mobley understood Lillard's general position to be that he should use his paid time off (PTO) on the days he was unable to come into the office.
In 2017 and 2018, Lillard, Valdez, and/or Knudtson each observed Mobley moving more slowly and/or struggling with his gait.
For the first two quarters of 2018, Lillard rated Mobley's overall work performance a 4 out of 5. After the March 2018 meeting, Mobley sought and Lillard granted his requests to telecommute more often than his scheduled one work-from-home day [*6]  per week. Though Lillard denied Mobley's request to telecommute on one occasion after the March 2018 meeting, she generally approved Mobley's requests to telecommute before and after March 2018.
Also after the March 2018 meeting, Mobley was asked to rearrange the conference room furniture twice. Mobley did not object to the request and rearranged the furniture as requested. Additionally, Mobley performed five to seven inspections of home work stations, which required him to visit the homes of his direct reports. Also, Mobley asked for a reserved parking space after the March 2018 meeting; St. Luke's encouraged Mobley to park in the handicapped spaces and if none were available to use security to get to the building and back to his vehicle.
On August 24, 2018, Mobley tendered his letter of resignation to St. Luke's from the Patient Access Supervisor position. At the time of the resignation, Mobley had already accepted another job. The letter stated
[i]t is with sadness and great disappointment that I submit this letter of resignation, to be effective September 8th, 2018. It has truly been an honor and pleasure to work with and lead this group of employees in the Financial Clearance Center [*7]  . . . . I would like to thank [St. Luke's] for the opportunity to serve its patients . . . .
Mobley did not notify anyone at St. Luke's of his belief that he had no choice but to resign. Between the March 2018 meeting and August 3, 2018 (the date on which Mobley accepted the offer of employment from Western Governors University), Mobley used 13 days of PTO.
Throughout Mobley's time as a Patient Access Supervisor, Mobley was paid less per hour than Valdez because Valdez had extensive management experience when she was hired into the supervisory position, whereas Mobley had none.
Mobley applied for five positions for which he was not selected: (1) Community Benefit Program Coordinator; (2) Project Manager Intern; (3) Special Projects Graduate Intern; (4) Patient Access Manager; and (5) Patient Accounts Manager. Mobley believes he was not selected for these positions because he is an African American male.
Regarding the Community Benefit Program Coordinator position, in March 2016, Taylor Warwick hired Trenton Stronger because though Mobley interviewed well, Warwick believed the position's duties did not align with Mobley's interests and what Mobley was looking for long-term because the position [*8]  was entry-level.
Regarding the Project Management Intern position, in May 2016, Patrick Altenhofen hired Christopher Musgrove, a candidate with a strong background in analytics, which was valuable to the position and which Mobley does not have.
Regarding the Special Projects Graduate Intern position, in May 2016, Sherri Milam hired MacKenzie Lahar, a candidate with an educational background in supply chain management, which was relevant to the position and which Mobley does not have.
Regarding the Patient Access Manager position at St. Luke's East, in February 2018, Knudtson hired Penny Tarwater who had experience which Mobley lacked.
Regarding the Patient Accounts Manager position, in December 2017, Diane Watkins rehired Elda Dykes after Dykes reconsidered her decision to leave the position. Mobley contends Watkins never considered him a serious applicant for the Patient Account Manager position and all managers reporting to Watkins are either Caucasian and/or female.
On August 17, 2018, Mobley filed his charge of discrimination while he was still employed by St. Luke's.

ANALYSIS
St. Luke's argues it is entitled to summary judgment on each of Mobley's nine discrimination claims. Before considering [*9]  whether genuine issue of material fact preclude judgment as a matter of law in favor of St. Luke's, the Court first sets forth several legal principles generally applicable to Mobley's claims.
First, though Mobley's discrimination claims are alleged under both state and federal law, Missouri courts "are guided by both Missouri law and any applicable federal employment discrimination decisions." Medley v. Valentine Radford Commc'ns, Inc., 173 S.W.3d 315, 319 (Mo. Ct. App. 2005).
Second, most of Mobley's discrimination claims are subject to an administrative exhaustion requirement. Administrative exhaustion under the MHRA requires a plaintiff to file an administrative complaint and either adjudicate the claim through the Missouri Commission on Human Rights (MCHR) or obtain a right-to-sue letter. Mo. Rev. Stat. §§ 213.075, 213.111(1). Administrative exhaustion for federal claims requires a plaintiff to timely file a charge of discrimination with the EEOC setting forth the nature and facts underlying the charge and to receive notice of the right to sue. Williams v. Little Rock Mun. Water Works, 21 F.3d 218, 222 (8th Cir. 1994). "Exhaustion requires a claimant to give notice of all claims of discrimination in the administrative complaint, but administrative complaints are interpreted liberally in an effort to further the remedial purposes of legislation that prohibits unlawful [*10]  employment practices." Tart v. Hill Behan Lumber Co., 31 F.3d 668, 671 (8th Cir. 1994). Thus, discrimination allegations that are "like or reasonably related to the allegations of the administrative charge" are properly considered administratively exhausted. Id.
Third, though the Court presumes for purposes of summary judgment that each of Mobley's claims are administratively exhausted and thus properly before the Court, only claims of discrimination occurring within the applicable limitations period are viable. An actionable claim of discrimination under the MHRA must have occurred within 180 days of the date of the plaintiff's administrative charge filed with the MCHR. Pollock v. Wettereau Food Distrib. Grp., 11 S.W.3d 754, 756 (Mo. Ct. App. 1999) (citing Mo. Rev. Stat. §§ 213.075, 213.111). An actionable claim of discrimination under federal law must have occurred within 300 days of the date of the plaintiff's administrative charge. 42 U.S.C § 2000e-5(e)(1). There is no dispute in this case Mobley filed his charge of discrimination on August 17, 2018; thus, Mobley's MHRA claims are actionably only if they occurred between February 18, 2018 and August 17, 2018 and Mobley's federal claims are actionable only if they occurred between October 21, 2017 and August 17, 2018.
Fourth, under circumstances where, as here, a plaintiff relies on indirect evidence to support his or her discrimination [*11]  claims alleged under the MHRA or federal law, a three-step burden shifting analysis applies. Medley, 173 S.W.3d at 312; Schierhoff v. Glaxosmithkline Consumer Healthcare, L.P., 444 F.3d 961, 964 (8th Cir. 2006) (citing McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973)). Under this framework, the plaintiff first bears the burden to set forth prima facie case of his or her claim. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802. If the plaintiff makes a prima facie case, the burden shifts to the defendant to show "a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the employment decision." Id. at 804. If the defendant provides a nondiscriminatory reason, the burden shifts back to the plaintiff to show the reason provided is "a pretext for discrimination." Schierhoff, 444 F.3d at 965 (citing id.).

A. St. Luke's is entitled to summary judgment on Count I for MHRA disability discrimination because the record does not demonstrate an adverse employment action.
St. Luke's argues there is no genuine issue of material fact and it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law on Mobley's claim for disability discrimination under the MRHA alleged in Count I on the basis that Mobley cannot demonstrate an adverse employment action. In opposition, Mobley asserts the record demonstrates a prima facie case of MHRA disability discrimination because he is disabled, was subject to constructive discharge and/or different conditions of employment, and the record [*12]  contains evidence from which to infer Mobley's disability was a factor in the adverse employment action alleged.
The MHRA prohibits discrimination in employment "against any individual with respect to her compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because of" an individual's "race, color, religion, sex, ancestry age or disability . . . ." Bram v. AT&T Mobility Servs., LLC, 564 S.W.3d 787, 796 (Mo. Ct. App. 2018); Mo. Rev. Stat. § 213.055.1(1)(a).
To demonstrate a claim for disability discrimination in violation of the MHRA, a plaintiff must prove the following elements: (1) membership in a protected class based on a "disability protected by the statute"; (2) an adverse employment action taken by the defendant; and (3) "evidence from which to infer the employee's protected status was a factor" in the adverse employment action. Kerr v. Curators of the Univ. of Mo., 512 S.W.3d 798, 811 (Mo. Ct. App. 2016); Gamber v. Mo. Dep't of Health & Senior Servs., 225 S.W.3d 470, 475 (Mo. Ct. App. 2007).
As defined by the MHRA, "discrimination" is any unfair treatment based on a protected characteristic. Kerr, 512 S.W.3d at 806. "Disability" is a physical or mental impairment substantially limiting one or more major life activities, or being regarding as having such an impairment, "which with or without reasonable accommodation does not interfere with performing the job . . . ." Mo. Rev. Stat. § 213.010(5)
An adverse employment action is that which negatively affects the plaintiff's "compensation, [*13]  terms, conditions, or privileges of employment." Bram, 564 S.W.3d at 796. A contributing factor is which "contributed a share in anything or has a part in producing the effect"; that is, whether the protected characteristic was a factor relative to the adverse employment action. Bram, 564 S.W.3d at 798 (citing Holmes v. Kan. City Mo. Bd. of Police Comm'rs, 364 S.W.3d 615, 627 (Mo. Ct. App. 2012)).
In this case, Mobley alleges MHRA disability discrimination on the basis that his MS diagnosis, which affected his ability to ambulate, did not, with or without reasonable accommodation, interfere with Mobley's job as Patient Access Supervisor. Mobley alleges St. Luke's considered his disability in taking the following adverse employment actions against him: (1) constructive discharge; and (2) subjecting him to different terms and conditions of employment.
The parties do not dispute Mobley is disabled as statutorily defined for purposes of this claim, and with all reasonable inferences drawn in Mobley's favor for purposes of summary judgment, the Court assumes Mobley's disability was a factor in St. Luke's conduct since the record reflects managerial-level employees observed Mobley's difficulty moving. Therefore, the dispositive issue for this claim is whether there exists any genuine issue of material fact precluding summary [*14]  judgment for St. Luke's on the element of an adverse employment action.
"An adverse employment action is a tangible change in working conditions that produces a material employment disadvantage." Dick v. Dickinson State Univ., 826 F.3d 1054, 1060 (8th Cir. 2016). "Examples include termination, cuts in pay or benefits, and changes that affect an employee's future career prospects." Id. "An employer is also liable for committing an adverse employment action if the employee in need of assistance actually requested it but was denied reasonable accommodation." Id. (citing Hatchett v. Philander Smith Coll., 251 F.3d 670, 675 (8th Cir. 2001).
Mobley alleges St. Luke's subjected him to different terms and conditions of employment. The uncontroverted facts demonstrate that during the applicable limitations period, Mobley scored four out of five for overall work performance and continued working in his role as Patient Access Supervisor. The uncontroverted facts also indicate Mobley telecommuted at least one day per week, and sometimes more than one time per week as permitted, during the applicable limitations period. Further, the record indicates on the days Mobley was unable to telecommute or come into work, St. Luke's encouraged Mobley to use his paid time off. Mobley argues St. Luke's encouraging him to use his paid time [*15]  off when he was unable to work negatively impacted his benefits such that it amounts to an adverse employment action; however, St. Luke's did not reduce Mobley's available paid time off and did not require Mobley to work on the days he took PTO. The record does not otherwise demonstrate any reduction of pay or any change in job responsibilities. Therefore, St. Luke's is entitled to summary judgment to the extent Mobley asserts disability discrimination premised on St. Luke's encouraging Mobley to use his PTO on days he was unable to work. Brown v. Gap, Inc., No. 06-CV-000380-FJG (W.D. Mo. Dec. 21, 2007) (Doc. #57 at 11).
Mobley also asserts St. Luke's took an adverse employment action against him in the form of constructive discharge. "Constructive discharge occurs when an employer deliberately renders an employee's working conditions so intolerable that the employee is forced to quit his or her job." Wallingsford v. City of Maplewood, 287 S.W.3d 682, 686 (Mo. 2009). The working conditions leading to constructive discharge "must be such that a reasonable person would find them intolerable." Id. A viable constructive discharge clam requires "proof of a continuous pattern of discriminatory treatment," such as "social coercion, demotions or changes [*16]  in job responsibilities." Id.
Though Mobley resigned from his role as Patient Access Supervisor, he alleges he had no choice but to resign based on St. Luke's treatment. Under the uncontroverted facts, there is no dispute Mobley did not indicate to St. Luke's he felt he had no choice but to resign. Further, there is no dispute that during the limitations period, Mobley was required to move conference room furniture on at least two occasions and also travel to the homes of his direct reports to inspect their workstations on several occasions; however, there is also no dispute that these tasks were within Mobley's regular job duties and he performed the tasks as usual without objection. In addition, there is no dispute that St. Luke's denied Mobley's request to telecommute more than one day per week as a matter of policy, and that Mobley was still permitted to telecommute more than one day per week as the need arose. Indeed, during the applicable limitations period, Lillard denied Mobley's request to telecommute on only one occasion. The record in this case does not demonstrate a continuous pattern of discriminatory treatment or a change in job responsibilities; thus, Mobley cannot demonstrate [*17]  constructive discharge as an actionable adverse employment action.
Based on the foregoing, Mobley cannot demonstrate a prima facie claim of MHRA disability discrimination because the record does not show St. Luke's took an adverse employment action against him. St. Luke's motion for summary judgment on Count I is granted. To the extent Mobley asserts the denial of reasonable accommodation as an adverse employment action, the Court considers this assertion separately in Count III.

B. St. Luke's is entitled to summary judgment on Count II for ADA disability discrimination because the record does not demonstrate an adverse employment action.
St. Luke's argues there is no genuine issue of material fact and it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law on Mobley's Count II for disability discrimination under the ADA because the record does not demonstrate St. Luke's took an adverse employment action against Mobley during the applicable limitations period. Mobley argues there are genuine issues of material fact precluding summary judgment that St. Luke's took adverse employment action(s) against him through constructive discharge and/or the loss of benefits.
To demonstrate a claim for ADA disability [*18]  discrimination, a plaintiff must prove the following: (1) he is disabled within the meaning of the ADA; (2) he "is qualified (with or without reasonable accommodation) to perform the essential functions of a job; and (3) the employee suffered an adverse employment action because of the disability." Henderson v. Ford Motor Co., 204 F.3d 1026, 1034 (8th Cir. 2005).
As with the Court's analysis of Count I, there is no dispute Mobley is disabled as defined by the ADA and the record demonstrates Mobley's ability to perform his job with or without reasonable accommodation for purposes of Count II. However, for the reasons set forth in the previous section, the record does not support Mobley's claims for constructive discharge and/or loss of benefits as adverse employment actions to support Mobley's ADA disability discrimination claim. Therefore, St. Luke's motion for summary judgment on Count II is granted.

C. St. Luke's is entitled to summary judgment on Counts III and IV for failure to accommodate.
St. Luke's argues there is no genuine issue of material fact and it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law on Mobley's Counts III and IV alleging disability discrimination based on failure to accommodate. St. Luke's specifically argues there "is no triable [*19]  issue on" Mobley's claims for failure to accommodate whether alleged under the MHRA (Count III) or under the ADA (Count IV) because under either statutory scheme, St. Luke's was not obligated to allow Mobley to work from home when his condition "flared," and St. Luke's did not violate the MHRA or ADA when it instead directed Mobley to telecommute on his scheduled days, on other days as requested and approved on a case-by-case basis, and otherwise encouraged Mobley to use his paid time off for self-care on the days he was unable to come to work or telecommute.
In opposition, Mobley argues St. Luke's is not entitled to summary judgment on Mobley's claims for failure to accommodate because under the MHRA and ADA, St. Luke's had an affirmative duty to grant Mobley a reasonable accommodation unless it presented an undue hardship. In support of Mobley's arguments against summary judgment, Mobley relies only on cases applying the ADA and asserts an employer's affirmative duty to provide a reasonable accommodation to a known disability under either statutory scheme. Therefore, the Court considers whether St. Luke's is entitled to summary judgment on Counts III and IV using the framework applicable [*20]  under the ADA. Hanlon v Mo. Dep't of Health & Hum. Servs., No. 2:10-CV-04267, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 20730, 2012 WL 528316, at *4 (W.D. Mo. Feb. 17, 2012) ("Neither party has argued that the MHRA's definition of 'disability' differs from the ADA's requirement that a plaintiff in order to state a prima facie case of disability discrimination show that he or she is qualified to perform the essential functions of the job with or without reasonable accommodation," such that the district court resolves the MHRA claim in a manner consistent with resolution of the ADA claim.).
A prima facie case of failure to accommodate under the ADA requires a plaintiff to show (1) he has a disability within the meaning of the statute; (2) he is qualified, with or without reasonable accommodation to perform the essential functions of his job; and (3) he suffered an adverse employment action because of the disability. Lors v. Dean, 595 F.3d 831, 834 (8th Cir. 2010); Peebles v. Potter, 354 F.3d 761, 765 (8th Cir. 2004).
A modified burden-shifting analysis applies to a claim for failure to accommodate. Brunckhorst v. City of Oak Park Heights, 914 F.3d 1177, 1182 (8th Cir. 2019) (citing Fenney v. Dakota, Minn. & E.R.R. Co., 327 F.3d 707, 712 (8th Cir. 2003). Under this modified analysis, the employee "must first make a facial showing that he has an ADA disability and that he suffered an adverse employment action. Then he must make a facial showing that he is a qualified individual." Brannon v. Luco Mop Co., 521 F.3d 843, 848 (8th Cir. 2008) (citing id.). If the employee makes this [*21]  prima facie showing, then the burden shifts to the employer to show it is unable to accommodate the employee through the proposed accommodation. Id.
An ADA disability is an impairment substantially limiting one or more of a person's major life activities. 42 U.S.C. § 12102(2). Major life activities include walking and standing. Fjellestad v. Pizza Hut of Am., Inc., 188 F.3d 844, 950 (8th Cir. 1999). The parties do not dispute the record demonstrates Mobley can show an ADA disability. The Court thus turns to the other required aspects of Mobley's prima facie case.
"To be a qualified individual within the meaning of the ADA, an employee must (1) possess the requisite skill, education, experience, and training for his position, and (2) be able to perform essential job functions, with or without reasonable accommodation." Brannon, 521 F.3d at 858. "In cases where the employee claims that he can perform the essential functions of the job with a reasonable accommodation, the employee must only make a facial showing that a reasonable accommodation is possible." Id. "[T]he plaintiff's burden, upon a defendant's motion for summary judgment, is only to show that the requested accommodation is reasonable on its face, i.e. ordinarily or in the run of cases." Hanlon, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 20730, 2012 WL 528316, at *3.
Under the uncontroverted facts, there is no dispute [*22]  Mobley has the requisite skill and experience for his work as Patient Access Supervisor. Thus, the dispositive issue is whether with all reasonable inferences drawn in Mobley's favor for purposes of summary judgment there is no genuine issue of material fact that Mobley could perform all essential functions of his job as Patient Access Supervisor, with or without an accommodation that is reasonable on its face.
Mobley argues his request to telecommute each time his MS flared is reasonable on its face because reasonable accommodations commonly include restructuring or modified work schedules, and persuasive authority supports Mobley's assertion that his request to telecommute was reasonable. (Doc. #63 at 30-31). St. Luke's argues the request to telecommute was not reasonable because Mobley's essential job functions included supervisory elements and while the ADA requires reasonable accommodation it does not require an employer to accommodate to the employee's preference. (Doc. #58 at 220).
Under the ADA, an accommodation need not be a plaintiff's preferred choice; an employer complies with the ADA as long as it provides an accommodation that is reasonable. Brunckhorst 914 F.3d at 1183 (citing Cravens v. Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Kan. City, 214 F.3d 1011, 1019 (8th Cir. 2000)). "Regular attendance [*23]  at work is an essential function of employment"' thus, an inability to perform a job's essential functions generally includes the ability to come to work. Brannon, 521 F.3d at 849 (citing Browning v. Liberty Mut. Ins., 178 F.3d 1043, 1048 (8th Cir. 1999). Further, working from home may, under certain circumstances, be a reasonable accommodation if job's essential functions can be adequately performed from home and the work-from-home arrangement does not result in any undue hardship to the employer. Hanlon, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 20730, 2012 WL 528316, at *3 (cf. Humphrey v. Mem'l Hosps. Ass'n, 239 F.3d 1128, 1136 (9th Cir. 2001) (physical attendance was not an essential job function for medical transcriptionists where employer permitted others in same role to work from home).
Under the circumstances presented here, however, Mobley's supervisory responsibilities are an essential function of his job as Patient Access Supervisor. Thus, Mobley has not demonstrated he could perform the essential functions of his job through his proposed accommodation of telecommuting anytime his MS flared. Kiel v. Select Artificials, Inc., 169 F.3d 1131, 1136 (8th Cir. 1999) ("The employment-discrimination laws have not vested in the federal courts the authority to sit as super-personnel departments reviewing the wisdom or fairness of the business judgments made by employers, except to the extent that those judgments involve intentional discrimination."). For these reasons, Mobley cannot [*24]  demonstrate a prima facie case for failure to accommodate because he cannot demonstrate that he could perform the essential functions of his job through the accommodation proposed. Though Mobley argues St. Luke's does not assert undue hardship, St. Luke's is not required to make this showing unless Mobley first demonstrates his prima facie case.
To the extent the record shows Mobley could perform the essential functions of his job with the reasonable accommodation St. Luke's provided to him, i.e. telecommuting more than his scheduled one day per week on a case-by-case basis and using his PTO on the days he could not telecommute and/or come into the office, the record does not demonstrate that St. Luke's failed to engage in the interactive process in good faith, or any other adverse employment action. Evans v. Coop Response Ctr., Inc., No. 19-2483, 2021 U.S. App. LEXIS 13180, 2021 WL 1741147, at *3 (8th Cir. 2001); Fjellestad, 188 F.3d at 954. St. Luke's is entitled to summary judgment on Counts III and IV.

D. St. Luke's is entitled to summary judgment on Count V for MHRA retaliation because the record does not demonstrate an adverse employment action.
St. Luke's argues there is no genuine issue of material fact and it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law Mobley's Count V for MHRA retaliation because Mobley cannot demonstrate [*25]  that St. Luke's took an actionable adverse employment action against him. Mobley argues genuine issues of material fact preclude summary judgment for St. Luke's because the record demonstrates the adverse employment actions of constructive discharge and/or the loss of benefits after Mobley requested accommodation.
The MHRA precludes retaliation against an employee for participating in an investigation or proceeding involving a charge or complaint of discrimination. Mo. Rev. Stat. § 213.070(2). A prima facie case of MHRA retaliation requires the plaintiff to show (1) he complained of discrimination; (2) an adverse employment action; and (3) a causal link between the complaint and the adverse employment action. Thompson v. W.-So. Life Assur. Co., 82 S.W.3d 203, 207 (Mo. Ct. App. 2002).
Even with all reasonable factual inferences drawn in Mobley's favor for purposes of summary judgment, the record does not demonstrate St. Luke's took any adverse action against Mobley in the form of constructive discharge and/or loss of benefits as set forth above. Therefore, St. Luke's motion for summary judgment on Count V for MHRA retaliation is granted.

E. St. Luke's is entitled to summary judgment on Count VI for ADA retaliation because the record does not demonstrate an adverse employment action.
St. [*26]  Luke's argues there is no genuine issue of material fact and it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law Mobley's Count VI for ADA retaliation because Mobley cannot demonstrate that St. Luke's took an actionable adverse employment action against him. Mobley argues genuine issues of material fact preclude summary judgment for St. Luke's because the record demonstrates the adverse employment actions of constructive discharge and/or the loss of benefits after Mobley requested accommodation.
A prima facie claim of ADA retaliation requires the plaintiff to show "(1) that he or she engaged in statutorily protected activity; (2) an adverse employment action was taken against him or her; and (3) a causal connection exists between the two events." Green v. Franklin Nat'l Bank of Minneapolis, 459 F.3d 903, 914 (8th Cir. 2006) (citations omitted).
For the same reasons set forth above, Mobley cannot demonstrate the occurrence of an adverse employment action during the applicable limitations period or otherwise rooted in his allegations for constructive discharge and/or a loss of benefits. St. Luke's motion for summary judgment is thus granted on Count VI for ADA retaliation.

F. St. Luke's is entitled to summary judgment on Count VII for race and gender discrimination under [*27]  the MHRA because the record does not show the decision to promote another over Mobley was discriminatory.
St. Luke's argues there is no genuine issue of material fact and it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law on Mobley's Count VII alleging race and gender discrimination in violation of the MHRA because the record does not demonstrate St. Luke's took an adverse employment action against Mobley. In opposition to summary judgment on Count VII, Mobley argues the record presents genuine issues of material fact whether St. Luke's failed to promote Mobley because is African American or because he is male.
As set forth in Mobley's opposition to summary judgment, a prima facie case of discrimination on the basis of race or sex requires the plaintiff to show: (1) he is a member of a protected group; (2) he was qualified for and applied for a promotion to an available job position; (3) he was not selected for the job; and (4) a similarly situated employee, not part of the protected group, was promoted instead. Shannon v. Ford Motor Co., 72 F.3d 678, 682 (8th Cir. 1996); Lampley v. Mo. Comm'n on Human Rights, 570 S.W.3d 16, 24 (Mo. 2019).
In this case, Mobley alleges St. Luke's discriminated against him based on his race and/or his gender under the MHRA when it failed to promote him and/or when it subjected him [*28]  to different terms or conditions of employment because he is an African American male. Under the uncontroverted facts, there are five instances in which Mobley applied for a position for which he was not selected. However, only one of these instances, the February 2018 selection of Penny Tarwater for Patient Access Manager, falls within the 180-day window for an actionable claim under the MHRA.
With all reasonable inferences drawn in Mobley's favor, he is a member of a protected class, he was not hired for the Patient Access Manager position for which he applied, and Tarwater, an individual with more experience, was hired instead. For purposes of summary judgment, the Court assumes Tarwater is female and not a racial minority, although these characteristics of Tarwater are not explicitly set forth in the uncontroverted facts. The dispositive issue is whether Plaintiff was qualified for the Patient Access Manager position.
There is no genuine issue of material fact that Tarwater had relevant experience for the Patient Access Manager position for which she was hired and that Plaintiff did not have relevant experience. St. Luke's decision to hire a more qualified candidate is a legitimate, [*29]  non-discriminatory reason not to hire and/or promote Plaintiff. St. Martin v. City of St. Paul, 680 F.3d 1027, 1034 (8th Cir. 2012); Farver v. McCarthy, 931 F.3d 808, 812-13 (8th Cir. 2019). The inference of pretext might arise then, if Mobley had superior qualifications to Tarwater; however, Plaintiff does not make such an argument here, nor does the record otherwise support such a conclusion. Ash v. Tyson Foods, Inc., 546 U.S. 454, 457-58, 126 S. Ct. 1195, 163 L. Ed. 2d 1053 (2006). St. Luke's motion for summary judgment on Count VII for MHRA race and/or gender discrimination for failure to promote is granted.

G. St. Luke's motion for summary judgment on Plaintiff's Count VIII for race and gender discrimination under Title VII is granted because the record does not demonstrate discriminatory conduct.
St. Luke's argues there is no genuine issue of material fact and it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law on Mobley's Count VIII for race and gender discrimination in violation of Title VII based on failure to promote, subjecting Mobley to different terms and conditions of employment, and pay disparity because the record does not show any adverse employment action. In opposition, Mobley argues genuine issues of material fact preclude summary judgment whether St. Luke's failed to promote him and/or paid him less based on his race or his gender.
The analysis in the previous section applies equally [*30]  to Mobley's Count VIII alleging gender and/or race discrimination in violation of Title VII and St. Luke's is thus entitled to summary judgment on Count VIII to the extent the claim is predicated on St. Luke's failure to promote Mobley in February 2018.
This conclusion is not dispositive of Count VIII, however, because a claim of discrimination alleged under Title VII is actionable as long as it occurred within 300 days of the date of the plaintiff's charge, as opposed to the 180-day limitations period applicable to a similar discrimination claim alleged under the MHRA. Because Mobley's Count VIII for race and/or gender discrimination under Title VII properly envelopes discriminatory conduct going back to October 2017, the Court considers whether St. Luke's is entitled to summary judgment to the extent Mobley's Count VIII is predicated on St. Luke's failure to promote Mobley to Patient Accounts Manager in December 2017.
Under the uncontroverted facts and with all reasonable factual inferences drawn in Mobley's favor, he is a member of a protected group, he applied for a promotion for which he was qualified, and Diane Watkins rehired Elda Dykes to a Patient Accounts Manager position instead [*31]  of hiring Mobley. While the uncontroverted facts do not expressly set forth that Dykes is female and/or not African American, the Court makes these assumptions for purposes of analysis. Therefore, Mobley has demonstrated a prima facie case for failure to promote based on race and/or gender under Title VII.
This prima facie case thus shifts the burden to St. Luke's to show a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for its decision not to promote Mobley in December 2017. Under the uncontroverted facts, although Watkins did not seriously consider Mobley's application for the Patient Accounts Manager position, Dykes had previously performed the job as Patient Accounts Manager, whereas Mobley had not. Farver, 931 F.3d at 813 (comparative experience a legitimate basis to support hiring decision).
The burden thus shifts to Mobley to show the decision to hire Dykes over him was pretext for discrimination based on race and/or gender. A plaintiff can generally make this showing through evidence suggesting the employer's proffered reason "has no basis in fact," or that a discriminatory motive for the hiring decision is more likely. Id. (citing Torgerson v. City of Rochester, 643 F.3d 1031, 1042 (8th Cir. 2011)). "To show a prohibited reason is more likely because he or she was more qualified [*32]  than selected candidates, a rejected candidate must present evidence the other candidates were in fact less qualified." Farver, 931 F.3d at 812 (citing Kincaid v. City of Omaha, 378 F.3d 799, 805 (8th Cir. 2004)). This showing involves looking to comparative qualifications of the plaintiff and the individual who was hired for the job for which the plaintiff applied. Id. (citing Torgerson, 643 F.3d at 1048).
Mobley asserts Watkins' decision to hire Dykes based on her experience was pretext for race and/or gender discrimination in violation of Title VII because all managers who report to Watkins are Caucasian and/or female. Without evidentiary support, Mobley's contention is insufficient to establish pretext on this record. Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 561, 112 S. Ct. 2130, 119 L. Ed. 2d 351 (8th Cir. 2012) (plaintiff cannot rely on unsupported allegations at the summary judgment stage). Because Watkins rehired Dykes for a position which Dykes had previously performed, she had experience as Patient Accounts Manager which Mobley lacked. Mobley thus cannot show Dykes was less qualified than he for the promotion to demonstrate Watkins did not promote Mobley based on a discriminatory motive. St. Luke's is thus entitled to summary judgment on Count VIII to the extent Mobley's claim for violation of Title VII is premised on St. Luke's failure to promote Mobley in December 2017.
To [*33]  the extent Plaintiff's claim for pay discrimination is administratively exhausted and thus properly before the Court, the uncontroverted facts establish Valdez had several years of supervisory/managerial experience when she was hired as Patient Access Supervisor, in contrast with Plaintiff who had no supervisory experience when he was hired to the same position. Hutchins v. Int'l Brotherhood of Teamsters, 177 F.3d 1076, 1081 (8th Cir. 1999) (experience and education differences legitimate bases for different pay rates).
For these reasons, St. Luke's motion for summary judgment on Count VIII for race and/or gender and/or pay discrimination under Title VII is granted.

H. St. Luke's motion for summary judgment on Plaintiff's Count IX for race discrimination under § 1981 is granted because the record does not demonstrate discriminatory conduct.
St. Luke's argues there is no genuine issue of material fact and it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law on Mobley's Count IX for race discrimination in violation of 42 U.S.C. § 1981 because the record does not demonstrate St. Luke's took an adverse employment action against Mobley. In opposition, Mobley argues there are genuine issues of material fact whether St. Luke's discriminated against him on the basis of race in violation of § 1981 when it [*34]  failed to promote him on at least five occasions.
Section 1981 provides all persons in the United States have equal rights "to make and enforce contracts, to sue, be parties, give evidence, and to the full and equal benefit of all laws and proceedings . . . as is enjoyed by white citizens . . . ." 42 U.S.C § 1981(a). The reference to "make and enforce contracts" includes "the making, performance, modification, and termination of contracts, and the enjoyment of all benefits, privileges, terms, and conditions of the contractual relationship." 42 U.S.C. § 1981(b).
A prima facie case for race discrimination under § 1981 requires the same elements as those required to demonstrate a prima facie case for race discrimination under Title VII. Richmond v. Bd. of Regents of Univ. of Minn., 358 F.2d 595, 598 (8th Cir. 1992). However, Mobley's failure to promote claim based on race under § 1981 is not subject to the same 300-day limitations period as Mobley's Title VII claim based on the same conduct. Thus, though the Court's conclusions in the previous two sections are partially dispositive of Count IX, the uncontroverted facts set forth three other instances in which Mobley applied for and was not selected for job promotions.
Under the uncontroverted facts, St. Luke's did not promote Mobley on three occasions in 2016. There is no dispute [*35]  St. Luke's did not hire Mobley on two of those occasions in favor of hiring other candidates who had relevant experience which Mobley lacked. Under the applicable burden-shifting framework, there is no genuine issue of material fact that the candidates St. Luke's hired had more experience than Mobley, and Mobley does not identify, nor does the record contain, evidence to suggest these hiring decisions based on experience were in fact pretext for race discrimination. As to the third instance wherein Mobley was not selected in favor of another candidate, St. Luke's did not select Mobley because the position at issue, Community Benefit Program Coordinator, was entry-level and not in line with Mobley's interests. Mobley's opposition to summary judgment does not argue this reason was pretext for race discrimination and the record does not otherwise support such a conclusion. St. Luke's motion for summary judgment on Count IX for violation of § 1981 based on failure to promote is thus granted.
To the extent Mobley alleges St. Luke's discriminated on the basis of race in violation of § 1981 with respect to the terms and conditions of his employment, the Court's conclusions above pertaining to Mobley's [*36]  assertions of constructive discharge and/or loss of benefits are equally dispositive of Mobley's § 1981 claims predicated on these asserted adverse employment actions. Accordingly, it is hereby
ORDERED Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment (Doc. #57) is GRANTED. It is further
ORDERED Defendant's Motion for Leave to File Second Notice of Supplemental Authority (Doc. #90) is DENIED AS MOOT. It is further
ORDERED the parties' Joint Motion for Extension of Time to File Proposed Jury Instructions (Doc. #97) is DENIED AS MOOT.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
DATE: June 1, 2021
/s/ Brian C. Wimes
JUDGE BRIAN C. WIMES
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT


End of Document

