Monroe v. Wilkie
United States District Court for the Southern District of California
March 20, 2020, Decided
Case No.: 18cv0662 DMS (KSC)

Reporter
2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 269095 *
JOSEPH MONROE, Plaintiff, v. ROBERT WILKIE, Acting Secretary of Veterans Affairs; THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS, an unknown business entity, and DOES 1 through 25, Inclusive Defendants.
Counsel:  [*1] For DAVID J. SHULKIN, M.D. Secretary of Veterans Affairs an individual, Defendant: Daniel Everett Butcher, LEAD ATTORNEY, U S Attorneys Office Southern District of California, San Diego, CA.
For Robert Wilkie, Acting Secretary of Veterans Affairs, Defendant: Daniel Everett Butcher, LEAD ATTORNEY, U S Attorneys Office Southern District of California, San Diego, CA.
For Joseph Monroe, Plaintiff: Dante T. Pride, LEAD ATTORNEY, The Pride Law Firm, San Diego, CA.
For Joseph Monroe, Plaintiff: Alana McMains, LEAD ATTORNEY, Federal Defenders of San Diego, San Diego, CA.
For Joseph Monroe, Plaintiff: Laura Michelle Kelleher, LEAD ATTORNEY, Swan Employment Law, San Diego, CA.
For Robert Wilkie, Acting Secretary of Veterans Affairs, Defendant: Paul L Starita, LEAD ATTORNEY, U S Attorneys Office Southern District of California, San Diego, CA.
For The Department of Veterans Affairs, an unknown business entity, Defendant: Daniel Everett Butcher, LEAD ATTORNEY, U S Attorneys Office Southern District of California, San Diego, CA.
For Robert Wilkie, Acting Secretary of Veterans Affairs, Defendant: Betsey Boutelle, LEAD ATTORNEY, U.S. Attorney's Office, San Diego, CA.
For The Department of Veterans Affairs, [*2]  an unknown business entity, Defendant: Betsey Boutelle, LEAD ATTORNEY, U.S. Attorney's Office, San Diego, CA.
For The Department of Veterans Affairs, an unknown business entity, Defendant: Paul L Starita, U S Attorneys Office Southern District of California, San Diego, CA.
Judges: Hon. Dana M. Sabraw, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Dana M. Sabraw
Opinion



ORDER GRANTING IN PART AND DENYING IN PART DEFENDANTS' MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
This case comes before the Court on Defendants' motion for summary judgment. Plaintiff Joseph Monroe filed an opposition to the motion, and Defendants filed a reply. For the reasons set forth below, Defendants' motion is granted in part and denied in part.

I.

BACKGROUND
On June 22, 2009, Defendants hired Plaintiff as a Veterans Service Representative ("VSR") at the Veteran's Affairs Regional Office in San Diego. (Third Am. Compl. ("TAC") ¶18.) Plaintiff himself is a veteran, having worked for the Department of the Navy for 20 years prior to his employment at the Department of Veterans Affairs ("VA"). (Id. ¶19.) As a VSR, Plaintiff was responsible for serving "as the primary contact for veterans, explaining benefits programs and entitlement criteria to veterans, conducting interviews [*3]  with veterans, gathering evidence for claims, inputting data for veterans' claims, notifying veterans of payments, managing any issues with claims, and scheduling future actions for claims." (Id. ¶20.)
In January 2013, after failing to pass a certification test at work, Plaintiff decided to seek out an assessment to determine whether he had a learning disorder. (Ex. 1 in Supp. of Mot. at 151 ; Ex. 2 in Supp. of Mot. at 170.) He was referred to Tanya Mesirow, Psy.D., who, after conducting an evaluation and administering tests, diagnosed Plaintiff with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder and a learning disorder. (Ex. 2 in Supp. of Mot. at 177.) After this diagnosis, Plaintiff requested that the VA provide him with extra time for testing to accommodate his learning disability. (Ex. 3 in Supp. of Mot.) The VA granted Plaintiff's request, and Plaintiff thereafter passed his certification test.
In July of 2013, the VA placed Plaintiff on a Performance Improvement Plan ("PIP") due to his failure to meet certain productivity standards. (Ex. 4 in Supp. of Mot.) While on the PIP, Plaintiff requested another accommodation, namely one-on-one training on end product codes. (Ex. 6 in Supp. of [*4]  Mot.) In response, the VA offered Plaintiff "one-on-one training with a supervisor/Senior VSR at least once per week to go over specific questions [Plaintiff] has related to his current work load[.]" (Id. at 188; Ex. 7 in Supp. of Mot.) Plaintiff does not dispute the VA provided him with occasional one-on-one assistance, but the parties dispute whether Defendants provided the specific accommodation that was offered. Plaintiff completed the PIP on January 3, 2014. (Ex. 5 in Supp. of Mot.)
On April 24, 2014, the VA issued a proposed reprimand to Plaintiff for his failure to follow instructions, careless or negligent workmanship resulting in delayed notification of benefits to a veteran, failure to safeguard confidential matter and falsifying government records. (Ex. 16 in Supp. of Mot.) Plaintiff submitted a response to that proposal in which he reminded the VA of his learning disability and its effect on his performance, (Ex. 17 in Supp. of Mot.), but the VA went ahead with the reprimand on June 5, 2014. (Ex. 18 in Supp. of Mot.)
On January 5, 2015, Plaintiff requested a third accommodation due to his learning disabilities. (Ex. 12 in Supp. of Mot.) Specifically, he requested 1) untimed [*5]  tests, 2) oneon- one training with a supervisor/mentor at least once per week to go over specific questions related to Plaintiff's current workload, 3) more time to meet daily and monthly deadlines, 4) an adjustment to the point system for work requirements, 5) a clean, neat and clutter-free work space and 6) written notes to refer to regarding work procedures. (Id. at 211.) In response, the VA agreed to provide Plaintiff with twice as much time to take tests, additional training time for new tasks, a third party job coach, and advance access to training materials. (Id. at 212, 214.) The VA denied Plaintiff's request for more time to meet daily and monthly deadlines and for an adjustment of the point system on the ground those requirements were based on national standards and "no accommodations ... could be provided for [these] request[s] without removing an essential function." (Id. at 214.)
On November 24, 2015, Plaintiff received his performance plan and appraisal for the period December 1, 2014, to September 30, 2015, which reflected that Plaintiff was either fully successful or exceptional in all elements of his position. (Ex. B. in Supp. of Opp'n to Mot. at 19.) However, on that [*6]  same day, the VA issued a proposal that Plaintiff be removed from employment. (Ex. 19 in Supp. of Mot.) That proposal charged Plaintiff with negligent conduct, specifically, taking credit for claims that did not exist, failing to complete claims, taking multiple credit for claims, and taking authorization credit for claims where he did not complete the authorization. (Id. at 228-29.) Plaintiff submitted a response to that proposal, this time through counsel, in which he explained that the negligent conduct alleged was a symptom of his documented disability. (Ex. 20 in Supp. of Mot.) He specifically stated his "mistakes transposing numbers and/or using the same claim number multiple times are readily identifiable symptoms of a person who suffers from [his] learning disability and ADHD[ ]." (Id. at 235 (footnote omitted).) On March 1, 2016, the VA decided to suspend Plaintiff for 14 days rather than remove him from employment. (Ex. 22 in Supp. of Mot.) As a result of that suspension, the VA also terminated Plaintiff's telework status. (Ex. 23 in Supp. of Mot.)
On May 11, 2016, Plaintiff contacted an EEO counselor regarding his suspension, the revocation of his telework status, and the [*7]  VA's alleged failure to provide him with the one-on-one training. (Ex. 29 in Supp. of Mot.) Informal resolution of those issues was not achieved, and thus on July 19, 2016, Plaintiff filed a formal EEO complaint of employment discrimination against the VA. (Ex. 30 in Supp. of Mot.)
One week after filing that complaint, Plaintiff received his performance appraisal covering December 8, 2015, to July 8, 2016. (Ex. B. in Supp. of Opp'n to Mot.) That appraisal again rated Plaintiff fully successful or exceptional in all elements of his position. (Id. at 24.) Nevertheless, on October 12, 2016, the VA issued another proposal to remove Plaintiff from employment. (Ex. 24 in Supp. of Mot.) In that proposal, Plaintiff was again charged with negligent conduct, specifically taking credit for claims that did not exist, taking credit for claims where no action had been taken, and taking multiple credit for claims. (Id. at 266-67.) The following day, Dr. Mesirow completed a third addendum to her initial evaluation of Plaintiff in which she stated that due to Plaintiff's learning disabilities, he was "likely to have difficulty in the following areas: ... Problems with numbers, possibly leaving out numbers, [*8]  reversing numbers or recording numbers incorrectly." (Ex. 25 in Supp. of Mot at 270.) Plaintiff's counsel submitted a response to this proposal reasserting that the negligent conduct alleged was a symptom of Plaintiff's documented disability. (Ex. 26 in Supp. of Mot.) However, the VA proceeded with its proposal, and removed Plaintiff from employment on December 12, 2016. (Ex. 28 in Supp. of Mot.)
After his initial EEO complaint was rejected, and a subsequent EEO complaint concerning his removal was also rejected, Plaintiff filed the current case against David Shulkin, M.D. and the VA in San Diego Superior Court. Defendants removed the case to this Court on April 3, 2018. Plaintiff filed an amended complaint on August 27, 2018, and a Third Amended Complaint ("TAC") on September 28, 2018. The TAC alleges claims for disability discrimination, retaliation, failure to accommodate disability, failure to engage in the interactive process, and wrongful termination.

II.

DISCUSSION
Defendants move for summary judgment on all of Plaintiff's claims. They argue certain of Plaintiff's claims are unexhausted. They also assert they had legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for their adverse employment [*9]  actions, therefore they are entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's claims for disability discrimination, retaliation and wrongful termination. Defendants contend they are also entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's claims for failure to accommodate and failure to engage in the interactive process because they provided the requested accommodations.

A. Legal Standard
Summary judgment is appropriate if there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact, and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). The moving party has the initial burden of demonstrating that summary judgment is proper. Adickes v. S.H. Kress & Co., 398 U.S. 144, 157 (1970). The moving party must identify the pleadings, depositions, affidavits, or other evidence that it "believes demonstrates the absence of a genuine issue of material fact." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323 (1986). "A material issue of fact is one that affects the outcome of the litigation and requires a trial to resolve the parties' differing versions of the truth." S.E.C. v. Seaboard Corp., 677 F.2d 1301, 1306 (9th Cir. 1982).
The burden then shifts to the opposing party to show that summary judgment is not appropriate. Celotex, 477 U.S. at 324. The opposing party's evidence is to be believed, and all justifiable inferences are to be drawn in its favor. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255 (1986). However, to avoid summary judgment, the [*10]  opposing party cannot rest solely on conclusory allegations. Berg v. Kincheloe, 794 F.2d 457, 459 (9th Cir. 1986). Instead, it must designate specific facts showing there is a genuine issue for trial. Id.; see also Butler v. San Diego District Attorney's Office, 370 F.3d 956, 958 (9th Cir. 2004) (stating if defendant produces enough evidence to require plaintiff to go beyond pleadings, plaintiff must counter by producing evidence of his own). To do so, the non-moving party must "go beyond the pleadings" and by "the depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file," designate "specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." Celotex, 477 U.S. at 324 (quoting Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e)) (internal quotation marks omitted).
More than a "metaphysical doubt" is required to establish a genuine issue of material fact. Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co., Ltd. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586 (1986). The opposing party must show that evidence in the record could lead a rational trier of fact to find in its favor. Id. at 587. "[M]ere disagreement or the bald assertion that a genuine issue of material fact exists no longer precludes the use of summary judgment." Harper v. Wallingford, 877 F.2d 728, 731 (9th Cir. 1989) (citing California Architectural Bldg. Prods., Inc. v. Franciscan Ceramics, Inc., 818 F.2d 1466, 1468 (9th Cir. 1987)). "Credibility determinations, the weighing of the evidence, and the drawing of legitimate inferences are jury functions, not those of a judge, [when] he [or she] is ruling on a motion for summary judgment." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 255. "[I]f direct evidence produced by the moving party conflicts [*11]  with direct evidence produced by the nonmoving party, the judge must assume the truth of the evidence set forth by the nonmoving party with respect to that fact." TW. Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Pacific Elec. Contractors Ass'n, 809 F.2d 626, 631 (9th Cir. 1987).

B. Exhaustion
Before turning to the individual legal claims, the Court first addresses Defendants' argument that they are entitled to summary judgment on all claims related to Plaintiff's suspension due to Plaintiff's failure to exhaust that issue. There is no dispute Plaintiff was required to exhaust this issue prior to filing this case. There is also no dispute that exhaustion is an affirmative defense, and thus Defendants "'bear[ ] the burden of pleading and proving it.'" Kraus v. Presidio Trust Facilities Div./Residential Management Branch, 572 F.3d 1039, 1046 n.7 (9th Cir. 2009) (quoting Bowden v. United States, 106 F.3d 433, 437 (D.C. Cir. 1997)).
Here, Defendants attempt to meet that burden by reference to a November 22, 2016 email revising their partial acceptance of Plaintiff's July 20, 2016 EEO complaint. (See Ex. 31 in Supp. of Mot.) In that email, Defendants dismissed Plaintiff's claim arising out of his suspension for failure "to comply with the regulatory time limit." (Id. at 320.)
Plaintiff does not dispute that he did not contact an EEO counselor within the 45- day deadline. See 29 C.F.R. § 1614.105(a)(1).2 Instead, he argues he did not believe he had been discriminated against until May 2, 2016, and [*12]  that he contacted an EEO counselor within 45 days of that date. In support of this argument, Plaintiff relies on an unpublished decision from the Ninth Circuit, Ho v. Brennan, 721 Fed. Appx. 678, 681 (9th Cir. 2018), but he acknowledges there is Ninth Circuit authority to the contrary. See Anoruo v. Shinseki, 569 Fed. Appx. 485, 486 (9th Cir. 2014). See also Mulligan v. Lipnic, 734 Fed. Appx. 397 (9th Cir. 2018).
However, even assuming the law supports Plaintiff's argument, the evidence does not. As Defendants point out, Plaintiff's counsel suggested Defendants had "fail[ed] to properly accommodate Mr. Monroe's disability[ ]" as early as December 15, 2015. (See Ex. 20 in Supp. of Mot. at 233.) Plaintiff's self-serving, uncorroborated statement that he did not realize until May 2, 2016, that his suspension was based on his disability is insufficient to raise a genuine issue of material fact. See Villiarimo v. Aloha Island Air, Inc., 281 F.3d 1054, 1061 (9th Cir. 2002) (citing Kennedy v. Applause, Inc., 90 F.3d 1477, 1481 (9th Cir. 1996)) (stating "court has refused to find a 'genuine issue' where the only evidence presented is 'uncorroborated and self-serving' testimony.") Accordingly, Defendants are entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's claims arising out of his suspension.3

C. Disability Discrimination
Turning to the substantive claims, Plaintiff's first claim is for disability discrimination under the Rehabilitation Act.4 "To state a prima facie case under the Rehabilitation Act, a plaintiff must demonstrate [*13]  that (1) she is a person with a disability, (2) who is otherwise qualified for employment, and (3) suffered discrimination because of her disability." Walton v. U.S. Marshals Service, 492 F.3d 998, 1005 (9th Cir. 2007). If the plaintiff makes that showing, the burden "then shifts to the employer to articulate some legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the challenged action." Chuang v. Univ. of Cal. Davis, Bd. Of Trs., 225 F.3d 1115, 1123-24 (9th Cir. 2000). "If the employer does so, the plaintiff must then show that the articulated reason is pretextual." Id. at 1124.
Here, Defendants assume, for the purpose of the present motion, that Plaintiff can make a prima facie showing of disability discrimination, but argue they had a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for Plaintiff's termination.5 Specifically, they assert Plaintiff was removed because (1) he took credit for work he did not perform, as evidenced by the five instances of Plaintiff entering claim numbers that did not exist, (2) he failed to complete claims as instructed, (3) he took triple credit for a claim, as evidenced by his entering the same claim number three times, (4) he took double credit for a claim, as evidenced by his entering the same claim number twice, and (5) he took authorization credit without completing the authorization. Plaintiff does not dispute that he [*14]  engaged in this conduct. Instead, he argues this conduct "stemmed out of symptoms of his disabilities[.]" (Opp'n at 17.)
The Ninth Circuit has addressed this argument a number of times. Two cases are instructive. The first of those cases is Humphrey v. Memorial Hospitals Ass'n, 239 F.3d 1128 (9th Cir. 2001). In that case, the plaintiff, a medical transcriptionist, was fired because of a "history of tardiness and absenteeism." Id. at 1133. The district court granted the employer's motion for summary judgment, but the Ninth Circuit reversed. On the plaintiff's claim for wrongful termination, in particular, the court stated, "conduct resulting from a disability is considered to be part of the disability, rather than a separate basis for termination." Id. at 1139-40. The court then found that the plaintiff had "presented sufficient evidence to create a triable issue of fact as to whether her attendance problems were caused by [obsessive compulsive disorder, or] OCD." Id. at 1140. The court specifically referenced a letter the plaintiff's psychiatrist submitted to the employer stating the plaintiff's OCD "'is directly contributing to her problems with lateness.'" Id. at 1130. Based on that and other evidence, the court held "a jury could reasonably find the requisite causal link between a disability [*15]  of OCD and Humphrey's absenteeism and conclude that MHA fired Humphrey because of her disability." Id. at 1140.
This issue came up again in Dark v. Curry County, 451 F.3d 1078 (9th Cir. 2006). In that case, the plaintiff, a heavy-equipment operator for a County road department, was fired after suffering a seizure while driving a County vehicle. The County argued the plaintiff was fired for "misconduct or a failure to meet legitimate job expectations." Id. at 1083. The "misconduct" was described as "'driving with knowledge of the risk [plaintiff] posed, and without warning any coworkers of the danger he presented.'" Id. However, the court noted the County did "not argue that Dark's 'misconduct' resulted from other than his disability [epilepsy]." Id. at 1084. Given the County's failure to make that argument, the court held the defendants' "explanation, as a matter of law, fails to qualify as a legitimate, nondiscriminatory explanation for Dark's discharge." Id. Even assuming the defendants had made that showing, the court went on to address the issue of causation, and found "there is record evidence sufficient that a jury could reasonably find that Dark was terminated for an impermissible reason." Id. at 1085. That evidence included the plaintiff's termination letter, which specifically [*16]  referenced his "medical condition" and "epilepsy," id. at 1083, and evidence "of six separate accidents for which other Road Department workers went undisciplined." Id. at 1085. The court also cited this evidence to support a finding that, even if the defendants had met their burden and overcome the issue of causation, the plaintiff had met his burden to show pretext. Id. at 1085-86. Also supporting this finding was evidence that "Dark was not immediately terminated after the January 15, 2002, accident, but rather was subjected to a medical examination to determine his fitness for the position." Id. at 1085.
These cases reflect that Plaintiff's legal argument is valid. Basically, that argument is: Plaintiff's disability caused the conduct underlying his termination, therefore his termination was based on his disability. The only other question for the Court is whether Plaintiff has presented sufficient evidence to raise a triable issue of fact on this point.
Defendants dispute that Plaintiff has met his burden, but their arguments are not persuasive.6 First, they argue Plaintiff has failed to produce either direct or "specific" and "substantial" evidence of pretext. However, Plaintiff has raised numerous triable questions and fact-bound [*17]  inferences about whether the reasons for Defendants' conduct were legitimate and nondiscriminatory, and whether there is any causation between Plaintiff's disability and the conduct underlying his termination.
Plaintiff has consistently maintained that the errors in question "stemmed out of symptoms of his disabilities[,]" (Opp'n to Mot. at 17), rather than attempts to falsely take credit for work he did not perform. Plaintiff points to his overall record of "excellent performance" evaluations and suggests that the errors he made should not have resulted in suspension or removal. Defendants' decision to terminate an employee with such a "stellar performance record[,]" Plaintiff argues, could lead a reasonable jury to conclude Defendants' stated reasons do not really reflect a loss of confidence in his ethics and abilities but are cover for discriminatory motive. (Id. at 18.) Plaintiff also points out that there is no evidence of any tangible benefit he would receive by falsely inflating his production levels; he was "already receiving excellent performance reviews, so he did not need to bolster his numbers." (Id.) And there is no evidence that increased production levels would result [*18]  in any type of bonus, raise or promotion. (Id.) Additionally, Plaintiff notes a reasonable jury could consider suspect the timing between Plaintiff's filing of the EEO complaint on July 9, 2016, and his proposed removal three months later on October 12, 2016. (Id.) (stating a reasonable jury could conclude Defendants' accusations of "falsely taking credit" are pretextual for discriminatory and retaliatory motives against an employee for consistently asserting his rights and requesting accommodations).
Second, Defendants suggest that Dr. Mesirow's report does not address the specific instances of alleged misconduct underlying Plaintiff's termination. (Reply at 4.) However, it is unclear that Dr. Mesirow's report needs to satisfy that standard. Notably, in both Humphrey and Dark, the evidence did not meet that exacting standard, yet it was found sufficient to raise a triable issue. The evidence here is sufficient to raise triable issues that ought to be determined by a jury. Dr. Mesirow's neuropsychological reports and addenda detail the difficulties Plaintiff had at work as a result of his disabilities, specifically "forgetfulness," "distractibility," and "[p]roblems with numbers, possibly leaving [*19]  out numbers, reversing numbers or recording numbers incorrectly." (See Exs. 2 & 25 in Supp. of Mot.) These kinds of difficulties are intertwined with the stated reasons for Plaintiff's removal—taking credit for work he did not perform by repeatedly making "entries of false and duplicative claim numbers. (See Reply Br. at 2 (stating Defendants removed Plaintiff after losing confidence in his "ethics and his ability to process Veteran's claims, to take appropriate ASPEN credit, and be productive."))7 On the record presently before the Court, Defendants have not shown they are entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's disability discrimination claim. A trier of fact should determine these fact-bound issues. Accordingly, Defendants' motion for summary judgment on this claim is denied.

D. Retaliation
Plaintiff's second claim alleges retaliation. "A prima facie case of retaliation requires a plaintiff to show: '(1) involvement in a protected activity, (2) an adverse employment action and (3) a causal link between the two.'" Coons v. Secretary of U.S. Department of Treasury, 383 F.3d 879, 887 (9th Cir. 2004) (quoting Brown v. City of Tuscon, 336 F.3d 1181, 1187 (9th Cir. 2003)). "Once the plaintiff establishes a prima facie case, the employer has the burden to 'present legitimate reasons for the adverse employment action.'" [*20]  Id. (quoting Brooks, 229 F.3d at 928). "If the employer carries this burden, and plaintiff demonstrates a genuine issue of material fact as to whether the reason advanced by the employer was a pretext, then the retaliation case proceeds beyond the summary judgment stage." Id. (citing Brooks, 229 F.3d at 928).
On this claim, Defendants rely on the same argument they advanced on Plaintiff's disability discrimination claim: That they had legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for their adverse employment actions. As explained above, Plaintiff has raised a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Defendants' reasons were legitimate and nondiscriminatory, and thus Defendants are not entitled to summary judgment on this claim either.8

E. Failure to Accommodate
Plaintiff's third claim alleges Defendants failed to accommodate his disability in violation of the Rehabilitation Act.9 Defendants move for summary judgment on this claim on three grounds: (1) Plaintiff failed to exhaust certain aspects of this claim, (2) to the extent those aspects of the claim were exhausted, Defendants were not required to provide the requested accommodations, and (3) for the exhausted aspects of the claim, Defendants provided the accommodation.
As discussed above, there is no [*21]  dispute Plaintiff was required to exhaust this claim prior to filing this case, or that exhaustion is an affirmative defense on which Defendants bear the burden of proof. Kraus, 572 F.3d at 1046 n.7 (quoting Bowden, 106 F.3d at 437). Unlike with the issue of Plaintiff's suspension, Defendants have not met their burden to show Plaintiff failed to exhaust his accommodation claim. Indeed, the evidence they cite indicates Plaintiff's claim for reasonable accommodation regarding one-on-one training was approved despite being untimely filed. (Ex. 29 in Supp. of Mot. at 315-16.) Therefore, the Court rejects Defendants' exhaustion argument on this claim.
On the merits, Defendants argue they are entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's claim he was denied (1) more time to meet deadlines and (2) an adjustment to the point system because those production standards were essential job functions and they are not required to remove or adjust essential job functions. In support of this argument, Defendants rely on the Declaration of Patrick Priebe, which states the time deadlines and point systems were part of the VA's national production standards. (Decl. of Patrick Priebe ¶¶7-9.) Defendants also cite cases relying on EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (Oct. [*22]  17, 2002), which states an employer is not "required to lower production standards - - whether qualitative or quantitative - - that are applied uniformly to employees with and without disabilities." EEOC Enforcement Guidance: Reasonable Accommodation and Undue Hardship Under the Americans with Disabilities Act, EEOC Notice No. 915.002 (Oct. 17, 2002). (See Mot. at 18.)
Notably, Plaintiff does not present any evidence to dispute Defendants' argument, nor does he challenge the legal authority on which Defendants' argument relies. Absent either of those things, Defendants are entitled to summary judgment on this aspect of Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim.
The only other aspect of Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim at issue in the present motion involves Plaintiff's request for one-on-one training, and on that issue, Defendants argue they are entitled to summary judgment because they provided that accommodation. In support of this argument, Defendants cite a number of emails documenting their one-on-one meetings with Plaintiff. (See Exs. 8-11 in Supp. of Mot.) However, all of those emails reflect meetings that occurred prior to November 25, 2015, which is the relevant date for Defendants' argument. (See Mot. at 16.) Defendants also [*23]  cite the Declarations of Charles Morris and Marvin Dinoso, both of whom state that Plaintiff received one-on-one training from subject matter experts, (see Decl. of Charles Morris in Supp. of Mot. ("Morris Decl."), ¶¶4-5; Decl. of Marvin Dinoso in Supp. of Mot. ¶¶4-5), but neither of them provides evidence beginning on the relevant date of November 25, 2015. Indeed, Mr. Morris states he did not begin supervising Plaintiff until December 8, 2015. (Morris Decl. ¶4.)
Plaintiff also produced evidence that he did not receive the requested accommodation of weekly, hour-long, one-on-one training sessions. (Opp'n at 21.) The requested and agreed upon accommodation, according to Plaintiff, was for regular weekly one-on-one training sessions. And there is conflicting evidence whether the VA fulfilled its promise. (See id. (the training "didn't happen every week, like it should have[,]" according to Plaintiff)). In light of the competing evidence, Defendants have not shown there are no genuine issues of material fact on this aspect of Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim such that they are entitled to summary judgment.10

F. Failure to Engage in Interactive Process
The final claim at issue [*24]  here is Plaintiff's claim for failure to engage in the interactive process. Defendants argue they are entitled to summary judgment on this claim because it "is not a viable stand-alone claim for relief." (Mot. at 19.) However, Plaintiff points out that he has not pleaded a stand-alone claim for failure to engage in the interactive process. Rather, he has also alleged a claim for failure to accommodate. Thus, this argument does not warrant summary judgment in Defendants' favor.
Defendants' only other argument is they are entitled to summary judgment on this claim because they "grant[ed] all requested accommodations that Plaintiff requested that did not eliminate an essential job function." (Id.) As explained above, however, the Court disagrees with that argument. Thus, Defendants' request for summary judgment on this claim is denied to the same extent as Plaintiff's claim for failure to accommodate.

III.

CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, Defendants' motion for summary judgment is granted in part and denied in part. Specifically, the Court grants the motion as to Plaintiff's suspension and Defendants' failure to provide Plaintiff with more time to meet deadlines and an adjustment to [*25]  the point system. On all other issues, the motion is denied.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
Dated: March 20, 2020
/s/ Dana M. Sabraw
Hon. Dana M. Sabraw
United States District Judge


End of Document

