Moore v. Harris
United States District Court for the Southern District of California
May 22, 2015, Decided; May 22, 2015, Filed
Case No. 13cv347-JAH (BLM)

Reporter
2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 191223 *
ALDEN LAMONT MOORE, Plaintiff, v. K. HARRIS, et al., Defendants.
Subsequent History: Objection overruled by, Adopted by, Summary judgment granted by Moore v. Harris, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 191224 (S.D. Cal., June 23, 2015)
Prior History: Moore v. Harris, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 81380 (S.D. Cal., June 7, 2013)
Counsel:  [*1] For Alden Lamont Moore, Plaintiff: Scottlynn J Hubbard, IV, LEAD ATTORNEY, Disabled Advocacy Group, Chico, CA.
For C Hammond also, known as C Hammon, J. D. Lozano, Chief of Appeals, William Suglich, Associate Warden, Defendants: Sylvie Plamondon Snyder, LEAD ATTORNEY, Attorney Generals Office, San Diego, CA.
Judges: BARBARA L. MAJOR, United States Magistrate Judge.
Opinion by: BARBARA L. MAJOR
Opinion



REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION FOR ORDER GRANTING DEFENDANTS' MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
This Report and Recommendation is submitted to United States District Court Judge John A. Houston pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 636(b) and Civil Local Rules 72.1(c) and 72.3(f) of the United States District Court for the Southern District of California. Having reviewed Defendants' motion, Plaintiff's opposition, Defendants' reply, and the supporting exhibits, declarations, and pleadings, the Court RECOMMENDS that Defendants' motion for summary judgment be GRANTED.

PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
On June 17, 2013, Plaintiff Alden Lamont Moore, a state prisoner proceeding pro se and in forma pauperis, filed a First Amended Complaint ("FAC") alleging violations of his constitutional rights under the Civil Rights Act, 42 U.S.C. § 1983, and violations of his rights under the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C § 12101, et seq. [*2]  ECF No. 12. Plaintiff alleged that he was hearing-impaired and unable to hear the emergency alarms at R.J. Donovan Correctional Facility ("RJD") where he was incarcerated, and that RJD's blue-light visual paging alarm system did not notify him if he was not paying attention when emergencies occurred. Id. at 3. Plaintiff further asserted that as a result of not being able to hear or notice the emergency alarms, he was threatened and harassed by prison staff. Id. at 3-4. Plaintiff sought monetary damages and an injunction requiring Defendants to provide a visual paging alarm system at RJD for hearing-impaired inmates and ordering Defendants to comply with the Armstrong Remedial Plan.1 Id. at 8.
On August 22, 2013, Defendants filed a motion to dismiss Plaintiff's FAC on the ground that Plaintiff failed to state a claim for relief. ECF No. 18. On January 31, 2014, this Court issued a Report and Recommendation ("R&R") recommending that Defendants' motion to dismiss be denied. ECF No. 29. On March 17, 2014, District Judge John A. Houston issued an order declining to adopt this Court's factual finding that Plaintiff's FAC alleged that Plaintiff is unable to see the visual paging alarms at the prison. ECF No. 33 at 5. Judge Houston [*3]  adopted the remainder of the R&R, finding that when viewed in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, the FAC stated a claim for injunctive relief and for deliberate indifference under the ADA. Id. at 4-8.
On June 23, 2014, Plaintiff filed a Second Amended Complaint ("SAC") in which he amended the amount of the requested damages and removed Kamala Harris as a named defendant. ECF No. 46. The SAC alleges one cause of action-discrimination under the American with Disabilities Act and seeks monetary damages and injunctive relief in the form of requiring Defendants to "provide a visual alarm system[] at RJD for hearing impaired inmates" and to "stop Defendants from not following, enforcing the Armstrong v. Brown court order Remedial Plan." Id. at 3, 8 (emphasis omitted). Attorneys Scottlynn J. Hubbard, IV and Anthony M. Bettencourt entered appearances as counsel of record for Plaintiff on June 24 and 26, 2014, respectively. ECF Nos. 47 & 51. Defendants Suglich, Hammond and Lozano filed an Answer to the SAC on June 26, 2014. ECF No. 50.
On January 22, 2015, Defendants filed a Motion for Summary Judgment pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 56, along with a Memorandum of Points and Authorities [ECF No. 59], supporting exhibits [ECF No. 59-1], [*4]  and three supporting declarations [ECF No. 59-2, Declaration of A. Hernandez ("Hernandez Decl."); ECF No. 59-3, Declaration of Kim Blackseth ("Blackseth Decl."); and ECF No. 59-4, Declaration of Sylvie P. Snyder ("Snyder Decl.")]. On February 23, 2015, Plaintiff filed a timely opposition [ECF No. 62], including supporting declarations [ECF No. 62-1 at 3-4, Declaration of Alden Moore ("Moore Decl."), and ECF No. 62-1 at 5-6, Declaration of Steve Chennault ("Chennault Decl.")] and exhibits [ECF No. 62-1 at 7-76], to which Defendants timely replied [ECF No. 63]. Defendants argue that summary judgment is appropriate because (1) Plaintiff's hearing impairment has been reasonably accommodated, (2) Defendants were not deliberately indifferent to Plaintiff's disability and therefore monetary damages are inappropriate, and (3) the request for injunctive relief should be dismissed because there is an existing class that incorporates Plaintiff and addresses the same requests. ECF No. 59. Plaintiff agrees with Defendants that the request for injunctive relief should be dismissed because Plaintiff's claims are governed by the Armstrong Remedial Plan. ECF No. 62 at 12. Plaintiff disputes Defendants' [*5]  other arguments, challenges Defendants' evidence, and argues that because the district court denied Defendants' motion to dismiss and found that plaintiff's FAC stated a claim, the court is precluded from granting summary judgment on the same claim. Id. at 4-12.

LEGAL STANDARD
Summary judgment is appropriate if there is no genuine issue as to any material fact, and the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). The moving party has the initial burden of demonstrating that summary judgment is proper. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). The burden then shifts to the opposing party to provide admissible evidence beyond the pleadings to show that summary judgment is not appropriate. Id. at 322-24. The opposing party "may not rest upon mere allegation or denials of his pleading, but must set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 256, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986).
A court may not weigh evidence or make credibility determinations on a motion for summary judgment; rather, the inferences to be drawn from the underlying facts must be viewed in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 255. Furthermore, in order to avoid summary judgment, the opposing party cannot rest solely on conclusory allegations of fact. Berg v. Kincheloe, 794 F.2d 457, 459 (9th Cir. 1986). Instead, the nonmovant [*6]  must designate which specific facts show that there is a genuine issue for trial. Id.; Anderson, 477 U.S. at 256.
Section 1983 imposes two essential proof requirements upon a claimant: (1) that a person acting under color of state law committed the conduct at issue, and (2) that the conduct deprived the claimant of some right, privilege, or immunity protected by the Constitution or laws of the United States. See 42 U.S.C. § 1983; Parratt v. Taylor, 451 U.S. 527, 535, 101 S. Ct. 1908, 68 L. Ed. 2d 420 (1981), overruled on other grounds by Daniels v. Williams, 474 U.S. 327, 328, 106 S. Ct. 662, 88 L. Ed. 2d 662 (1986). A person acting under the color of law deprives another "of a constitutional right, within the meaning of § 1983, 'if he does an affirmative act, participates in another's affirmative act, or omits to perform an act which he is legally required to do that causes the deprivation of which [the plaintiff complains].'" Preschooler II v. Clark County Sch. Bd. of Trustees, 479 F.3d 1175, 1183 (9th Cir. 2007) (quoting Johnson v. Duffy, 588 F.2d 740, 743 (9th Cir. 1978)). "The inquiry into causation must be individualized and focus on the duties and responsibilities of each individual defendant whose acts or omissions are alleged to have caused a constitutional deprivation." Leer v. Murphy, 844 F.2d 628, 633 (9th Cir. 1988); Berg, 794 F.2d at 460.

LEGAL ANALYSIS

A. Plaintiff's Procedural Challenge
Plaintiff argues that the Court must deny Defendants' motion for summary judgment pursuant to Jones v. Blanas, 393 F.3d 918 (9th Cir. 2004), cert. denied, 546 U.S. 820, 126 S. Ct. 351, 163 L. Ed. 2d 61 (2005), because Plaintiff's verified pro se complaint and exhibits "survived the defense's original [*7]  motion to dismiss." ECF No. 62 at 7. Plaintiff asserts that the Ninth Circuit in Jones "held that a defendant cannot prevail on summary judgment when the pro se plaintiff successfully opposes a motion to dismiss their verified pro se complaint." Id. (citing Jones, 393 F.3d at 922-23). Defendants challenge Plaintiff's argument on the grounds that Jones does not support Plaintiff's legal position, Plaintiff is not proceeding pro se, and Plaintiff's SAC is not verified and does not contain any exhibits. ECF No. 63 at 6. Defendants also point out that Plaintiff's FAC and his original complaint, along with the attached exhibits, are not verified. Id.
In Jones, 393 F.3d at 922, the plaintiff filed an action pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983 against the sheriff and County of Sacramento for civil rights violations that allegedly occurred while he was a civil detainee. After the close of discovery, defendants filed a motion for summary judgment. Id. at 925. Plaintiff, who was appearing pro se, made several attempts to obtain additional discovery to oppose the motion, including filing a motion to stay pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(f). Id. The magistrate judge denied the plaintiff's motion to stay, denied his requests for additional time to conduct discovery, and issued a Report and Recommendation [*8]  to grant summary judgment in favor of defendants. Id. In his objections to the Report and Recommendation, the plaintiff attempted to expand the record by providing additional evidence in support of his claims. Id. The district judge adopted the Report and Recommendation and granted summary judgment in favor of the defendants based in part on findings that the plaintiff failed to provide evidence supporting his claims. Id.
The Ninth Circuit found that the district court had erred in denying the plaintiff's requests for additional time to conduct discovery. Id. at 930. The court stated that the plaintiff had "acted diligently and reasonably in pursuing discovery" and that he was unable to comply with the court's shortened discovery period due to restrictions associated with prison confinement. Id. The court held that the district court had abused its discretion when it denied the plaintiff time to conduct the relevant discovery and reversed the summary judgment as to the claims where it found that the "additional discovery would not have been 'fruitless.'" Id. The court also reversed summary judgment as to the claim related to the discovery submitted with the plaintiff's objections to the Report [*9]  and Recommendation. Id. at 935. The court explained that "[b]ecause [plaintiff] was pro se and concluded his Objections with a signed statement attesting under penalty of perjury to their truth" and because the facts were "crucial" to the motion for summary judgment, the district court abused its discretion by not considering the evidence. Id.
While the Jones court summarized the following "important principle[]":
because [plaintiff] is pro se, [a court] must consider as evidence in [] opposition to summary judgment all of [plaintiff's] contentions offered in motions and pleadings, where such contentions are based on personal knowledge and set forth facts that would be admissible in evidence, and where [plaintiff] attested under penalty of perjury that the contents of the motions or pleadings are true and correct,
the court did not conclude, or even indicate, that summary judgment is precluded in cases where a plaintiff successfully opposed a motion to dismiss his verified pro se complaint. Jones, 393 F.3d at 923; see also Barker v. Yassine, 2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 26005, 2015 WL 925715, at *10 (E.D. Cal. Mar. 3, 2015) (rejecting plaintiff's assertion that because the verified allegations in his initial pro se pleading and its exhibits survived a motion to dismiss, plaintiff met his burden to demonstrate that [*10]  material factual disputes precluded summary judgment for defendant, and stating that "Jones does not preclude this court's consideration of defendant's admissible evidence or the merits of defendant's motion for summary judgment."). Accordingly, Plaintiff's argument that Jones prohibits this Court from granting Defendants' motion for summary judgment [ECF No. 63 at 6] is without legal support. Moreover, unlike the plaintiff in Jones, Mr. Moore obtained legal representation shortly after filing his SAC and is not proceeding pro se and neither the FAC nor the SAC were verified. See ECF Nos. 12, 46, 47, 51; Jones, 393 F.3d at 923.
The Court therefore DENIES Plaintiff's procedural challenge and will consider the merits of Defendants' motion for summary judgment.

B. Evidentiary Considerations
Plaintiff claims that the testimony of Defendants' expert, Ms. Blackseth, addressing ADA requirements and Defendants' compliance with those requirements is improper, and asks the Court to disregard the testimony in its entirety. ECF No. 62 at 4-5. Plaintiff relies on the Ninth Circuit's opinion in Strong v. Valdez Fine Foods, 724 F.3d 1042, 1046-47 (9th Cir. 2013) and asserts that Strong holds that "experts are precluded from testifying on ADA requirements or a defendant's compliance." ECF [*11]  No. 62 at 4. Plaintiff further asserts that Blackseth is not an expert, but a licensed contractor, who is not qualified to opine that Plaintiff's hearing aids allow Plaintiff to hear the alarms most of the time and that RJD has provided accommodations that meet or exceed the ADA requirements for reasonable accommodation of hearing-impaired inmates. Id. at 6-7.
Defendants disagree and argue that Strong "indicated that experts are allowed, but not necessarily required." ECF No. 63 at 5. Defendants assert that Strong did not address the issue of whether expert testimony was allowed, but whether a plaintiff's failure to designate an ADA expert was fatal to his claim. Id. at 4-5. Defendants also challenge Plaintiff's assertion that their expert opined that Plaintiff's hearing aids allowed Plaintiff to hear the alarms most of the time, claiming that Ms. Blackseth merely utilized Plaintiff's own testimony in forming her opinion. Id. at 5 (citing ECF No. 62 at 6). Defendants further argue that they offer Blackseth's Declaration to "show that the ADA does not mandate the color of warning lights," that they have "consulted with a qualified expert, and that expert, after considering all the factors, opines that Plaintiff [*12]  has been reasonably accommodated." ECF No. 63 at 5.
In Strong, 724 F.3d at 1044, a quadriplegic customer brought an action against a restaurant under the ADA and state law alleging that he encountered barriers that prevented him from patronizing the restaurant. Plaintiff missed the deadline to designate an expert so he filed his own sworn declaration, which included the measurements of the allegedly excessive slopes taken by plaintiff's expert in plaintiff's presence, to oppose defendants' motion for summary judgment. Id. at 1044-45. The district court "refused to consider [plaintiff's] evidence because it found that [plaintiff] didn't have personal knowledge" of the measurements and because plaintiff "does not assert he is an ADA expert or is otherwise qualified to opine whether certain conditions constitute barriers within the meaning of the Act" and therefore granted summary judgment in favor of the defendants. Id. at 1045-46.
The Ninth Circuit reversed the summary judgment, holding that the plaintiff's sworn declaration was sufficient to oppose summary judgment as it showed the plaintiff had personal knowledge of the asserted violations and facts. Id. The court also stated that a disabled plaintiff is not required to present expert [*13]  testimony regarding ADA violations where the alleged violations are "straightforward assertions," such as whether a handle is properly mounted or a sidewalk slope exceeds 2%. Id. at 1046-47. The court does not state that expert testimony on these types of violations or on other ADA violations is prohibited; it merely states that it is not required. Id. Finally, the court stated that "an expert witness is not permitted, much less required, to instruct the jury on the law of ADA compliance," and referenced its opinion in United States v. Weitzenhoff, 35 F.3d 1275, 1287 (9th Cir. 1993) stating that "[i]t is well settled . . . that the judge instructs the jury in the law . . . . The court's admission of expert testimony on contested issues of law in lieu of instructing the jury was manifestly erroneous." Strong, 724 F.3d at 1047 (citing Weitzenhoff, 35 F.3d at 1287 (emphasis added)).
The Court agrees with Defendants and finds that Strong does not expressly preclude expert testimony in ADA cases. See Strong, 724 F.3d at 1047; ECF No. 63 at 5. The Court therefore DENIES Plaintiff's motion to disregard Defendants' expert evidence in its entirety. Moreover, the Court finds that the instant case differs significantly from the Strong case because the instant case involves the more complex issue of what the ADA requires to accommodate hearing impaired [*14]  inmates in the prison setting, whereas the Strong case involved the "straightforward assertions" of slope and handle location. Because this case involves more complicated claims, expert testimony is relevant, helpful and admissible.
Finally, Plaintiff challenges the sufficiency of the expert's qualifications to reach her specific opinions. Initially, the Court finds that Plaintiff's challenges go to the weight not the admissibility of Ms. Blackseth's opinions. In addition, the Court rejects Plaintiff's argument that Ms. Blackseth is not qualified to opine on the impact of Plaintiff's hearing aids. See ECF No. 62 at 6. Here, Ms. Blackseth is not opining on how Plaintiff's hearing aids work; she is relying on Plaintiff's own testimony that he can hear alerts and alarms when wearing his hearing aids. Blackseth Decl. at 2; Moore Depo. at 9-11, 19-20, 26. Finally, Plaintiff argues that because Ms. Blackseth is not a penologist, her testimony regarding whether the prison's accommodations for Plaintiff satisfy the ADA must be stricken. ECF No. 62 at 6-7. Plaintiff provides no legal or factual support for this argument. Ms. Blackseth provides information regarding her qualifications and her [*15]  opinions are limited to the areas in which she is qualified. See Blackseth Decl. at 1-2. The Court therefore DENIES Plaintiff's motion to strike Ms. Blackseth's declaration and will consider her opinions, giving them the appropriate weight. See Federal Rules of Evidence 702-05.
Plaintiff also points out Defendants' failure to authenticate Plaintiff's deposition transcript. See ECF No. 62 at 4; see also ECF No. 59 at 18-60. Defendants subsequently submitted the necessary supporting documents in their reply in support of their motion for summary judgement. See ECF No. 63-2. The Court will thus consider the deposition transcript as admissible evidence and will cite to the version attached to Defendants' reply.

C. Plaintiff's ADA/Reasonable Accommodation Claim
In the SAC, Plaintiff alleges that he is disabled because he is hearing impaired and that Defendants discriminated against him by denying him reasonable accommodations for his disability. ECF No. 46 at 3-4. Plaintiff asserts that he has "been unable to appropriately hear any 'emergency alarms'" and that the "prison 'visual paging alarm' [does not] alert [him] if [he is] not paying attention." Id. at 3. Plaintiff states that his accommodation request, which was denied by prison [*16]  officials during the inmate appeal process, is for an "appropriate visual paging alarm system" or transfer to another prison. Id. at 4, 8. Defendant moves for summary judgment on this claim on the grounds that the undisputed evidence establishes that Plaintiff's disability was reasonably accommodated and Defendants were not deliberately indifferent to Plaintiff's needs. ECF No. 59-1 at 10-12.
Title II of the ADA "prohibit[s] discrimination on the basis of disability." Lovell v. Chandler, 303 F.3d 1039, 1052 (9th Cir. 2002); 42 U.S.C. § 12132. In order to establish a violation of Title II of the ADA, a plaintiff must allege (1) he is an individual with a disability; (2) he is otherwise qualified to participate in or receive the benefit of some public entity's services, programs, or activities; (3) that he was either excluded from participation in or denied the benefits of the public entity's services, programs, or activities, or was otherwise discriminated against by the public entity; and (4) that such exclusion, denial of benefits, or discrimination was by reason of the plaintiff's disability. Thompson v. Davis, 295 F.3d 890, 895 (9th Cir. 2002); O'Guinn v. Lovelock Corr. Ctr., 502 F.3d 1056, 1060 (9th Cir. 2007). Title II of the ADA applies to state prisoners. Pennsylvania Dept. of Corrections v. Yeskey, 524 U.S. 206, 208, 213, 118 S. Ct. 1952, 141 L. Ed. 2d 215 (1998). Under the ADA, inmates are entitled to "reasonable accommodations, not to optimal ones finely tuned to [inmates'] preferences."  [*17] See Nunes v. MA. Dep't of Correction, 766 F.3d 136, 146 (1st Cir. 2014).
The undisputed evidence presented in this case establishes that prison authorities provided Plaintiff with hearing aids for both ears. Moore Depo. at 9-11. Plaintiff testified that he wears both hearing aids during the day, except when he works out, and one hearing aid at night. Id. Plaintiff stated that with the hearing aids in his ears, he can hear the alarm when he is in the housing unit, unless he is on the right or left sides of the building in the corners. Id. at 19-20, 26, 51. Plaintiff takes his hearing aids out when he works out, but "always" makes sure to have someone with him who can notify him if an alarm is going off. Id. at 16, 18-19. Prison authorities also provided Plaintiff with a yellow vest that identifies him to prison staff as hearing-impaired. Id. at 12-13, 18; Hernandez Decl. at 2. Plaintiff testified that he chooses not to wear the vest on the yard or in the housing unit, because the Armstrong Remedial Plan does not require him to do so since he has working hearing aids. Moore Depo. at 12-13, 16-18, 21-22. Prison authorities also posted a placard on Plaintiff's cell door identifying him as hearing-impaired. Id. at 29. Plaintiff admitted that he has seen other inmates getting down when an alarm is activated. Id. at 18, 28.
When [*18]  an alarm is activated in a housing unit or on the yard, all inmates are required to get down on the ground for safety and security reasons. Hernandez Decl. at 2; Moore Depo. at 15-16. If an inmate is physically unable to get on the ground, the inmate is provided a vest to wear which indicates the inmate's disability and alerts the guards to the fact that the inmate cannot get on the ground. Hernandez Decl. at 2. Hearing-impaired inmates have vests that indicate hearing impairment, and correctional staff are trained regarding the significance of the inmates' vests. Id.; Moore Depo. at 16-18. The regular floor officers know that Plaintiff is hearing impaired and relief officers can see the placard on Plaintiff's cell indicating his impairment. Moore Depo. at 28-29; Hernandez Decl. at 2. When an inmate wearing a hearing-impairment vest does not get down during an alarm, the tower officer, the only officer with a gun, and the floor and yard staff are aware that the inmate might not have heard the alarm, and will personally convey to that inmate that he needs to immediately get down. Hernandez Decl. at 2; Moore Depo. at 16-18. Plaintiff acknowledged that other inmates and guards have told [*19]  Plaintiff that an alarm has gone off and he needs to get down on the ground. Moore Depo. at 28-31. When an alarm is sounded, a blue light flashes near the tower and the overhead lights are flashed on and off. Id. at 26-27. Plaintiff testified that he can only see the flashing blue light if he is looking at the tower because a wall blocks some of the light. Id.

1. Injunctive Relief
In the SAC, Plaintiff seeks injunctive relief in the form of "a visual alarm system[] at RJD for hearing impaired inmates" and to require Defendants to "follow[], enforc[e] the Armstrong v. Brown court order Remedial Plan." ECF No. 46 at 8. Defendants move for summary judgment on Plaintiff's request for injunctive relief on the ground that Plaintiff is a class member under the Armstrong v. Brown class action and must obtain the systemic injunctive relief he seeks in this case through that existing class action. ECF No. 59 at 14-16; see also Crawford v. Bell, 599 F.2d 890, 892-93 (9th Cir. 1979) (a member of a class seeking injunctive relief cannot raise those same claims in a separate lawsuit seeking the same relief). Plaintiff concedes in his opposition that his request for injunctive relief "[a]s a hearing-impaired inmate complaining about ADA violations at the RJD" falls under the [*20]  Armstrong Remedial Plan, and that consequently summary judgment on this ground is appropriate. ECF No. 62 at 12. Accordingly, the Court RECOMMENDS that Defendants' motion for summary judgment with respect to Plaintiff's claim for injunctive relief be GRANTED.

2. Monetary Damages
Plaintiff also seeks monetary damages for Defendants' alleged failure to reasonably accommodate Plaintiff's hearing disability. ECF No. 46 at 8. "To recover monetary damages under Title II of the ADA . . . a plaintiff must prove intentional discrimination on the part of the defendant," and the standard for intentional discrimination is deliberate indifference. Duvall v. County of Kitsap, 260 F.3d 1124, 1138 (9th Cir. 2001). Deliberate indifference under the ADA requires (1) knowledge that a harm to a federally protected right is substantially likely and (2) a failure to act upon that likelihood. Id. at 1139. The first prong requires a plaintiff to "identify 'specific reasonable' and 'necessary' accommodations that the defendant failed to provide" and to establish that s/he notified defendant of the need for accommodation. Id. The second prong requires a showing that the entity deliberately failed to fulfill its duty to act in response to a request for accommodation. Id. The entity's [*21]  duty is to undertake a fact-specific investigation to gather from the disabled individual and qualified experts sufficient information to determine what constitutes a reasonable accommodation. Id. The second prong is not satisfied if the failure to fulfill this duty to accommodate results from mere negligence. Id. Under the second element, "a public entity does not 'act' by proffering just any accommodation: it must consider the particular individual's need when conducting its investigation into what accommodations are reasonable." Id.
Defendants argue that Plaintiff has not established the first element because the undisputed evidence establishes that Defendants complied with the ADA and reasonably accommodated Plaintiff's hearing disability. ECF No. 63 at 6-8. Defendants also argue that Plaintiff has not established that they were deliberately indifferent because the undisputed evidence establishes that they investigated and evaluated Plaintiff's requests for accommodation and determined that the existing blue-light alarm system was "equally effective" as a red-light alarm system would be and that lights in the yard were not required for a reasonable accommodation. ECF No. 59-1 at [*22]  13-14. Plaintiff does not challenge the majority of the undisputed facts set forth by Defendants. ECF No. 62 at 8-12. Rather, Plaintiff argues that the visual alarm system does not comply with the ADA because Plaintiff cannot see it from all locations in the yard. Id. Plaintiff bases his argument on the assertion that the "Armstrong counsel has already confirmed that RJD's visual alarms are ineffective and do not cover the entire yard, much less the buildings that they serve," on Plaintiff's testimony that he does not see the alarms if he is not looking in the correct direction, and on Plaintiff's testimony and inmate declarations describing an instance in which Plaintiff did not hear or see alarms and did not know he had to get down on the ground and shots were fired near him. Id.
A prisoner can satisfy the first prong by submitting to prison authorities a request for reasonable accommodation in which the prisoner identifies the specific, reasonable, and necessary accommodation he seeks. Scott v. Garcia, 370 F.Supp.2d 1056, 1075-76 (S.D. Cal. 2005); Brown v. Woodford, 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 85905, 2007 WL 4169904, at *4 (N.D. Cal. Nov. 20, 2007). Here, on February 2, 2012, Plaintiff submitted to prison authorities a "Reasonable Modification or Accommodation Request." ECF No. 59-1 at 62. The request stated, in relevant part, that Plaintiff [*23]  is "unable to hear any alarms, and there is no "red-light-alarm-signal" for the hearing impaired" and it asks that "red-light-alarm-signals" be placed in the housing units or that he be transferred to a facility that has a red-light alarm signal. Id. In his first and second level responses, Plaintiff explained that the "particular blue light alarm does not alert a hearing impaired person" and that "the blue light alarm just above the housing unit control booth are not visible on the left and right side of the housing units." Id. at 64-66. In denying this aspect of Plaintiff's request for accommodation, the prison found that the blue light alarms were "as equally effective" as the requested red lights and that the other accommodations provided to Plaintiff were sufficient. Id. at 71-72.
On August 21, 2013, Plaintiff submitted an inmate appeal alleging a "safety concern" and explaining that shots were fired in Plaintiff's general direction because he "never heard the emergency alarm or [saw] the emergency visual lights flash." Id. at 75-76. Plaintiff's requested action was for "appropriate emergency visual alarm lights [to be] placed on the yard and housing units ASAP." Id. at 76. The prison responded by granting his request for [*24]  "visual alarm lights to be placed on the housing units" (explaining that "the lights are currently in place") but denying his request for "visual alarm lights to be placed on the yard . . . because it is not a viable solution based on the size of the yard," and because an alternative accommodation, hearing aids and a yellow hearing-impaired vest, was provided to Plaintiff. Id. at 81. While the Court does not conclude that Defendants or RJD violated the ADA, the Court finds that Plaintiff may have satisfied the first prong of the Duvall test by alerting prison authorities to his disability and identifying for them the specific accommodations he is seeking.2
Even if Plaintiff satisfied the first prong of the Duvall test, Plaintiff has not presented evidence establishing a triable issue of fact as to the second prong-the adequacy of the investigation. In response to Plaintiff's requests for accommodation, Defendants interviewed Plaintiff, verified the specific accommodations that he was requesting, considered the requests, as well as other accommodations already provided to Plaintiff, and determined whether the requested accommodations were necessary and feasible. ECF No. 59-1 at 62-72, 75-85. At [*25]  the third level of review on the request for a red, rather than blue, light warning system, prison officials found:
[T]he institution provides Blue Light audible alarms above the Control Booth, which was viewed as equally effective as the red light alarm [Plaintiff] requested. To alert hearing-impaired inmates, Staff also flashes the overhead lights on the unit during emergency conditions and when PA announcements are made. Moreover, [Plaintiff] was assigned a Floor Officer as a Staff Assistant to help him if he experiences any difficulties with hearing. . . . All of these modifications were provided as equally effective means of accommodation for [Plaintiff's] request.
Id. at 71. With regard to the request regarding warning lights in the yard, the third level response provided:
[Plaintiff] was issued a hearing-impaired vest on July 30, 2013, and it is his responsibility to wear the vest any time he is outside his cell to alert staff to identify him in case of institutional emergency. . . . Installation of a comprehensive outdoor lighting system to warn hearing-impaired inmates of institutional emergencies would result in an unnecessary financial burden on the Department.
Id. at 84-5. The responses opined that [*26]  the provision of the hearing-impaired vest, denial of comprehensive outdoor lighting, and blue warning lights were consistent with the Armstrong Remedial Plan. Id. at 71-72, 84-85.
Plaintiff does not present any evidence indicating that Defendants' investigation was inadequate. Rather, Plaintiff argues that the prison's decision was incorrect. Plaintiff relies on an Armstrong Remedial Plan report on RJD and declarations and testimony of instances in which Plaintiff did not hear an alarm or observe the flashing lights to argue that the utilized warning system is inadequate. However, these arguments, even if accurate, go to the injunctive relief claim, not the deliberate indifference claim.
Plaintiff provides an excerpt from a "monitoring tour report of RJD," which was provided to him in a July 23, 2013 letter. ECF No. 62-1 at 9. The report indicates that (1) RJD's alarm system was tested, (2) the visual alarm (blue light) was visible inside and outside of the building, (3) the light was not visible to prisoners in the corners of Building 10, and (4) the light was not visible from all parts of the yard. Id. The report concluded:
In sum, because the flashing lights that indicate that an alarm has been sounded [*27]  are not visible from all areas of a housing unit or under all circumstances on a yard, prisoners with hearing impairments may not hear or see when an alarm occurs. RJD must address this problem so that prisoners with hearing impairments are not misidentified as non-compliant with alarm procedures.
Id. at 9-10. Notably, the report does not express any opinion regarding the adequacy of the prison's investigation or the sufficiency of the totality of the accommodations made by the prison for Plaintiff. The report also does not dictate how RJD must address the problem. As set forth below, RJD addressed the problem of having Plaintiff identified as non-compliant with alarm procedures by providing him with hearing aids, which Plaintiff admits enables him to hear, a yellow vest to be worn over his clothes and a placard on his cell identifying him as hearing impaired, training officers about a proper response to a hearing impaired inmate who is not compliant with alarm procedures, and by flashing blue warning lights. Plaintiff has not and cannot presented evidence indicating that this response was "deliberately indifferent."
Plaintiff also points to the July 24, 2013 yard incident and alleges that if inmate [*28]  Chennault had not alerted him about the fight involving three other inmates, Plaintiff would not have been aware of the emergency and could have been shot. See ECF No. 62 at 9; Moore Decl. at 3-4; Chennault Decl. at 5-6. The undisputed evidence in this case establishes that the prison alarm was not activated during the incident, and thus none of the prisoners were alerted about the emergency via the prison alarm system. See Moore Depo. at 34-35, 40-41; Chennault Decl. at 5. Furthermore, Plaintiff was neither wearing his hearing-impairment vest nor his hearing aids when the incident occurred. Moore Depo. at 34, 40. While the Court is sympathetic to Plaintiff's concerns, this incident does not raise a triable issue of fact as the adequacy of Defendants' investigation or whether Defendants were deliberately indifferent to Plaintiff's needs.
The undisputed evidence establishes that (1) Defendants received Plaintiff's requests for accommodation (first for red lights and second for more lights outside) and investigated both requests, including interviewing Plaintiff, through three levels of appeal, (2) while Defendants denied Plaintiff's specific accommodation requests, they provided Plaintiff [*29]  with other accommodations to ensure his safety and ability to comply with prison emergencies, (3) Defendants considered the Armstrong Remedial Plan3 and its requirements when evaluating Plaintiff's requests, (4) the Armstrong Remedial Plan does not require red rather than blue lights,4 and (5) while the monitoring report states a concern regarding whether the current warning system is sufficient to prevent prisoners with hearing impairments from being "misidentified as non-compliant with alarm procedures," the report does not state what is required to fix this concern and does not consider or address whether other accommodations such as hearing aids, a yellow hearing-impaired vest, and training for the prison officers about the proper procedure for addressing a hearing-impaired prisoner who doesn't respond immediately to a warning are sufficient to satisfy the Armstrong Remedial Plan, the ADA, and Plaintiff. Thus, the undisputed evidence establishes that the Defendants properly considered and investigated Plaintiff's requests and were not deliberately indifferent to Plaintiff's needs and Plaintiff has not provided any evidence creating a triable issue of fact as to this claim.
The undisputed evidence also establishes that Defendants' investigation was focused on Plaintiff's "particular needs" and that Defendants reasonably accommodated Plaintiff. See Duvall, 260 F.3d at 1139 (a public entity "must consider the particular individual's need when conducting its investigation into [*31]  what accommodations are reasonable"); Brown, 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 85905, 2007 WL 4169904, at *6 (granting summary judgment in favor of defendants where undisputed evidence showed that defendants "conducted a factual investigation into the nature of plaintiff's disability" and determined that the requested accommodation was not reasonable and therefore denied the request). Plaintiff's own testimony establishes that (1) he has been provided with two hearing aids and that with those hearing aids in his ears, he can hear the alarms and notifications; (2) that he has been provided with a yellow vest identifying him as hearing impaired to the guards; (3) that a placard has been placed by his cell door identifying him as hearing impaired; and (4) that he can see the blue flashing light from most locations in the building and in the yard if he looks in the correct direction. Defendants also provide an expert opinion, supported by undisputed facts from this case, that "the prison has provided Mr. Moore with accommodations that meet or exceed the Americans with Disability Act requirements for reasonable accommodation." Blackseth Decl. at 2. Plaintiff did not provide an expert opinion (or a qualified opinion from Plaintiff) that the totality of the [*32]  accommodations provided to Plaintiff do not satisfy the ADA. While the Court acknowledges that Plaintiff is not required to provide an expert opinion [see Strong, 724 F.3d at 1046-47; Kohler v. Presidio International, Inc., 782 F.3d 1064, 1068-69 (9th Cir. 2015) (interpreting Strong, 724 F.3d at 1042)], Plaintiff must provide evidence challenging the expert's opinion. Here, Plaintiff has not.
The undisputed evidence establishes that Defendants provided Plaintiff with reasonable accommodations that satisfied the ADA. Even if the accommodations did not satisfy the ADA, the undisputed evidence establishes that Defendants investigated and considered Plaintiff's requested accommodations and determined that they were either not appropriate or not financially viable and that the alternative accommodations were reasonable. Plaintiff has not presented any evidence establishing a triable issue of fact as to Defendant's negligence, much less any evidence of deliberate indifference or intentional discrimination. See Brown, 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 85905, 2007 WL 4169904, at *5-6 (summary judgment appropriate on monetary claim where undisputed evidence established that defendants denied plaintiff's specific accommodation request but granted an alternative accommodation after conducting a factual investigation); Nunes, 766 F.3d at 146 (inmates are entitled to "reasonable accommodations, not to optimal ones [*33]  finely turned to [the inmate's] preferences"). Accordingly, this Court RECOMMENDS that Defendants' motion for summary judgment on the claim for monetary damages be GRANTED.

CONCLUSION
For all the foregoing reasons, IT IS RECOMMENDED that the District Court GRANT Defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment.
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that any written objections to this Report must be filed with the Court and served on all parties no later than June 12, 2015. The document should be captioned "Objections to Report and Recommendation."
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that any reply to the objections shall be filed with the Court and served on all parties no later than July 3, 2015. The parties are advised that failure to file objections within the specified time may waive the right to raise those objections on appeal of the Court's order. See Turner v. Duncan, 158 F.3d 449, 455 (9th Cir. 1998).
IT IS SO ORDERED.
DATED: May 22, 2015
/s/ Barbara L. Major
BARBARA L. MAJOR
United States Magistrate Judge


End of Document

