Myers v. Gwinnett Cty.
United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division
July 20, 2017, Decided; July 20, 2017, Filed
CIVIL ACTION FILE NO. 1:16-cv-824-RWS-JKL

Reporter
2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 215371 *
CRYSTAL MYERS, Plaintiff, v. GWINNETT COUNTY, Defendant.
Subsequent History: Adopted by, Objection overruled by, Summary judgment granted by Myers v. Gwinnett County, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 215364 (N.D. Ga., Sept. 25, 2017)
Counsel:  [*1] For Crystal Myers, Plaintiff: Victor Severin Roberts, LEAD ATTORNEY, Benjamin Andrew Stark, Barrett & Farahany, LLP, Atlanta, GA.
For Gwinnett County, Defendant: F. Skip Sugarman, Sugarman Law LLP, Atlanta, GA; Ryan E. Harbin, Simon Howard Bloom, Bloom Sugarman, LLP, Atlanta, GA.
Judges: JOHN K. LARKINS III, United States Magistrate Judge.
Opinion by: JOHN K. LARKINS III
Opinion



FINAL REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION
This employment discrimination case is presently before the Court on Defendant Gwinnett County's ("Gwinnett County" or the "County") motion for summary judgment on Plaintiff Crystal Myers's claims of discrimination, in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") and the Family Medical Leave Act ("FMLA"). For the following reasons, the Court RECOMMENDS that the motion for summary judgment be GRANTED.

I. FACTUAL BACKGROUND
The following factual background is presented in the light most favorable to Myers. The Court has implicitly resolved disputes of fact in favor of Myers, as the non-moving party.

A. Gwinnett County's Corrections Facility
Gwinnett County operates a prison, known as the Comprehensive Correctional Complex (the "correctional facility"), in Lawrenceville, Georgia. (Def.'s Statement of Material [*2]  Facts as to Which There Is No Genuine Issue to Be Tried ("DSUMF") [Doc. 40-2] ¶ 1.) Since 2013, Darrell Johnson has served as interim warden or warden of the prison. (DSUMF ¶ 40.) The County employs sworn correctional officers to work with and among the inmate population in the correctional facility. (DSUMF ¶ 2.) Correctional officers work in the inmates' dormitory facilities and oversee inmate activities, such as religious services, dining, and outdoor recreation. (Id. ¶ 3.) They are assigned to one of two divisions: (1) security, or (2) Support Services, previously known as Care and Treatment, which includes case workers, counselors, and officers who oversee the dining facilities. (Id. ¶¶ 5-6.) At times, Support Services officers are required to assist security officers. (DSUMF ¶ 7; Pl.'s Resps. to Def.'s Statement of Material Facts ("R-DSUMF") [Doc. 53-2] ¶ 7.)
Correctional officers are responsible for the "inmate count" conducted several times each day. (DSUMF ¶ 4.) Conducting the inmate count might not be part of a correctional officer's daily or regular duties, but officers assist with the count when needed. (See Decl. of Crystal Myers ¶ 7.)
All correctional officers, regardless [*3]  of division, are required to respond to emergencies, such as inmate altercations, in order to protect themselves, other inmates, and other officers. (DSUMF ¶¶ 8-9; R-DSUMF ¶¶ 8-9.) An officer is not necessarily expected to break up an inmate fight by herself, however. (Dep. of Crystal Myers at 123; Dep. of Warden Darrell Johnson at 37-39; Dep. of Sheree White at 57.) Should an officer encounter an inmate fight, she is expected to call for backup, give verbal commands to the inmates to stop fighting, and film the incident with a video camera; then additional officers will arrive to assist in breaking up the fight. (Myers Dep. at 123-24; Johnson Dep. at 37-39; White Dep. at 57.) This protocol is used because (1) it is unsafe for a single officer to engage multiple inmates in a fight by herself; (2) the protocol establishes a record of the event in case inmates later asserted claims about the altercation; and (3) the altercation might be a "trap" to attack an officer who tries to intervene. (Myers Decl. ¶ 36; Johnson Dep. at 38; White Dep. at 58.) Warden Johnson also expects that a correctional officer would intervene in a fight, without waiting for backup, if an inmate is being badly [*4]  hurt by another inmate and there are no other inmates around who might "jump[]" the officer. (Johnson Dep. at 37-39.)

B. Myers's Career with the County
In 2002, Myers was hired at the correctional facility as a correctional officer in the security division. (DSUMF ¶ 12.) She was later promoted to the position of Senior Corrections Officer and, in 2009, was transferred to the Support Services division to work as a case worker. (Id. ¶¶ 13-14.) In 2010, she transferred to an assignment as a counselor, which was her assignment during the remainder of her career with the County. (Id. ¶ 16; Pl.'s Statement of Add'l Material Facts in Supp. of Mot. for Summ. J. ("PSMF") [Doc. 53-1] ¶ 2.)
As a counselor, Myers was responsible for: counseling inmates; inmate orientation; assessing the needs of inmates; maintaining inmate files; coordinating inmate programs and activities; maintaining the library and legal materials; attending hearings to determine how inmates should be classified and whether they should be segregated; advocating for inmates in disciplinary hearings; coordinating inmate grievance procedures; communicating with the Warden and other staff about inmate problems and general morale; [*5]  and performing occasional security duties as needed. (PSMF ¶ 3.)
Myers occasionally participated in inmate counts, even though the count was not one of her regular duties. (PSMF ¶ 7.) When she conducted the inmate count in a dormitory unit, she sometimes had inmates brought downstairs so that she could count them without climbing stairs. (Myers Dep. at 375-76.) Myers was never required to supervise inmate recreation time outdoors in the prison yard. (Id. at 239, 254, 334-35.) The inmates' yard time was not scheduled during the day shift throughout her employment with the correctional facility. (Id. at 239.) Myers occasionally had to move objects at work but, instead of moving the objects herself, she instructed inmates to do so. (Id. at 90.) Myers was never called upon to break up a physical altercation among inmates. (Id. at 123-24.)
At the time relevant to this case, Myers reported to the following chain of command: Corporal April Martin, Sergeant Sheree White, Lieutenant Keith Phinney, and the Warden. (PSMF ¶¶ 8-10.)

C. Myers's Multiple Sclerosis
In 2003, Myers began experiencing memory loss, fatigue, cognitive issues, loss of equilibrium, and she abruptly lost the ability to see with her left eye. (DSUMF ¶ 18.) In August 2013, she was [*6]  diagnosed with multiple sclerosis, a disease that affects an individual's central nervous system. (Id. ¶ 19; PSMF ¶¶ 11-12.) With treatment, Myers regained sight in her left eye, although her vision did not fully recover. (DSUMF ¶ 20.)
Myers's symptoms manifest in "flare-ups," lasting a few days at a time, during which she would experience loss of equilibrium and balance, causing falls, temporary vision impairment in her left eye, numbness or tingling in her hands, slowed cognitive processes, and extreme fatigue. (PSMF ¶¶ 13, 16-17.) Outside of her flare-ups, she lives a normal life. (Id. ¶ 15.) She can usually tell when she is going to experience a flare-up because she experiences "warnings" in the days before a flare-up onset, such as blurred vision in her left eye and fatigue. (Id. ¶ 18.) When fatigued, she occasionally experiences "exasperations," rather than full flare-ups, of her symptoms. (Id. ¶ 19.) While employed at the correctional facility, when she experienced an exasperation of her symptoms, Myers sometimes would work and sometimes stay at home to rest. (DSUMF ¶ 21; PSMF ¶ 19.) Her symptoms at such times included numbness and weakness in her left side. (DSUMF ¶ 23; R-DSUMF [*7]  ¶ 23.) Myers was forthcoming about the fact that she suffers from multiple sclerosis and discussed it with Sergeant White, Lieutenant Phinney, and other County personnel. (PSMF ¶¶ 20-28.)

D. Accommodations for Myers's Disability Through August 2015
From 2003 to early 2015, Myers applied for and was approved for intermittent FMLA leave so that she could manage her multiple sclerosis symptoms. (DSUMF ¶¶ 26-29; PSMF ¶ 29.) In 2003, a supervisor told her that she could not take leave when she was recovering from her multiple sclerosis symptoms, but another supervisor intervened and allowed Myers to take FMLA leave. (DSUMF ¶ 31.) In 2003, Myers had difficulty changing her schedule so that she did not have to drive at night, but the administration of the correctional facility eventually allowed her to work at the prison only during daylight hours. (Myers Dep. at 159-63, 166-67.) Myers continued to work a daytime shift throughout her employment at the correctional facility. (See id. at 239.)
Myers took intermittent FMLA leave from 2003 to 2015. (PSMF ¶ 34.) Intermittent leave was the primary official accommodation for her multiple sclerosis. (Id. ¶ 30.) Myers used the leave when she was unable to work [*8]  because of her symptoms. (Id.) She was required to reapply for intermittent leave each year. (Id. ¶ 31.)
To apply for FMLA leave, Myers was required to have her doctor complete a Certification of Health Care Provider form and an Essential Duty Checklist form. (PSMF ¶ 35.) She then submitted those forms with her FMLA leave application to the County's FMLA liason. (Id.) The Certification of Health Care Provider form allowed an employee's doctor to provide information regarding the nature of the employee's medical conditions, the duration of the condition, treatment for the condition, and the effect of the condition on the employee's ability to perform certain job functions. (Id. ¶ 36.) The Essential Duty Checklist form allowed an employee's doctor to indicate whether the employee could perform purportedly essential duties with or without a reasonable accommodation or could not perform those duties at all. (Id. ¶ 37.)
In 2004, Myers's FMLA application forms stated that she could not work more than 8.5 hours each day. (Myers Dep., Ex., 2004 FMLA App.) She took FMLA leave in 2005 so that she could care for a seriously ill parent. (Myers Dep., Ex., 2005 FMLA App.) In 2006, her Essential Functions [*9]  Checklist stated that she could perform all job functions without an accommodation, except that she was limited to 8.5 hour days. (Myers Dep., Ex., 2006 FMLA App.) Her 2007 FMLA application, as it appears in the record, does not include a detailed description of her abilities and limitations. (Myers Dep., Ex., 2007 FMLA App.)
In 2008, Myers's Certification form stated that she could not work in hot temperatures and was limited to workdays of 8.5 hours. (Dep. of Lisa Carson, Ex. 8, 2008 FMLA App.) In 2009, her Certification form stated that she could not work in hot temperatures and could work only 8 to 9 hours each day. (Carson Dep., Ex. 7, 2009 FMLA App.)
Myers's 2010 Essential Duty Checklist form stated that she could not climb, exert up to 100 pounds of force occasionally, or work more than 8.5 hours each day. (Carson Dep., Ex. 6, 2010 FMLA App.) It also noted that she would have difficulty with strenuous activities such as climbing stairs. Myers was able to perform all other job functions without accommodation, although several functions, including supervising inmate yard activities, were marked "N/A." Her Certification form reiterated that she could not work in extreme temperatures [*10]  and might have difficulty climbing stairs. (Id.)
Myers's 2011 Essential Duty Checklist form indicated that she could not exert up to 100 pounds of force occasionally to move objects, exert 50 pounds of force frequently to move objects, exert 20 pounds of force constantly to move objects, or work more than 8.5 hours each day. (Carson Dep., Ex. 5, 2011 FMLA App.) Regarding her ability to perform inmate counts, Myers's doctor noted that she would have difficulty with strenuous activity, such as climbing stairs. He also marked several functions, including supervision of inmate yard activities and cell inspections, "N/A" without comment but did not note any other functions that Myers could not perform. The 2011 Certification form stated that she could not work in extremely hot or cold temperatures and might "have difficulty with strenuous activity such as climbing stairs." (Id.)
Myers's 20131 FMLA Essential Duty Checklist stated that she was restricted to 8.5 to 9-hour workdays but otherwise could perform all of her job duties without an accommodation. (Myers Dep., Ex., Nov. 2013 FMLA App.) Myers also was granted FMLA leave in 2013 to care for her father, who was seriously ill. (Id.)
Myers's [*11]  2014 Essential Duty Checklist stated that, during a flare-up, she could not climb, balance, exert up to 100 pounds of force occasionally, exert up to 50 pounds of force frequently, or exert up to 20 pounds of force constantly. (Carson Dep., Ex. 4, 2014 FMLA App.) Myers's doctor also wrote on the Checklist form that she could not exceed 8.5 hours of work each day, could not work in extreme temperatures, and, during a flare-up, could not balance, climb stairs, or push and pull greater than 20 pounds. Otherwise, she could perform all job functions without accommodation, including the functions of resolving disputes, arguments, and physical activities between inmates and supervising inmate yard activities. The 2014 Certification form further explained that she would have difficulty "exerting energy to move 20 [to] 100 pounds" during flare-ups and that climbing stairs "may be a little difficult sometimes." (Id.)
In 2015, Myers's Certification form stated that she could not perform heavy lifting, walking, or standing during flare-ups, she must avoid excessive heat and cold, and she could not work more than 8.5 hours each day. (Carson Dep., Ex. 2, 2015 FMLA App.) The Essential Duties Checklist [*12]  form stated that she could not exert up to 100 pounds of force occasionally, exert up to 50 pounds of force frequently, exert up to 20 pounds of force constantly, or work more than 8.5 hours each day. She could supervise inmate yard activities and resolve disputes, arguments and physical activities without any accommodation. Myers was approved to use intermittent FMLA leave through January 6, 2016. (Id.)
Usually, once Myers's FMLA paperwork was approved, the Essential Duty Checklist form was submitted one of her supervisors. (Carson Dep. at 24-25.) Warden Johnson usually did not review FMLA paperwork for correctional facility employees. (Johnson Dep. at 18-19.) He would be shown such paperwork, however, if it indicated restrictions such that an employee could not perform an essential duty of her job. (Id. at 19.)
Myers's chain of command did not require that she work overtime shifts. (See PSMF ¶ 81.) As noted above, Myers was allowed to work daytime shifts throughout her employment with the County, which appears to have been an accommodation for her inability to drive at night. (See DSUMF ¶ 32; Myers Dep. at 239.)
Myers's supervisors also informally modified her responsibilities at work. Sergeant [*13]  White allowed Myers to conduct inmate counts in the isolation unit rather than the general housing unit because the stairs in the isolation unit were easier to climb. (PSMF ¶ 72.) During mandatory evacuations of the correctional facility, while the inmates evacuated to the yard, Myers patrolled the inside of the prison to make certain that all the civilians had evacuated, and then waited in her car until the evacuation was over. (Id. ¶ 77.) This assignment allowed Myers to avoid exposure to extreme temperatures. (See id. ¶ 78.) She also occasionally "switched duties" with another counselor when she experienced a symptom exasperation while at work. (Id. ¶ 83.)
Her supervisors never told her that these informal modifications were a problem. (PSMF ¶¶ 75, 78, 82, 84.) Moreover, Myers's employee reviews progressively improved over the years, and according to her final performance review in January 2015, she was a good employee. (Johnson Dep. at 54-55.) Myers was not disciplined for work performance problems and did not refuse to provide assistance when asked by Sergeant White. (Myers Dep. at 60; White Dep. at 31-32.)

E. Inmate Count in April 2015
In April 2015, Myers's second-level supervisor, [*14]  Lieutenant Phinney, instructed her to assist with the count in one of the inmate dorms. (Phinney Dep. at 55.) Myers did not refuse to assist with the count or say that she could not assist with the count, although she was physically unable to do the count in the dorm that day. (Myers Decl. ¶¶ 28-29; Myers Dep. at 221.) She told Lieutenant Phinney that her supervisor usually let her count in the isolation unit because the stairs were easier to climb. (Myers Decl. ¶ 29.) Lieutenant Phinney counted the dorm himself and later reported to his supervisor, Captain Pickens, that Myers had duty restrictions. (Phinney Dep. at 55-56.) He told Captain Pickens that Myers "told [him] she couldn't go up and down stairs." (Id. at 56.) Captain Pickens told Warden Johnson that Myers could not go into the inmate housing unit, and Warden Johnson informed the County's human resources department. (Johnson Dep. at 68-69.)

F. The August 10, 2015 Meeting
On August 10, 2015, representatives from the County's human resources department met with Myers and several other employees of the correctional facility. (DSUMF ¶ 43.) The purpose of the meeting was to determine whether Myers was able to perform the essential functions [*15]  of her position, or whether a reasonable accommodation would enable her to do so. (Id. ¶ 44.)
Human resources officials asked Myers about job duties listed on the Essential Duty Checklist form. (Myers Decl. ¶ 31.) While Myers answered questions about the job duties and her abilities, a human resources employee completed the Checklist form for her. (Id.) The employee handed Myers the form and instructed her to have it signed by her doctor. (Id. ¶¶ 31-32.)
As filled out by the human resources official, the Checklist form indicated that Myers could not supervise inmate yard activities or resolve disputes, arguments, and physical activities between inmates, with a note that she did not "think she ha[d] the strength" to resolve inmate disputes. (Decl. of Darrell Johnson, Ex. C.) The form also stated that Myers could not exert up to 100 pounds of force occasionally to move objects, exert 50 pounds of force frequently to move objects, or exert 20 pounds of force constantly to move objects, and that she could not work longer than 8.5 hours. The Checklist form noted for that Myers would be required to walk about 20 to 40 steps while conducting inmate counts on a three-week rotation. The form [*16]  invited Myers's doctor to provide additional information about her ability to perform her job functions, but it does not appear that he provided any additional information. (Id.) Myers had her doctor sign the form and returned it. (Myers Decl. ¶ 32.)
As a result of the August 10 meeting, the following purportedly essential duties were identified as job functions that Myers could not perform:
○ Supervising inmate yard activities;
○ Resolving disputes, arguments, and physical activities between inmates;
○ Exerting up to 100 pounds occasionally to move objects;
○ Exerting 50 pounds of force frequently to move objects; and
○ Exerting 20 pounds of force constantly to move objects.
(DSUMF ¶ 50; R-DSUMF ¶ 50.)
The County held a follow-up meeting with Myers on August 18, 2015. (Myers Decl. ¶ 38.) At that second meeting, Myers informed County officials that she had never, during her career at the correctional facility, been required to supervise inmate yard activities or exert 20 to 100 pounds of force to move objects. (Id. ¶ 39.) She also told the officials present at the meeting that she had never had to resolve an inmate altercation during her career and reminded them that, under the correctional [*17]  facility's protocol for dealing with violence among inmates, "I simply call for assistance and backup would come." (Id.; Myers Dep. at 385.) Myers asked that she be allowed to continue to take intermittent FMLA leave as needed as an accommodation for her multiple sclerosis symptoms. (Myers Dep. at 239.)

G. The 60-Day "Accommodation Period" and Myers's Termination
In a letter dated August 25, 2015, Warden Johnson initiated a 60-day "accommodation period" for Myers. (DSUMF ¶ 57; R-DSUMF ¶ 57; Johnson Decl., Ex. D.) During that time, Myers was supposed to seek other employment within the County and, if unsuccessful, would be terminated from County employment after the 60 days elapsed. (DSUMF ¶ 58; R-DSUMF ¶ 57.) Myers was removed from her assignment as a counselor during the accommodation period. (PSMF ¶ 142.) Moreover, the human resources department was supposed to work with Myers to identify other positions in the County that she could fill. (DSUMF ¶ 58.) Warden Johnson told Myers to contact him if she became able to perform the Checklist duties during the accommodation period. (DSUMF ¶ 59; R-DSUMF ¶ 59.) The human resources department identified positions within County government that [*18]  might have suited Myers, but she did not apply to any other position within the County. (DSUMF ¶¶ 61-62.) She also did not contact Warden Johnson to inform him that she could perform the Checklist duties. (Id. ¶ 60.) In a letter dated October 27, 2015, Warden Johnson notified Myers that he was "mov[ing] forward" with her termination, effective October 30, 2015. (Johnson Decl., Exs. E, F.)

H. Accommodations for Other Correctional Facility Employees
Myers contends that the County accommodated several other employees with disabilities but failed to provide her with a reasonable accommodation when it fired her. (See PSMF ¶¶ 130-31.) Those other employees included Officer Amanda Walker, who has a prosthetic leg below the knee, and Officer Negron, who was obese and had difficulty moving and walking. (Id.; Myers Dep. at 116; Decl. of Amanda Walker ¶¶ 3, 7.) Officer Walker's condition did not affect her ability to perform the functions of her job. (Johnson Dep. at 75.) Officer Negron was told that he would be fired if he did not lose weight because he could not perform the functions of his job. (Myers Dep. at 117-18; Johnson Dep. at 75.) He was placed on a 60-day accommodation period to find [*19]  work elsewhere in the County. (Johnson Dep. at 73.)

II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY
On March 14, 2016, Myers filed the initial complaint in this action. On June 26, 2016, she amended her complaint, [Doc. 20 (the "amended complaint" or "Compl.")], which is the operative pleading in this matter. In the amended complaint, Myers alleges that Gwinnett County interfered with her FMLA leave and retaliated against her for engaging in protected conduct under the FMLA. (Compl. ¶¶ 40-43.) She further alleges that Gwinnett County discriminated against her in violation of the ADA by failing to provide her with a reasonable accommodation and retaliated against her for engaging in protected activity under the ADA. (Id. ¶¶ 45-55.)
On January 9, 2017, Gwinnett County moved for summary judgment on Myers's ADA and FMLA claims. [Doc. 40.] Myers responded to the motion for summary judgment, [Doc. 53], and Gwinnett County filed a reply, [Doc. 54]. On July 6, 2017, the Court held oral argument on the motion for summary judgment, [Doc. 57], and Myers and the County provided the Court with supplemental citations to authority after the hearing, [Docs. 58-60]. The motion is now ripe for consideration.

III. DISCUSSION

A. The [*20]  Summary Judgment Standard
A court should grant summary judgment when there are no genuine issues of material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). The movant bears the initial burden of showing that it is entitled to summary judgment. Id. ("The court shall grant summary judgment if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law."); Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986) ("Of course, a party seeking summary judgment always bears the initial responsibility of informing the district court of the basis for its motion, and identifying those portions of [the record] which it believes demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact."); Clark v. Coats & Clark, Inc., 929 F.2d 604, 608 (11th Cir. 1991) (holding that Celotex did not change the rule that the movant bore the initial burden, and stating, "Even after Celotex it is never enough simply to state that the non-moving party cannot meet its burden at trial"). The movant may carry its burden by showing the court that there is "an absence of evidence to support the nonmoving party's case." Celotex, 477 U.S. at 325.
"Only when that burden has been met does the burden shift to the non-moving party to demonstrate that there is indeed a material [*21]  issue of fact that precludes summary judgment." Clark, 929 F.2d at 608. The nonmovant is then required "to go beyond the pleadings" and to present competent evidence in the form of affidavits, answers to interrogatories, depositions, admissions and the like, designating "specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." Celotex, 477 U.S. at 324 (quotation omitted); see Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). "[M]ere conclusions and unsupported factual allegations are legally insufficient to defeat a summary judgment motion." Ellis v. England, 432 F.3d 1321, 1326 (11th Cir. 2005). Resolving all doubts in favor of the nonmoving party, the court must determine "whether a fair-minded jury could return a verdict for the plaintiff on the evidence presented." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 252, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). In evaluating a summary judgment motion, "[t]he evidence of the non-movant is to be believed, and all justifiable inferences are to be drawn in [the non-movant's] favor. Id. at 255.

B. Failure-to-Accommodate Claim
Myers asserts that Gwinnett County discriminated against her on the basis of her disability by failing to provide her with a reasonable accommodation. [Doc. 53 at 4-19.] She also asserts that the County failed to engage in the "interactive process" to identify a reasonable accommodation. [Id. at 19-20.]
A plaintiff seeking to establish an ADA disability discrimination [*22]  claim must show that (1) she has a disability, (2) she was a "qualified individual" at the relevant time, and (3) she was subject to unlawful discrimination because of her disability. Lucas v. W.W. Grainger, Inc., 257 F.3d 1249, 1255 (11th Cir. 2001). Failure to provide a reasonable accommodation to the limitations of an individual with a disability can constitute discrimination under the ADA. 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). A qualified individual is "an individual who, without or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds or desires." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8); Holbrook v. City of Alpharetta, Ga., 112 F.3d 1522, 1526 (11th Cir. 1997).
Here, there is no dispute that Myers has a disability, but there is a dispute as to whether she is a "qualified individual," as she admits that she cannot perform the Checklist functions that Gwinnett County identified as essential to her position, with or without an accommodation. (See R-DSUMF ¶ 49.) Thus, the threshold question for the Court is whether the Essential Duties Checklist functions that Gwinnett County identified as essential were essential functions of her position. At oral argument, Myers acknowledged that, if the functions identified by the County are "essential functions," she cannot prevail on her failure-to-accommodate claim.
In general, the essential [*23]  functions of a job are the fundamental job duties, not the marginal functions of the position. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(1). Simply put, they are the functions of a position that an individual "is actually required to perform." Holly v. Clairson Indus., L.L.C., 492 F.3d 1247, 1257 (11th Cir. 2007). Under the ADA regulations, a job function may be essential because "the reason the position exists is to perform that function," there are a limited number of employees available to perform the function, or the function is highly specialized and the incumbent was hired for his ability to perform the function. Id. § 1630.2(n)(2). When essential functions are in dispute, the court gives "consideration" to the employer's judgment as to what functions of a job are essential. 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). The court also considers, inter alia, the time spent on the job performing that function and the consequences of not requiring the incumbent to perform the function. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(3)(iii)-(iv).
Courts have held that corrections officers and other employees in public safety positions must be able to perform job functions that require physical exertion. After all, "the very reason a corrections officer position exists is to provide safety and security to the public, as well as to [prison] employees and inmates; as such, the ability to provide safety and security [*24]  . . . without hesitation or limitation in an emergency is absolutely inherent to that position." Martin v. Kansas, 190 F.3d 1120, 1132 (10th Cir. 1999), overruled on other grounds by Bd. of Trustees of Univ. of Ala. v. Garrett, 531 U.S. 356, 121 S. Ct. 955, 148 L. Ed. 2d 866 (2001), as recognized in Adair v. City of Muskogee, 823 F.3d 1297, 1310 (10th Cir. 2016). Moreover, in public safety positions, an employee may be required to perform an essential function only in a rare emergency, but the function is nevertheless essential because the consequences of not performing it can be "dire." Cremeens v. City of Montgomery, 427 F. App'x 855, 857-58 (11th Cir. 2011) (concluding that a firefighting was an essential function of a fire investigator's position, even though fire investigators performed that duty infrequently); see also Holbrook, 112 F.3d at 1527 (determining that it was essential for a police detective to be able to collect evidence even though crime was relatively rare in his community); Scott-Bolton v. State of Alabama Bd. of Pardons & Paroles, No. 7:12-cv-0800-LSC, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 40942, 2013 WL 1282344, at *7 (N.D. Ala. Mar. 25, 2013) (finding that the ability to make field arrests and carry a firearm was an essential function of a probation officer's job, even though the need arose rarely).
Here, Myers argues that she was never required to perform the Checklist functions identified by the County as essential, and, thus, they were not essential functions. The Court addresses each function in turn.

1. Supervising yard activities
As to the first purportedly essential function—supervising [*25]  yard activities—Myers argues that she was never required to supervise yard activities during her 13-year tenure with the County. [Doc. 53 at 13.] She argues that the inmates do not have yard activities during her shift, and, thus, she would never be required to supervise yard activities. [Id.] Further, the County knew for many years that she could not work in hot or extreme temperatures. [Id. at 13-14.]
According to the County's Rule 30(b)(6) witness, supervising inmate yard activities involves "visual and physical control of inmates in the yard" during recreation time. (Dep. of Scott Fuller at 64.) Taking the evidence in the light most favorable to Myers, yard recreation time is never scheduled during her daytime shift.
On this record, the Court cannot conclude that supervising inmate outdoor recreation was an essential function of her job, as she never was required to supervise yard activities and yard recreation time was not scheduled during her shift. The ability to supervise yard activities might be an essential function for a correctional officer on the evening shift, but it was not required of a daytime shift employee like Myers. Furthermore, there is no suggestion in the record that it was an "essential [*26]  function" for Myers to be able to work the evening shift, particularly where Gwinnett County allowed her to work only the daytime shift for 13 years.
The County argues that Myers could be reassigned to a different shift or position at any time. [Doc. 54 at 10 n.5.] It also argues that, since Myers's termination, yard activities have been rescheduled to Myers's previous shift. [Id.] The Court is not persuaded by those arguments. Throughout Myers's employment, when the alleged discrimination occurred, yard activities were not scheduled for the day shift and apparently had not been scheduled for the that shift for 13 years. Furthermore, the County has not asserted that Myers must be able to work any shift. Its willingness to allow her to work only the day shift for 13 years suggests that working "any" shift is not an essential job function.
Gwinnett County also argues that Myers was responsible for supervising inmate yard activities but refused to do so. [Doc. 54 at 10 n.5.] To that end, it points to Myers's testimony that, at least on one occasion, when the inmates went outside to the yard during an emergency evacuation that occurred during her shift, she was allowed to patrol the administrative [*27]  area of the prison to make certain that no civilians were inside before retiring to her car for the rest of the evacuation. (Myers Dep. at 335.) Myers's conduct during an evacuation bears on her ability to guard inmates during an emergency, not whether she was responsible for supervising inmate recreation time. Based on the foregoing, there is a dispute of material fact as to whether supervising inmate yard activities was an essential function of Myers's position.

2. Resolving inmate disputes, arguments, and physical activities
Myers next argues that she had never been required to resolve inmate disputes, arguments, and physical activities during her career with the County. [Doc. 53 at 14-17.] She notes that she never had to break up an inmate fight. [Id. at 15.] Moreover, the protocol for breaking up a fight among inmates was to call for backup while filming the altercation. Thus, if she witnessed a fight, her job was to call for backup, not to single-handedly break up the fight. [Id.] She also argues that the fact that she is unlikely to run to assist other officers as a part of a backup unit should not be fatal to her claim because other officers employed by the County were not in physical [*28]  condition that allowed them to assist with backup. [Id. at 15-16.] In short, Myers argues, she could defend herself a physical altercation with a single inmate if needed, but she had never been required to perform duties as expansive as "resolving inmate disputes, arguments, and physical activities." [Id. at 17.]
As described by the County's Rule 30(b)(6) witness, the job function requiring a correctional officer to resolve inmate disputes:
can entail verbal and physical interaction by the officer, breaking up fights between two inmates, more than two inmates. Sometimes it's verbal . . . . Sometimes it's physically separating an inmate. Sometimes it's fighting with an inmate. It's fighting with an inmate to protect another staff member, it's responding to a riot or potential escape, an assault between two inmates, physical interaction between inmates can occur in an unlimited number of circumstances. . . . A correctional officer has to be able to respond with absolutely no notice and be able to diffuse a situation either by themselves or in a coordinated effort with other correctional officers. . . . [T]hat can be limited to verbal commands, that can . . . require physical hands-on control. It can involve fights, tasers, [*29]  just depends on the situation.
(Fuller Dep. at 75-76.)
As explained above, the protocol for resolving a simple dispute between two inmates is for the officer who observes the fight to call for backup while observing and recording the altercation. Officers use this protocol, in part, because they worry about situations where they might be lured into breaking up an inmate dispute as a trap or might be "jumped" by other inmates.
The undisputed evidence shows that Gwinnett County correctional officers must be able to give assistance to other officers in resolving inmate disputes. The consequences of an officer's inability to provide backup could be dire. This job function also was listed on Myers's Essential Duty Checklist for years, and the Court gives consideration to the County's judgment that the function is essential. See 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8).
The reasoning in Pickering v. City of Atlanta, 75 F. Supp. 2d 1374 (N.D. Ga. 1999), is particularly instructive here. In Pickering, a corrections officer, who had a risk of increased blood loss because of medication she used, argued that inmate supervision was not an essential function of her job in part because there were positions within the corrections department that did not involve a risk of physical trauma. 75 F. Supp. 2d at 1377-78. The Court concluded [*30]  "that inmate supervision is an essential function of the job of a corrections officer; in fact, it is the overall reason of the job." Id. at 1378. Even if there were aspects of the plaintiff's position that did not involve a risk of physical trauma, those tasks were peripheral to the officer's security functions. Id. Here, Myers's assignment to a counselor position for the final years of her employment with the County did not excuse her, as a sworn correctional officer, from her responsibility to provide security for inmates and other officers.
Her reliance on Jackson v. Jackson, No. 1:14-cv-3493-AT-JSA, is also misplaced. In Jackson, a corrections officer with a disability requiring limited contact with inmates had the option to work in the county courthouse, a post that would limit her interaction with inmates. [No. 1:14-cv-3493, Doc. 69 at 22.] Myers has not shown that any comparable alternative position exists in Gwinnett County's correctional facility. Furthermore, Myers's argument that she does not need to be able to resolve inmate disputes because she was never called upon to resolve a physical dispute is foreclosed by Circuit precedent. See Holbrook, 112 F.3d at 1527. As a public safety officer, she must be able [*31]  to perform certain functions, even if the need arises rarely. See id.; see also Cremeens, 427 F. App'x at 857-58; Scott-Bolton, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 40942, 2013 WL 1282344, at *7.
Myers points to functions related to security and resolving inmate conflicts that she can do. [See Doc. 53 at 16-17.] She notes that she could exercise security over inmates to prevent escape and provide a safe and secure custody for inmates until their release. [Id.] She can call for backup if she witnesses a inmate altercation and, if necessary, could defend herself against a single violent inmate. Taking the facts in the light most favorable to Myers, the Court finds that she could even fulfill Warden Johnson's expectation that she come to an inmate's assistance if he was being badly beaten by another inmate because, in that situation, she would only have to engage one inmate in a physical confrontation.
But Myers's ability to do those security-related functions does not mean that she can assist other officers as part of a team responding to an emergency situation involving multiple violent inmates, a function that is vitally important to officer and inmate safety. In an emergency, such as a riot or large-scale altercation, this requirement might mean that an officer has to fight multiple inmates in [*32]  a coordinated effort with other officers. As Myers acknowledges, she is unable to do so. (See Myers Decl. ¶ 34.)
Myers also argues that there is a factual dispute as to whether this function is essential because the County tolerated her inability and other employees' inability to provide backup assistance for other officers in an emergency. [Doc. 53 at 15-16.] But the undisputed evidence shows that Officer Walker's prosthetic leg did not interfere with her ability to perform her job functions, and Officer Negron was deemed unable to perform his job functions because of his disability, much like Myers.
To the extent that Myers argues that the County was tolerant of her own long history of limitations, the fact that she had good performance reviews does not suggest that the County was excusing her inability to be ready to assist in an emergency involving violent inmates. Myers had never been called on to do so, so there is no reason for her failure to do so to be at issue in her performance reviews. Myers also did not list on her FMLA Essential Duty Checklist forms that she could not perform the function of resolving inmate disputes. Furthermore, her FMLA Essential Duty Checklist forms [*33]  and her Certification forms show that, over time, there was a decline in her ability, or her doctor's judgment about her ability, to perform the Checklist job functions. Thus, the evidence does not show that Gwinnett County tolerated her inability to do purportedly essential job functions for 13 years. Rather, it shows that Myers experienced a slow decline in her ability to do her job, and eventually Lieutenant Phinney took note of the informal modifications to her job responsibilities that her direct supervisors made so that she could contribute to the inmate count.
The Court therefore concludes that there is no genuine issue of material fact as to whether the requirement that Myers resolve inmate disputes, arguments, and physical activities was an essential function of her job.

3. Exerting forces up to 100 pounds occasionally, 50 pounds frequently, and 20 pounds constantly
As to the third function, the exertion requirements, Myers asserts that she has never been required to exert up to 100 pounds of force occasionally, 50 pounds of force frequently, or 20 pounds of force constantly in order to move objects. [Doc. 53 at 17-18.] She points out that exerting force to move objects is different [*34]  from using self-defense to fend off an attacking inmate. [Id. at 17 n.7.] During her usual work day, if she needed to lift an object, she would instruct an inmate to do so. [Id. at 17-18.] Finally, she argues, the County had notice of her inability to perform those functions for five years. [Id. at 18.]
The County included the exertion functions in its Essential Functions Checklist, and the Court gives consideration to the County's inclusion of these functions in the Checklist. The Court also agrees with Myers that the exertion requirement specifically refers to an ability to move objects with frequency, not an ability to defend oneself or fight an inmate. To that end, Myers testified that she was required to move objects while at work.2 She contends that exerting force to move objects was not an essential function because inmates helped her move objects when necessary. The problem with Myers's work-around is that inmates cannot always be relied on to assist with moving objects, particularly in situations like emergencies, cell inspections, and searches for contraband, when inmates might be less inclined to cooperate. Thus, Myers's reliance on inmates for assistance does not suggest that the function is not essential. [*35]  Myers also does not suggest that the County knew she was relying on inmate assistance to do her job.
Myers compares her situation to that of the plaintiff in the currently-pending case Jones v. Aaron's, Inc., No. 1:15-cv-1686-RWS-JSA, in which Judge Anand issued a report and recommendation concluding that there was a genuine issue of material fact as to whether a lifting requirement was an essential function because the employee could ask other personnel to lift items for her. [No. 1:15-cv-1686-RWS-JSA, Doc. 90 at 68.] The factual context of the Jones case distinguishes it from Myers's case. Myers is in a public safety position, not a customer service position, like Jones. Myers also depends on the assistance of inmates, not other personnel, to lift objects for her so that she can do her job.
Myers argues that the County knew about her inability to perform the exertion requirements of her job for at least 5 years, which shows that the duty could not have been essential. [Doc. 53 at 18.] Myers overstates the record, however. In 2010, Myers informed the County through her FMLA paperwork that she could not exert up to 100 pounds of force occasionally, and in 2011, she informed the County [*36]  that she could not perform any of the exertion requirements. In 2013, however, she stated that she could perform those requirements without an accommodation, and in 2014, she only stated that she could not perform those requirements during a flare-up. In 2015, the year she was fired, she stated that she could not perform the exertion requirements. Thus, Myers did not consistently report that she could not perform those functions. This suggests that her limitations fluctuated over the years but does not create an inference that the County was aware that she was not doing the exertion functions for a period of five years. Furthermore, even if the County did accommodate her inability to meet the exertion requirements for a few years, that accommodation "may have exceeded what the law requires" and does not require the County to continue to providing such an accommodation now. See Holbrook, 112 F.3d at 1528 (concluding that an employer was not required to continue to provide any accommodation, beyond what the ADA requires, because it provided it "for quite some time").
The Court concludes that there is no genuine issue of material fact as to whether the exertion requirements were essential functions of Myers's job. [*37] 

4. Interactive process
Finally, Myers alleges that the County failed to engage in the interactive process to identify a reasonable accommodation that would allow her to perform the essential functions of her job. [Doc. 53 at 19-20.] The ADA regulations state that an employer may need to "initiate an informal, interactive process" with a disabled employee to determine the appropriate reasonable accommodation. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3); Frazier White v. Gee, 818 F.3d 1249, 1258 (11th Cir.), cert. denied 137 S. Ct. 592, 196 L. Ed. 2d 474 (2016). Myers's argument is squarely foreclosed by Circuit precedent. Myers has not identified any reasonable accommodation that would allow her to perform the essential functions of her position, and, thus, "there is no basis for imposing liability on [the County] for failing to engage in an 'interactive process' to identify accommodations." See Frazier-White, 818 F.3d at 1257-58.

5. Conclusion
As discussed above, the Court concludes that there is a factual dispute as to whether supervising inmate yard activities was an essential function of her job, but there is no genuine dispute of material fact that resolving inmate disputes and the exertion requirements were essential functions of Myers's job. As Myers admits that she cannot perform those functions, with or without an accommodation, she was not a "qualified [*38]  individual" under the ADA, and Gwinnett County is entitled to summary judgment on her failure-to-accommodate claim.3

C. FMLA Interference Claim
In her FMLA interference claim, Myers asserts that Gwinnett County interfered with her ability to take FMLA leave by terminating her, and thereby preventing her from taking intermittent FMLA leave. [Doc. 53 at 23-24.] Gwinnett County asserts that it terminated Myers because she could not perform the essential functions of her job, and, thus, it fired her for a reason wholly unrelated to her FMLA leave. [Doc. 40 at 19-20.] The County also notes that it approved her FMLA leave requests every year from 2003 to 2015. [Id.]
Under the FMLA, an eligible employee is entitled to 12 workweeks of leave during any 12-month period because of, inter alia, a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform the functions of his position. 29 U.S.C. § 2612(a)(1). A person who takes leave under the FMLA is entitled to restoration his position of employment after taking FMLA leave or restoration to an equivalent position with equivalent employment benefits, pay, and other terms and conditions of employment. Id. § 2614(a)(1). Moreover, an employee has the right to commence FMLA leave. [*39]  Krutzig v. Pulte Home Corp., 602 F.3d 1231, 1236 (11th Cir. 2010). A claim of FMLA interference does not require a showing that the employer had any motive or discriminatory intent in interfering with its employee's FMLA rights. Id. at 1235; see also Strickland v. Water Works & Sewer Bd., 239 F.3d 1199, 1208 (11th Cir. 2001).
To prevail on a claim of FMLA interference, an employee must show, by preponderance of the evidence, that he was denied a benefit to which he was entitled under the FMLA. Martin v. Brevard Cty. Pub. Schs., 543 F.3d 1261, 1266-67 (11th Cir. 2008). The employer is not liable for interference with the right to commence FMLA leave, however, if it shows that the employee dismissed before taking leave would have been dismissed regardless of any request for leave, meaning that the dismissal was unrelated to the FMLA leave. Krutzig, 602 F.3d at 1236; Strickland, 239 F.3d at 1208. A court must determine whether the FMLA leave (or upcoming FMLA leave) was the proximate cause of the employee's discharge. Schaaf v. Smithkline Beecham Corp., 602 F.3d 1236, 1242 (11th Cir. 2010).
There is no dispute here that Myers was entitled to take intermittent FMLA leave and that she was prevented from exercising her right to do so when she was terminated. Gwinnett County has shown, however, that Myers was terminated because Warden Johnson believed that she could not perform the essential functions of her job. Moreover, it has also shown that Myers in fact could not perform essential functions of her job: resolving inmate disputes [*40]  and exerting up to 100 pounds occasionally, 50 pounds frequently, and 20 pounds constantly to move objects. Myers points to no record evidence suggesting that this reason for her termination is untrue or that there was a causal connection between her intermittent leave and her termination. Accordingly, Gwinnett County is entitled to summary judgment on her FMLA interference claim.

D. ADA and FMLA Retaliation Claims
In her retaliation claims under the ADA and the FMLA, Myers asserts that Gwinnett County retaliated against her for requesting to take intermittent FMLA leave, which was protected conduct under the FMLA and a request for an accommodation under the ADA. [Doc. 53 at 20-25.] Gwinnett County argues that Myers cannot show a causal connection between her request for FMLA leave and her termination because she was terminated for being unable to perform the essential functions of her job. [Doc. 40 at 17-22.]
It is unlawful to discriminate against an individual for opposing any act or practice made illegal under the ADA. 42 U.S.C. § 12203(a); Stewart v. Happy Herman's Cheshire Bridge, Inc., 117 F.3d 1278, 1287 (11th Cir. 1997). An employee may be able to show that a request for an accommodation under the ADA is protected activity where she has a good faith, objectively reasonable belief [*41]  that she entitled to those accommodations. Standard v. A.B.E.L. Servs., Inc., 161 F.3d 1318, 1328 (11th Cir. 1998); see also Frazier-White, 818 F.3d at 1258. The FMLA also prohibits retaliation against employees who exercise or attempt to exercise their rights under the FMLA. 29 U.S.C. § 2615(a)(2); 29 C.F.R. § 825.220(a); Brungart v. BellSouth Telecomms., Inc., 231 F.3d 791, 798 n.5 (11th Cir. 2000).
In evaluating an ADA or FMLA retaliation claim, in the absence of direct evidence of discrimination, courts use the burden-shifting framework set out in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). Smith v. BellSouth Telecomms., Inc., 273 F.3d 1303, 1314 (11th Cir. 2001) (FMLA); Stewart, 117 F.3d at 1287 (ADA). A prima facie case of retaliation requires a showing that the employee engaged in statutorily protected conduct, the employee suffered an adverse employment action, and there is a causal connection between the two. Smith, 273 F.3d at 1314. A plaintiff can show a causal connection by showing that the decision maker was aware of the protected conduct and that the protected activity and adverse employment action were close in time. Brungart, 231 F.3d at 799.
If the plaintiff establishes a prima facie case of retaliation, the burden shifts to the defendant to articulate a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the adverse employment action. Smith, 273 F.3d at 1314. If the defendant does so, the plaintiff must show that the proffered reason is pretextual. Id. A plaintiff shows pretext by showing "such weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, incoherencies, or contradictions in [defendant's] proffered legitimate [*42]  reasons for its actions that a reasonable factfinder could find them unworthy of credence." Springer v. Convergys Customer Mgmt. Grp., Inc., 509 F.3d 1344, 1348 (11th Cir. 2007) (quotation omitted).
Here, the protected activity in which Myers engaged under the ADA and FMLA is the same: she requested that she be allowed to continue to take intermittent FMLA leave as an accommodation for her multiple sclerosis flare-ups. The Court has serious doubt, however, that she can establish a causal connection between the request for leave and her termination. Although Warden Johnson put Myers on a 60-day "accommodation period" one week after she requested intermittent FMLA leave at the August 18, 2015 meeting, Myers was already approved for intermittent FMLA leave when she suggested it as an accommodation. Myers also knew at the time of the meeting that Warden Johnson thought that she could not perform some essential functions of her job, even with an accommodation, and the County already had begun the process of firing her when she requested FMLA leave. Further, Myers took intermittent FMLA leave as an accommodation for her multiple sclerosis for 13 years without incident.
Even assuming the close proximity between Myers's request for FMLA leave and her placement on the 60-day [*43]  accommodation period raises an inference of causation in this case, the County has offered a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for her termination, namely, that she could not perform the essential functions of her job. Myers points to no evidence suggesting that reason is not true or that it was pretext for discrimination, particularly as the undisputed evidence shows that she could not perform essential functions of her job. Accordingly, the County is entitled to summary judgment on Myers's claims of FMLA and ADA retaliation.

IV. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, the Court RECOMMENDS that Gwinnett County's motion for summary judgment [Doc. 40] be GRANTED.
The Clerk is DIRECTED to terminate referral of this matter to the undersigned magistrate judge.
IT IS SO RECOMMENDED this 20th day of July, 2017.
/s/ John K. Larkins III
JOHN K. LARKINS III
United States Magistrate Judge


End of Document

