Nix v. McMaster Carr Supply Co.
United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division
February 11, 2019, Decided; February 11, 2019, Filed
CIVIL ACTION FILE No. 1:17-cv-2785-SCJ

Reporter
2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 43705 *; 2019 WL 1493704
APRIL NIX, Plaintiff, v. MCMASTER CARR SUPPLY CO., Defendant.
Prior History: Nix v. McMaster Carr Supply Co., 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 222827 (N.D. Ga., Dec. 27, 2018)
Counsel:  [*1] For April Nix, Plaintiff: Douglas R. Kertscher, Julie Anne Hoehn Burke, LEAD ATTORNEY, Hill Kertscher & Wharton, Atlanta, GA USA.
For Mcmaster Carr Supply Co., Defendant: Julie J. Stahr, Max G. Brittain, Jr., LEAD ATTORNEY, PRO HAC VICE, Schiff Hardin, LLP-IL, Chicago, IL USA; Chiaka Uzoma Adele, Scrudder, Bass, Quillian, Horlock, Taylor & Lazarus LLP, Atlanta, GA USA.
Judges: HONORABLE STEVE C. JONES, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: STEVE C. JONES
Opinion



ORDER
This matter is before the Court for consideration of the Report and Recommendation ("R&R") issued by the Honorable Janet F. King, United States Magistrate Judge, which makes recommendations regarding both parties' motions for summary judgment. Doc. No. [78]. The R&R recommends denying the Defendant's request for summary judgment on Plaintiff's Family and Medical Leave Act ("FMLA") claim, granting the Defendant's request for summary judgment on Plaintiff's American with Disabilities Act ("ADA") claim to the extent it is based on actions up until Plaintiff's termination, denying Defendant's request for summary judgment on Plaintiff's ADA claim to the extent that it is based on Defendant's termination of Plaintiff without providing available FMLA leave, [*2]  and denying Plaintiff's request for summary judgment in its entirety. Id. at 72. Both parties filed objections to the R&R and a response to the opposing party's objections. Doc. Nos. [81]; [81]; [85]; [87].

I. LEGAL STANDARD
When objections to a Magistrate Judge's R&R are filed pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(C), a district court must "make a de novo determination of those portions of the report or specified proposed findings or recommendations to which objection is made." 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(C); see also Fed. R. Civ. Pro. 72(b)(3). "[A] party that wishes to preserve its objection must clearly advise the district court and pinpoint the specific findings that the party disagrees with." United States v. Schultz, 565 F.3d 1353, 1360 (11th Cir. 2009). A "generalized re-assertion" of a prior argument that fails to "challenge [the] reasoning" in an R&R is insufficient. Id. "Frivolous, conclusive, or general objections need not be considered by the district court." Marsden v. Moore, 847 F.2d 1536, 1548 (11th Cir. 1988).
The portions of the report that the parties have not objected to are reviewed for clear error. Macort v. Prem, Inc., 208 F. App'x 781, 784 (11th Cir. 2006). After conducting this review, the Court "may accept, reject, or modify, in whole or in part, the findings or recommendations made by the magistrate judge." 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1)(C); see also Fed. R. Civ. Pro. 72(b)(3). After conducting a de novo review of the parties' objections and examining the remainder of the R&R for [*3]  clear error, the Court rules as follows.

II. DEFENDANT'S OBJECTIONS
Defendant McMaster Carr Supply Co. ("McMaster") raises multiple objections to the R&R. It challenges the Magistrate's recommendation on both Plaintiff's FMLA claim and her ADA claim. After careful consideration of each Defendant's objections, along with reviewing the underlying evidence and/or case law, the Court reaches the same conclusion as the Magistrate.

A. FMLA Claim
1. Application of Case Law Regarding Plaintiff's Admission
Defendant asserts that the Magistrate erred by "requiring" Plaintiff's admission that she was not able to return to work at the conclusion of her FMLA leave. Doc. No. [81], p. 2. However, the Magistrate did not require Plaintiff's admission. The Magistrate noted that in two of the cases relied upon by Defendant in its motion for summary judgment, the plaintiffs had admitted that they were unable to return to work at the end of their leave, thereby removing any genuine dispute of fact. Doc. No. [78], p. 44; see also Colburn v. Parker Hannifin/Nichols Portland Div., 429 F.3d 325, 332 (1st Cir. 2005); Patterson v. AJ Servs. Joint Venture I, LLP, No. CV 115-138, 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 29715, 2017 WL 830394, at *5 (S.D. Ga. Mar. 2, 2017). Plaintiff's lack of such an admission in this case merely opened the door for a possible dispute of fact. The Magistrate [*4]  went on to note that "evidence in the record would permit a jury to find that Plaintiff could have returned to work before this time." Doc. No. [78], p. 44. As summary judgment standards require, the Magistrate viewed that evidence (the declarations of Dr. Mangrum and Mr. Woods) in the light most favorable to the Plaintiff and concluded that a reasonable jury could find that Plaintiff had been able to return to work at the end of her leave. Thus, the Magistrate did not misapply the case law or the summary judgment standards.

2. Declarations of Mr. Woods and Dr. Mangrum
Defendant also objects to the Magistrate's consideration of the Woods and Mangrum declarations, because she "improperly relied on these declaration statements over defendant's objections." Doc. No. [81], p. 6. It contends that the declarations: (1) were created post-litigation; (2) provide no foundation and are not based on personal knowledge; (3) do not address any of Plaintiff's abilities other than lifting; (4) constitute improper expert opinion; and (5) were not available at the time of Plaintiff's leave expiring. Id. at 7-10.1
Most of Defendant's objections go to the weight of the evidence, not its admissibility. The [*5]  only objections that would impact the declarations' admissibility are those regarding foundation/personal knowledge and improper expert opinion. The Magistrate properly determined that portions of the Woods and Mangrum Declarations are admissible and only considered those portions.2 The remainder of Defendant's objections are for the jury to evaluate when weighing the credibility of the evidence. Even declarations that are created post-litigation serve as competing pieces of evidence for the jury to consider. See White v. Beltram Edge Tool Supply, Inc., 789 F.3d 1188, 1198 (11th Cir. 2015). Additionally, when evaluating whether an employee would actually have been able to return to work at the end of FMLA leave, medical evidence that was not available to the employee or the employer at the time is appropriate to consider. See Edgar v. JAC Prods., Inc., 443 F.3d 501, 512 (6th Cir. 2006); cf. White, 789 F.3d at 1194-95.

3. Calculation of Remaining FMLA Leave
Defendant asserts that the Magistrate erroneously calculated the amount of Plaintiff's remaining FMLA leave, because the Magistrate used a calendar-year method rather than a rolling-year method. Doc. No. [81], p. 11-14. However, the Court finds that the Magistrate properly employed summary judgment standards (to view the evidence in the light most favorable to the Plaintiff when considering [*6]  Defendant's motion for summary judgment) to determine that Plaintiff had successfully pointed to evidence in the record that created a genuine dispute of fact over the method Defendant employed for calculating FMLA leave and the amount of leave Plaintiff had remaining. A reasonable jury could construe the attendance records, emails, and testimony from other employees in conjunction with one another to find that Defendant employed a calendar method. See Doc. Nos. [46], pp. 50-55; [50-4]; [50-5]; [50-6]. More importantly, Plaintiff pointed to evidence that creates a dispute of fact regarding Plaintiff's ability to return to work under either calculation. See Doc. Nos. [71-1,], ¶3; [71-2], ¶3.

4. Mentoring
Finally, Defendant says the Magistrate wrongly considered mentoring as available work that Plaintiff could potentially have performed after the expiration of her FMLA leave. Doc. No. [81], pp. 14-15. However, the existence of mentoring played no role in the Magistrate's rationale for her recommendation to deny Defendant's motion. Mentoring was only briefly mentioned in the fact section of the R&R. See Doc. No. [78], p. 28. Nowhere is mentoring discussed as a possible placement for Plaintiff [*7]  upon her return from FMLA leave. Rather, the Magistrate noted that Plaintiff "previously had performed work with similar limitations" as to those that Woods and Mangrum attested to her having as of October 12, 2016. Id. at 45.
After consideration of the evidence and relevant case law, Defendant's objections regarding the Magistrate's recommendation to deny its motion for summary judgment on Plaintiff's FMLA claim are overruled.

B. ADA Claim

1. Not a Qualified Individual Under the ADA
Defendant objects to the Magistrate's finding that Plaintiff could demonstrate a genuine issue of fact regarding her status as a qualified individual under the ADA. Doc. No. [81], pp. 15-20. However, Defendant does not identify case law or evidence that the Magistrate overlooked or misinterpreted. Rather, Defendant merely disagrees with how the Magistrate weighed the evidence and argues for how it should be viewed in Defendant's favor. See id.
After consideration of the evidence in the record (in the light most favorable to Plaintiff), the Court reaches the same conclusion as the Magistrate. First, Woods's and Mangrum's declarations assert that as of October 12, 2016, Plaintiff was capable of lifting up to twenty-five [*8]  pounds with her left arm and had no restrictions on her right arm. Plaintiff had been accommodated before when under even harsher restrictions. See Doc. No. [49-4], pp. 11, 12, 16, 17.
Second, even if the one-pound restriction issued by Dr. Marchal3 on October 6, 2016 were permanent, the Magistrate properly determined that a dispute of fact existed over whether Plaintiff could have performed the job of bin filler utilizing one-arm techniques. The Magistrate noted that neither the job profile nor the Defendant's characterization of the job was conclusive, and Plaintiff offered competing evidence through her own testimony (which the Magistrate found that a jury could give credit, in light of the fact that Plaintiff had actually performed the job duties in question). Doc. No. [78], pp. 57-58. Plaintiff could potentially show a jury that she was a qualified individual; thus, a genuine dispute of fact exists regarding Plaintiff's ADA claim.
2. Leave as a Reasonable Accommodation
Finally, Defendant asserts that the Magistrate erred in finding that FMLA leave could have been a reasonable accommodation. Doc. No. [81], pp. 21-24. Defendant contends that the Magistrate erred in relying on a possible [*9]  update to Plaintiff's restrictions and the testimony of Defendant's Human Resources Director. Id. at 21-22, 23-24. Defendant also claims that the Magistrate erred by elevating the requirements of the interactive process required under the ADA. Id. at 22-23.
The Court finds no merit in Defendant's objections. Although Defendant contends that Plaintiff's request for leave in lieu of termination was indefinite and therefore unreasonable, Plaintiff's testimony shows that she sought enough leave to allow her doctor to receive the physiatrist's report and evaluate her restrictions.4 Doc. No. [49], p. 135. Defendant contends that Plaintiff had seen both Dr. Mangrum and Mr. Woods the day prior to her termination and that she confirmed at the termination meeting that the permanent one-pound restrictions were the restrictions in effect. Thus, according to Defendant, any leave would have been indefinite, and therefore, unreasonable.
However, neither Mangrum or Woods had issued the one-pound restrictions. Plaintiff had informed Defendant that Dr. Marchal would update her restrictions after she saw the physiatrist. A reasonable jury could conclude that, under the interactive process required by the ADA, [*10]  Defendant was required to wait more than one day for Dr. Marchal to receive Dr. Mangrum's report and update Plaintiff's restrictions. While Defendant points to evidence that shows Plaintiff agreed at her termination meeting that the one-pound restrictions were in place, the evidence does not show that she confirmed no update was forthcoming. In fact, the evidence shows the opposite. Doc. No. [49], p. 135 ("I had also told Megan that there was an update that was expected after my appointment with Dr. Mangrum, the physiatrist, but I was fired before that time.").
The Court also rejects Defendant's argument that the Magistrate elevated the requirements of the interactive process. Plaintiff informed Defendant on October 6, 2016, the same day Defendant received the restrictions, that Dr. Marchal "did say that we may have to do another update after I meet with the physiatrist next week" and that Dr. Marchal "also said he will update my restrictions if need be, after we see what the physiatrist says." Doc. Nos. [41-20]; [41-21]. She also asked about acquiring an FMLA leave form at that time. See id. Defendant made its termination decision on October 7th, before the physiatrist appointment, [*11]  and did not engage in the interactive process at the termination meeting to determine if a change in restrictions was forthcoming. Doc. No. [53], ¶¶54-56, 63. The Magistrate did not impose a higher duty on Defendant; rather, the Magistrate found that the evidence of Plaintiff's requests for leave, in conjunction with her statements that her restrictions would be updated, created a jury question as to whether Defendant abandoned the interactive process prematurely and as to whether leave would have been a reasonable accommodation.
Finally, Defendant objects to the Magistrate's reliance on the Human Resource Director's testimony. The Magistrate cited the Human Resource Director's testimony to demonstrate that Plaintiff had FMLA leave remaining. Doc. No. [78], p. 70. The Magistrate did not misquote or misapply the testimony in question. The Court finds no error with the Magistrate's consideration of his testimony. Therefore, Defendant's objections to the Magistrate's recommendation to deny it's motion for summary judgment on Plaintiff's ADA claim are overruled.

III. PLAINTIFF'S OBJECTIONS
Plaintiff objects only to the Magistrate's finding that Defendant reasonably accommodated Plaintiff [*12]  up until her termination. Doc. No. [82]. Plaintiff asserts that the Magistrate relied upon testimony about accommodations that related to April of 2016, but not necessarily to when Plaintiff's injuries occurred in August of 2016. Id. at 2. Plaintiff contends that she was not reasonably accommodated on August 10th and 12th because she did not have a 24-inch stepladder on those dates. Id. at 3.
The Magistrate properly concluded that there was no genuine dispute of fact that Defendant had accommodated Plaintiff up to the date of her termination. Doc. No. [78], pp. 59-64. Plaintiff's own testimony shows that although her accommodations (not having to perform overhead filling and asking other employees for help) may have been instituted in April, they were still in place in August. See Doc. No. [49], p. 84. Plaintiff does not point to any evidence that disputes that.
Furthermore, whether or not Plaintiff had a 24-inch stepladder on August 10th or 12th is irrelevant to whether or not reasonable accommodations were in place. As the Magistrate noted, an employee is entitled to a reasonable accommodation, but that does not necessarily mean that she is entitled to the accommodation of her choice. Doc. No. [78], [*13]  p. 61; see also Stewart v. Happy Herman's Cheshire Bridge, Inc., 117 F.3d 1278, 1286 (11th Cir. 1997). Plaintiff may believe that she would not have been injured if she were using a 24-inch stool, but the only question for the Court is whether the accommodations that Defendant actually used were reasonable. Plaintiff provides no evidence that Defendant's accommodations were an unreasonable way to address Plaintiff's restrictions. Plaintiff's objection to the Magistrate's recommendation to deny her motion for summary judgment on her ADA claim is overruled.

IV. CONCLUSION
Having conducted a de novo review of the portions of the R&R that the parties objected to and having reviewed the remainder of the R&R for clear error, the Court overrules the parties' objections and finds no error. The R&R is ADOPTED as the opinion and order of this Court. Doc. No. [78]. Defendant's motion for summary judgment is GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART. Doc. No. [40]. The motion is granted with respect to Plaintiff's failure-to-accommodate claim up until her termination. The motion is denied with respect to Plaintiff's failure-to-accommodate claim based on her termination in lieu of FMLA leave. The motion is also denied with respect to Plaintiff's FMLA interference claim. Plaintiff's motion [*14]  for summary judgment is DENIED. Doc. No. [50]. The parties are ORDERED to file their consolidated pre-trial order within thirty (30) days of entry of this order.
IT IS SO ORDERED this 11th day of February, 2019.
/s/ Steve C. Jones
HONORABLE STEVE C. JONES
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

