Olson v. Ameristar Casino Council Bluffs, LLC
United States District Court for the Southern District of Iowa, Western Division
June 18, 2020, Decided; June 18, 2020, Filed
CIVIL NO. 1:19-cv-00005-SBJ

Reporter
2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 266575 *
MATTHEW B. OLSON, Plaintiff, v. AMERISTAR CASINO COUNCIL BLUFFS, LLC, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Ameristar Casino Council Bluffs LLC, Defendant: John J. Marino Jr., PRO HAC VICE, Rex P. Fennessey, PRO HAC VICE, Stephen B. Maule, PRO HAC VICE, MCMAHON BERGER PC, St. Louis, MO; Walter P. Thomas, LEAD ATTORNEY, TELPNER PETERSON LAW FIRM LLP, Council Blufffs, IA.
For Matthew B. Olson, Plaintiff: Raymond R. Aranza, LEAD ATTORNEY, WALENTINE O'TOOLE MCQUILLAN & GORDON, Omaha, NE.
Judges: STEPHEN B. JACKSON, JR., UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE.
Opinion by: STEPHEN B. JACKSON, JR.
Opinion



MEMORANDUM OPINION AND ORDER ON DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT

I. INTRODUCTION
Plaintiff Matthew Olson worked as a slot technician for defendant Ameristar Casino Council Bluffs, LLC ("Ameristar") until his employment was terminated on September 27, 2017. Olson alleges Ameristar interfered with and violated his rights under the Family and Medical Leave Act, Americans with Disabilities Act and Iowa Civil Rights Act. Olson also claims Ameristar violated the Iowa Wage Payment Collection Act and the Fair Labor Standards Act during his employment by utilizing an unlawful time-clock rounding system.
Now before the Court is Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment (Dkt. 46). Ameristar contends it is entitled to summary judgment on all [*2]  claims under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56. Olson contends the motion must be denied because there are genuine issues of fact to be decided by a jury on his claims against Ameristar.
The parties supported their positions with briefs, statements of facts and appendices of exhibits as required by the Court's Local Rule 56. Oral arguments were presented by counsel and the Court considers the matter to be fully submitted. For the reasons which follow, the motion will be granted in part, denied in part and reserved in part.

II. STANDARDS FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
Pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56, "[t]he court shall grant summary judgment if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). The moving party has the initial responsibility of identifying evidence "which it believes demonstrates the absence of a genuine issue of material fact." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). "If the movant does so, the nonmovant must respond by submitting evidentiary materials that set out 'specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial.'" Torgerson v. City of Rochester, 643 F.3d 1031, 1042 (8th Cir. 2011) (en banc) (quoting Celotex Corp., 477 U.S. at 324).
A party asserting that a fact cannot be or is genuinely disputed must support the assertion by:
(A) citing to particular parts of materials in the [*3]  record, including depositions, documents, electronically stored information, affidavits or declarations, stipulations (including those made for purposes of the motion only), admissions, interrogatory answers, or other materials; or
(B) showing that the materials cited do not establish the absence or presence of a genuine dispute, or that an adverse party cannot produce admissible evidence to support the fact.
Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(1). "A party may object that the material cited to support or dispute a fact cannot be presented in a form that would be admissible in evidence." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(2). "The court need consider only the cited materials, but it may consider other materials in the record." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(3). "An affidavit or declaration used to support or oppose a motion must be made on personal knowledge, set out facts that would be admissible in evidence, and show that the affiant or declarant is competent to testify on the matters stated." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(4).
"Only disputes over facts that might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law will properly preclude the entry of summary judgment." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). At this stage, the court's function is not to determine credibility, weigh the evidence or determine the truth of the matter. Id. at 249, 255. Instead, the court views [*4]  the record in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party and determines whether there is a genuine issue for trial. Id.; see also Torgerson, 643 F.3d at 1042.
"The summary judgment standard does not require the non-moving party to prove its case, but to submit evidence that gives rise to a genuine dispute of material fact." Hill v. Southwestern Energy Co., 858 F.3d 481, 487 (8th Cir. 2017). As further instructed by the Eighth Circuit:
A court must "make all reasonable inferences in favor of the non-moving party," but will "not resort to speculation." Solomon v. Petray, 795 F.3d 777, 788 (8th Cir. 2015) (internal quotation marks omitted). If a nonmovant "come[s] forward with specific facts" that could "lead a rational trier of fact to find for the nonmoving party, there is [a] genuine issue for trial." Torgerson, 643 F.3d at 1042, citing Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586-87, 106 S.Ct. 1348, 89 L.Ed.2d 538 (1986) (internal quotation marks omitted).
Id. "[A] non-moving party survives summary judgment when the facts, 'while thin, enable a jury to draw a reasonable inference' for its claim." Id. (quoting Solomon, 795 F.3d at 788).

III. SUMMARY OF FACTUAL RECORD
The following facts are summarized from the parties' statements of facts, responses thereto, and materials submitted in support thereof. The Court has thoroughly reviewed the evidentiary record but has not set forth below every fact therein. Disputes over certain facts exist and are noted.
Ameristar [*5]  Casino Council Bluffs, LLC ("Ameristar") operates a hotel and casino in Council Bluffs, Iowa. Matthew Olson worked for Ameristar as a slot technician, referred to as Slot Tech II, performing duties associated with the maintenance and repair of the casino's gaming machines including slot machines and table games. He began in October 1998 and received several nominations and commendations during his employment.
For example, in July 2008, Olson received recognition for his knowledge on bill validators ("BV"); it was said to be his "biggest strength." In September 2009, it was announced that a national consumer survey company gave Ameristar a high score on bill validator accuracy. In an Ameristar Coaching Form for Olson it was stated "this could not have been achieved had it not been for the outstanding level of guest service that you have brought to the department."
In December 2011, Olson requested and was granted leave pursuant to Ameristar's Family and Medical Leave Act ("FMLA") policy to care for his daughter. He again requested and was granted FMLA leave to care for his daughter in January 2012. After conclusion of both leaves, Olson returned to his Slot Tech II position at the same [*6]  rate of pay and other terms and conditions of employment.
In November 2013, Ellie McNeil became a Slot Tech Supervisor. She had worked at the casino since 2011 as a slot service specialist but did not have experience as a slot technician prior to her promotion. In December 2013, Olson was praised by his then manager, Randall McQueen, for taking McNeil with him "every chance [he got] to show her aspects of her new job" . . . and then he "encouraged [his] fellow team members to do the same."
In June 2015, Olson requested and was granted FMLA leave for his own serious health condition. Olson again returned to his Slot Tech II position at the same rate of pay and other terms and conditions of employment.
McNeil was promoted to Slot Tech Manager in June 2016. Before McNeil was promoted to Slot Tech Supervisor and then Slot Tech Manager, Olson's average performance evaluation scores were 4.28 on a scale of 5 in 2011, 4.35 in 2012, and 4.22 in 2013. Thereafter until he was terminated, Olson's scores were 4.07 in 2014, 3.67 in 2015, 3.67 in 2016, and 3.0 in 2017.
A Performance Appraisal by McNeil dated April 30, 2016, noted Olson "still struggle[d] with communicating with your peers and answering [*7]  text messages" and he did not complete any work orders after December 2015, even though he was required to complete two work orders per shift. Dkt. 46-18. But Olson received recognition for demonstrating knowledge, skill and competency "consistently and with above average skill" in the areas of Guest Service, Winning Impression (maintaining a professional and well-groomed appearance), Technical Proficiency, and Compliance with Regulations and Company Policies. Id. It was noted "[o]ver the past year you have received several recognitions for your work with BVs and training team members. We were also seeing a big increase in functionality of our BVs." Id. The appraisal further noted: "Your successful year with BVs has been noticed and your efforts are very much appreciated." Id.
On May 6, 2016, Olson had the first of several conversations with McNeil regarding his concern about not having enough time to complete his daily tasks. Olson became defensive, upset and negative rather than discuss the issue in a professional manner. On May 13, Olson and McNeil talked about how to start the process of techs taking on the task of BV repairs. In a written Coaching Summary, which was used by Ameristar [*8]  to document interactions between supervisors and employees for "Recognition, Improvement, Development, [and] Other Coaching Opportunities," McNeil noted she had "seen some big improvements over the past two weeks":
You have found time to help with some work orders and you have been making an effort to have other Techs help with BV tasks. . . . This morning we had a nice conversation . . . . I appreciate your hard work.
Dkt. 46-30.
On June 17, 2016, Olson made this entry in a Coaching Summary: "Working on bill validators is a 24/7 job if you have one person or ten people working on it all the time." On November 18, 2016, Olson expressed concern to McNeil about his peers needing some additional training.
On December 14, 2016, McNeil discussed shift priorities with Olson indicating that moving slot machines "always takes first priority" and "[n]ext priority is down games. If those are as taken care of as possible and/or they are being worked on already, then there are work orders, tilt reports, BV repairs, etc." Dkt. 46-30. On December 26, 2016, Olson sent an email concerning a machine issue to the Iowa Racing and Gaming Commission. McNeil later discussed with Olson the need to follow their [*9]  department's reporting structure. McNeil reminded Olson he was to defer to his manager in determining what was a reportable incident and to allow his manager to complete the final reporting of incidents. According to Olson, he had sent similar emails before without criticism from management:
Ms. McNeil criticized me numerous times after she became my manager for actions or tasks I had performed for many years without being reprimanded. For example, I had acquired knowledge of Iowa gaming regulations by which I was able to determine what machine issues were reportable. I had also established a close working relationship with personnel at IRGC (the Iowa Racing and Gaming Commission), which allowed me to communicate with them directly regarding such issues. On December 29, 2016, I was criticized by Ms. McNeil for sending an email to IRGC although I had done so on numerous occasions before without being criticized by my managers.
Dkt. 57-1 ¶ 6.
In January 2017, Olson requested and was granted FMLA leave for his daughter's medical condition. This leave was to be taken by Olson on an intermittent basis by taking time off from work as needed to care for his daughter. After each instance Olson [*10]  took time off to care for his daughter in 2017, he returned to his Slot Tech II position at the same rate of pay and other terms and conditions of employment.
On March 10, 2017, Olson received "a verbal coaching for inappropriate conduct and lack of Ownership for [his] reactions" from McNeil. The Coaching Form stated as follows:
Details:
On Wednesday 3/8/17, I asked you about using a Utility Tech to help you with your BV work. You stated that he got done with all of his PMs, did a bulb walk, and was in the shop not doing anything. As you and I had already discussed previously, I asked that you let leadership know when this happens so that we can work on adjusting their tasks. I let you know that we would like the Utility Techs to remain focused on their work, unless assigned otherwise by leadership.
Thursday 3/9/17, you were very upset about that conversation, communicating to a Supervisor that you got your 'ass chewed' for working with Josh and that you feel that you should be able to develop him. During this conversation with the Supervisor, you were frustrated, raised-voice, and using inappropriate language. That afternoon, you and I met to discuss these concerns. You were very insistent [*11]  that you would continue to work with this TM on your own time and that I have no say in what you do in your own time. You are correct that I cannot tell you what to do in your personal time, however, it is not acceptable to complete work training, using confidential work information, outside of company-paid hours. We also discussed that you are upset and frustrated with your workload and that you feel you have no time to work on BVs. During your conversation with me, you were again raised-voice and using inappropriate language. We ended the conversation in agreeance that you would provide a list of the additional BV tasks that you are looking to get completed, so that leadership could delegate them to other Techs.
On Friday 3/10/17, you spent a significant amount of time typing a detailed, twopage sheet of all of the things you do. This was a misuse of time, as we discussed documenting only the additional items needing to be worked on.
Recommended Action: As a result of the issues described above, you are receiving a verbal coaching for inappropriate conduct and lack of Ownership for your reactions. I agree that there is much value to developing other Team Members; however, you must [*12]  stay focused on getting through the assigned tasks that you feel you are struggling to find time to complete. You are expected to check with leadership when working on extra projects such as spending time training others.
. . . You will need to stay focused on your work, remain positive, and take ownership of your time management. I also ask that you communicate with leadership immediately, so that you do not reach this level of frustrations, and work with us to find solutions to issues. Immediate and sustained improvement necessary. Further performance issues may result in coaching per Ameristar's policy, up to and including Management Review.
Dkt. 46-10.
Olson acknowledges he used a raised voice and inappropriate language with McNeil but emphasizes it was "[b]ehind closed doors" and contends "[s]he raised her voice to me." Dkt. 57-3 p. 18. He disagrees that he was not working on his tasks. Dkt. 57-2 p. 31. He also disagrees he engaged in disrespectful and insubordinate behavior, and contends everybody "cussed" in the supervisor's presence behind closed doors, testifying: "That was a place that you could go and you could blow up." Id. p. 30. Olson believes the verbal coaching from McNeil [*13]  is evidence of discrimination or retaliation for using FMLA leave "[b]ecause everybody trains everybody else on certain things. Why am I getting singled out?" Dkt. 57-3 p. 20. He is unaware of other technicians being disciplined for the same reasons. Dkt. 57-2 p. 31. Ameristar denies that "everybody was allowed to cuss and blow off steam behind closed doors" and contends there is no evidence that others engaged in similar conduct but were not disciplined. Dkt. 69 ¶ 22.
On April 5, 2017, Olson was criticized for asking the IT Director a question about a new program instead of going through the chain of command. Dkt. 57-1 ¶¶ 7, 21. He was instructed by Slot Tech Supervisor Jessica Vance on following the chain of command when dealing with issues. Olson again contends this is something he had done previously without it becoming a disciplinary issue, declaring: "Prior to this time, I approached IT directly when I had IT questions without asking permission from my manager." Id.
On April 18, 2017, McNeil worked with Olson on helping him improve his time management by dedicating a certain amount of time each week when he would work solely on one specific task (bill validators) and no others. [*14]  As noted in a Coaching Summary, McNeil instructed Olson as follows: "There may be special circumstances, where you will need to check with leadership if you should leave BV repairs to help, but for these times, you will want to remain focused on BV repairs." Dkt. 46-30. The next day Olson did not work on his assigned task but instead, without first contacting McNeil for direction, assisted another employee who asked for help to fix a game at the direction of her supervisor. Then the next day, rather than working on completing a parts order he had been instructed to complete or making repairs to bill validators, Olson helped another employee with a repair job, again without first contacting McNeil. As explained by Olson, another slot tech had been trying to fix a game "for like three hours" and Olson "didn't want him to go home upset." Dkt. 57-2 p. 18.
On April 24, Olson was disciplined in a written Coaching Form for not following directions issued to him by management. Dkt. 46-11. McNeil noted Olson was dismissive of her concerns that he had not worked on completing his assigned tasks and instead made a judgment call to help another employee. Id. Olson informed McNeil he would help [*15]  another employee if he determined they needed his help. Id. McNeil noted the other employee had not requested Olson's assistance. Id. McNeil further noted, in part:
You continue to find other tasks to work on, which continues to delay progress in the areas you have expressed concern and frustration.
. . . Your continued insubordinate behavior, and disrespectful tone and comments towards your leadership team, does not embody integrity, also shows a lack of Ownership for your actions, and will not be acceptable. You expressed a concern for the work falling behind, so leadership provided time, and you continued to not use it.
Id. McNeil concluded: "Due to the obvious disregard for instructions for BV repairs during assigned times, we will have you discontinue BV repairs, running BV reports, upgrading, etc., so that you can focus on improving your rapport and teamwork, without the worry of these additional projects." Id.
Olson disputes he was insubordinate under the circumstances leading up to April 20. Dkt. 66 ¶ 32. He is unaware of other slot techs being disciplined for the same reasons and believes his discipline was "unfair." Dkt. 57-2 pp. 19-20. When asked why he believes his bill validator [*16]  work was discontinued, Olson testified:
In my opinion they were frustrating me and they were harassing me in order to make me discouraged. And they were discriminating against me because of the FMLA that I took. And I could actually not be at work and take care of my daughter at any time when they had major projects coming up and they needed somebody reliable. So they were trying to discourage me and downgrade me, since I've done that for years and years and years saying that it was not my job when I took ownership in it, even got employee of the year for it, and say it's not my responsibility, it's their responsibility, when one of the values of the casinos is ownership. And I took pride in what I did because I was good at it.
Dkt. 57-3 pp. 10-11.
The written Coaching Form of April 24 also noted Olson was "found to be working while on FMLA on Friday 4/21/17, which is against company payroll policy." Dkt. 46-11. It was further noted: "Despite receiving instructions in your verbal coaching on 3/13/17, regarding not working off the clock, you contacted a vendor for a quote while you were at home on FMLA (see attached email)." Id. The Coaching Form noted Olson responded: "I thought that [*17]  I was helping by doing the order from home." Id.
According to Olson, he would receive text messages in general at home from coworkers, including McNeil, and calls and texts from vendors because "the vendors knew [he] was really good at his job, and if they had an issue they would call him at home." Dkt. 57-2 pp. 11-13. Specifically in regard to April 21, Olson testified as follows:
I was instructed to get a quote done for parts for BVs that didn't get done in a time limit that they wanted. So after I dealt with my daughter's FMLA incident stuff, I called a friend of mine in IT because we could log into our work email at work from outside the casino. And I did the quote, finished the quote, for the casino in order to be in a timely manner.
Id. pp. 21-22. Olson further testified he felt pressured to complete the quote and would be punished if not completed. Id. p. 23. But when asked whether it was expected he complete the quote while on FMLA leave, Olson responded:
No. They expected me to have it done by I think 4-20, but I didn't have it done by 4-20 because I was helping other guests and I was helping other techs. And she didn't allow any time for me to get it done in the afternoon.
. . [*18]  .
It was started, but it wasn't finished and I finished it on FMLA.
. . . I was concerned whether I'd get disciplined if I didn't get it done.
Id. p. 28.
Olson believes McNeil's disciplinary action against him for completing a parts order while on FMLA leave was an adverse and retaliatory action in response to his use of leave. Dkt. 57-10 pp. 3-4. Ameristar denies Olson had to perform any duties while on FMLA leave and contends there is no evidence to support his "subjective belief as to what he felt he had to do." Dkt. 69 ¶ 34.
Olson subsequently received a Performance Appraisal dated April 30, 2017, from supervisor Vance which addressed the performance issues in April, as well as recognition for Olson's positive efforts in certain aspects of his job. Dkt. 46-19. Vance highlighted several areas of improvement Olson needed to accomplish, including his "behavior towards leadership and [his] failure to complete tasks assigned to [him]." Id.
On May 8, 2017, McNeil noted in a Coaching Summary she had "seen some great improvements in your interactions with leadership, and participation in projects." Dkt. 46-30. The next day McNeil commended Olson on his work, commenting "Great job!" Id. On May [*19]  19, as a result of Olson pursuing an internal appeal of his April Final Written Coaching, Ameristar reduced the discipline "with the expectation that professionalism, time management, and teamwork remain a focus for continuous improvement." Id. On May 26, McNeil made a point to thank Olson for taking the opportunity to "get some extra machines done." Id.
On May 29, 2017, Olson was disciplined in a written Coaching Form for removing certain materials from a workstation and deleting information from a flash drive. Dkt. 46-12. The parties dispute much of the circumstances which led to this discipline. See Dkt. 57 ¶¶ 41-49; Dkt. 66 ¶ 40; Dkt. 69 ¶¶ 41-49. Olson again believes McNeil "singles [him] out from the other techs" and the incident is evidence of discrimination. Dkt. 57-3 p. 21.
Olson appealed the discipline to a peer review board. Thleen Blood, an HR Business Partner at Ameristar who facilitates appeals, told Olson that prior information regarding the March and April write-ups were not going to be discussed at the peer review meeting, but they were discussed. Olson felt he "couldn't defend [himself] because [he] had no documentation." Dkt. 57-3 p. 28. Prior to this incident, Olson [*20]  had issues with the way Blood acted when meeting with him, testifying as follows:
Q. What were they?
A. The way she acted. Her body language. Her tone of voice.
Q. Explain.
A. Everything. Put-offish. Not paying attention, being short.
Q. When did that happen?
A. When I would go and have meetings with her about certain things.
Q. What types of meetings did you have with her?
A. Like the FMLA stuff.
Q. . . . Back in January of 2017, we already went over those FMLA requests for your daughter, you were not pleased with her reaction with that?
A. No, I wasn't pleased with her demeanor at all any time that I was dealing with her.
Dkt. 57-3 p. 30. After the peer review, Olson talked to Heather Davis, Ameristar's Director of Human Resources, and requested to deal with Davis, which was a positive experience for him. Davis agreed Olson could deal with her personally.
In September of 2017, Ameristar was in the process of replacing carpet in the casino. This required the gaming machines, table games and other furniture to be moved from the floor and stored while the old carpet was removed, and the new carpet installed. In order to minimize the effect on the casino's operations, Ameristar scheduled much of [*21]  the work to be performed at night. McNeil prepared a schedule for the majority of Slot Techs to work the graveyard shift, from 11:00 p.m. to 7:30 a.m.
Olson, who typically worked the day shift, volunteered to work the graveyard shift for the project. According to Olson, he volunteered "because he had been through two of them before and so that other people would not have their family lives disrupted." Dkt. 57 ¶ 56. But because he had narcolepsy, he informed McNeil he needed "a consistent shift." Dkt. 57-2 p. 39. Olson testified he told McNeil he could not "switch from days to graves because [he was] on Adderall and it would screw my system completely up." Dkt. 57-3 pp. 32-33.
Olson was scheduled to work the 11:00 p.m. to 7:30 a.m. graveyard shift for the weeks beginning September 10 and 17. For the weeks beginning September 24 and October 1, however, McNeil scheduled Olson to work the day shift from 6:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. Olson thought he had a verbal agreement with McNeil to work the graveyard shift.
On September 24, Olson did not show for work at 6:30 a.m. as he had been scheduled to do pursuant to the posted schedule. McNeil texted Olson at 11:44 a.m. and asked, "Good morning. Is everything [*22]  ok?" Dkt. 46-14 p. 1. Olson responded, "Yea I believe so have to be at work at 11pm right"? Id. McNeil replied, "I believe 6:30 am today. You might want to double check VR," referring to Ameristar's work scheduling program. Id. Olson responded, "I was staying on graves cause of my sleep disorder we talked about it." Id. McNeil replied: "We talked about not doing the 11p/8p switches in the same week. You and Brad were both scheduled to return to days for main deck." Id. Olson responded:
My understanding is that I was staying on graves the whole 8 weeks because flipping back and forth like that when you have a sleep disorder can do serious damage to your health
Guess we should have talked a little more and clarified things better
And you also said that I could come in at 10pm on the 26th because I scheduled my heart tests at 7:30am in the morning kinda tells me that you were letting me stay on graves during the project. Did I understand that wrong?
Id. pp. 1-2. McNeil replied:
I didn't realize you were talking about the 26th of September. I'll have to find someone else to work days this week while I figure out what's happening with your restrictions. I am not exactly able to discuss those [*23]  or make them for you.
Id. p. 2. Olson responded:
I take meds at certain times during the day if you want me to help on graves [I'm] all for it. I am more than willing to help the team. Juggling my sleep schedule screws up my body with sleep along with taking my meds. I have done above and beyond for the first two weeks and had no complaints . . . .
Id. p. 3. McNeil replied:
Please know that I do understand that. Like I said, I don't get to decide restrictions. We will get this worked out. Also like I said we only discussed the 11p/8p changes through the grave shift weeks. I will follow up with you tomorrow. In the meantime plan on the 11p for this week.
Id.
During this email exchange, McNeil emailed Thleen Blood at 12:04 p.m. on September 24, stating:
Hello!
So I could use some HR advice. We are working on this huge carpet project, and there are a few schedule changes needed for the different phases.
Matt and Brad are the two getting switched, but Matt will not make the changes, stating his health issues. As I am not supposed to be involved in his health issues, and the team should be treated the same; will I need to have him bring a doctor note to specify his restrictions?
He was scheduled [*24]  for 6:30am today and did not show. When I texted asking if everything was ok, he said he works at 11p, and that he and I discussed the change for his sleep disorder. All he and I talked about was not doing the 11p and 8p changes during the other weeks.
Dkt. 46-32. Blood replied at 9:26 a.m. the next morning on September 25:
You are correct. If he has a medical issue that makes him unable to work the shift you are giving him - he needs to talk to me about ADA accommodation. He cannot just refuse to work the shift.
The issue is going to be that we have to give them about 2 weeks to get the doctor's paperwork back to me and in the meantime we must "try" to do the best we can to accommodate. But without me having an interactive conversation with him, I cannot say what the accommodation might be. Just because he says that he can't work the shift doesn't mean that is a reasonable accommodation. And since those conversations have to go through me as you can't discuss his medical condition with him - we don't have to try to accommodate until him and I talk.
Can you have him call or come in to speak with me ASAP?
Id. When Blood was asked why she put the word "try" in quote marks, she later testified: [*25]  "I don't know. . . . I don't remember." Dkt. 57-7 p. 2.
McNeil texted Olson a few minutes later: "When you wake up, can you please give Thleen a call so she can work with you on your scheduling concerns? I want to be sure I am doing right by you and everyone else." Dkt. 46-15 p. 1. Olson responded: "I don't deal with her I do not like the way she treats me . . . I saw [H]eather after work and explained the situation she said she is going to touch base with you." Id.
Olson had met with Heather Davis the morning of September 25 to discuss the scheduling issue. Olson talked to Davis about his accommodation request and she told him a doctor's letter would be required. Davis described the conversation as follows:
The morning he came in, he told me that he there was a mixup with his schedule. He very distinctly told me that he thought everything was fine and had been worked out with Ellie, but he was just leaving it closed with me to make sure that nothing else came up with it, and I did tell him that if this is a medical issue, he needed to go through the interactive ADA process.
Dkt. 57-8 p. 4. Davis told Olson to speak with one of Ameristar's Human Resources Business Partners and recommended [*26]  he speak with Tammy rather than Thleen Blood. Id. Davis communicated to McNeil and Blood that Olson had told her he believed everything was squared away.
In the morning of September 26, Olson picked up a letter from his doctor which stated:
Patient, Matthew Olson, is under my medical care for his narcolepsy diagnosis. It is my medical opinion that, due to this diagnosis, he requires a consistent work schedule and have agreed that 11:00pm-7:30am shift would be best suited for him at this time.
Dkt. 57-11. Olson called Davis to let her know that he would bring it to her office at the end of his shift the next morning.
Olson's request for a consistent schedule during the carpet installation project was the only accommodation he requested for his narcolepsy. During a deposition, McNeil conceded it would not have been difficult to accommodate Olson by putting him on a consistent schedule.
During the day on September 26, 2017, McNeil and Travis Gullick, a Performance Manager for Ameristar, placed blue tape on the new carpet to identify where gaming machines should be placed so that the machines would be lined up with structural columns along the center of the floor. McNeil later explained in [*27]  a written statement:
[T]he area needed to be mapped out for the team to return slot machines to their locations. I then made a list of tasks for the next shift, and assigned each Tech to certain tasks. . . . Matt's assigned task was to feed machine power and communication wires, so that games could be turned on.
Dkt. 46-29. As stated by Olson: "My assigned task during the shift was to wire games and take floor calls. A floor call is a request for a slot technician like me to go to the floor of the casino to fix or repair a game." Dkt. 57-1 ¶ 4.
The parties dispute various aspects of what occurred during the following graveyard shift. It is undisputed, however, that Olson moved certain machines four inches away from where McNeil and Gullick had marked the carpet where the machines were to be placed. From the perspective of Ameristar, "[t]hat night, rather than following the directions of his leadership and placing the machines on the marks indicated by blue tape, [Olson] decided the machines near the bar area were too close to the bar and needed to be moved four inches farther away from the bar." Dkt. 46-3 ¶ 45.
Olson denies that he did not follow the directions of leadership and asserts [*28]  "he sought and received approval from Casino Shift Manager Jenn Zelenka to relocate three banks of machines four inches farther away from the bar." Dkt. 66 ¶ 45. Olson further emphasizes that his assigned task was to wire the machines after they had been placed but "[b]ecause the shift was shorthanded, he became involved in placing the machines on the floor." Id. ¶ 44. Olson asked Zelenka for permission to have a slot specialist help place the machines which she granted. In addition, Olson declares:
Jenn Zelenka directed me to put locks on pit podiums in the table games area. The pit podiums and table games were being returned to the casino floor as part of the carpet installation project. . . . When Ms. Zelenka directed me to put locks on the podiums, she was directing me away from my assigned tasks for that night, which were to wire games and take floor calls.
Dkt. 57-1 ¶¶ 3, 5.
Ameristar denies Olson moved the machines at issue after asking Zelenka for permission. Dkt. 69 ¶ 86. In a subsequent written statement, Zelenka explained:
At approximately 0130 on 9/27/17, Slot Tech Matt Olson message me via KAI to come to bar 2. When I arrived, he and other techs were moving slot machine around [*29]  from the carpet project. He asked if it was okay for Slot Specialist Calvin Herman to stay an hour late to help them since they were shorthanded. I said that was fine. Matt then began talking about the banks in front for bar 2 being to close and he moved them. He asked if they looked okay and after looking at them, I said they appeared to be all lined up straight. The next day I was told that he did not place them according to measurements that were requested per the Slot Tech Manager and Performance Manager. I was unaware that the machines were placed differently from what they had directed him to do.
Dkt. 46-24. Ameristar identifies Zelenka as an "Assistant Night Casino Manager, who was the only supervisor on duty in that area of the casino," but contends "Zelenka was not involved in the new carpet installation project and had no authority to approve changes in the placement of the machines on the floor." Dkt. 46-3 ¶¶ 47, 50. It is undisputed Zelenka was the highest-ranking manager at the casino that night.
After having set the three banks of games, Olson checked out locks from inventory and put the locks in the podiums on table games as directed by Zelenka. He did not return until [*30]  7:30 a.m. after everybody was gone because he had issues with the tangs on the locks fitting. Putting locks on the podiums was not a "floor call" and, therefore, was not part of Olson's assigned tasks for the shift. Olson probably would have started wiring the games like he was supposed to had he not been called away by Zelenka to do the locks.
McNeil arrived at work around 9:00 a.m. on September 27 and observed the banks of games were not in the locations she had pre-marked. Olson was still at the casino when she arrived. McNeil did not talk with Olson that morning but met with Vance, who had spoken with Olson, and Shaun Williams. She prepared a written statement dated October 4, 2017, regarding the events:
When I arrived to work the following morning, around 9am on 9/27/17, the prior night's assignments were not complete, and the slot banks had been placed in different locations. I was informed by Slot Tech Supervisor Jessica Vance that Slot Tech Matt Olson stated to her that the locations originally taped-out were not right, and that they were too close to the bar. According to Jessica, Matt stated he checked with the Casino Manager on-duty, and that he measured the distance between [*31]  bar and slots on 1st deck. Casino Managers are not active participants in this project, or slot moves, therefore have no knowledge of slot placement to give proper direction. The measurement differences between 1st and 2nd deck were irrelevant, since they were different sized slot bases. Matt's assigned task was to feed machine power and communication wires, so that games could be turned on. This task was not completed. The day shift team then had to go back through the section, moving all of the games to where they were originally intended to sit, and wire all of the machines. At approximately 2pm on 9/27/17, the day shift team was able to begin placing the remainder of the slot bases, which is the task they were to begin at 8am that morning. The need to correct the section before starting the next phase, set the project behind by six hours.
Dkt. 46-29. During later deposition testimony, McNeil acknowledged some machines were wired and others were not when she arrived but was unable to remember which or how many machines were wired. Dkt. 57-5 pp. 6-7.
Olson delivered his doctor's letter to the Human Resources office around 9:25 a.m. on September 27. At 9:43 a.m., Blood sent the following [*32]  email to Davis:
Matt just stopped down here to drop off his letter a couple of minutes ago. I am the only one here because Tammy ran to do a couple of things..
I someone in the lobby and I said "Hello". He said "Thleen, it Matt. I have a letter for Heather". I stood up and walked towards my door while saying "Heather is not here." He said, "I know, I am supposed to give it to Tammy." At this point we were both at in eyesight of each other since I got to my doorway. Keeping a positive tone to my voice because I knew he would get awkward, I said, "Why can't you give it to me?" He replied "I can - but I need to open it and take a picture of it first."
He then walks to the counter by the coffee pot and pulls out a 4 inch pocket knife and flips it open. He then takes his time to open the envelope with the knife and says "I got this last night when they released me from the hospital". I tried to keep my cool but this was ridiculous. He was being very methodical about opening the envelope with the knife and when he got it open, he layed the paper out and smoothed it, again taking his time. I asked him if he wanted me to just take a copy of it. At this point, I just wanted him out of the office. [*33]  He said no and took a photo - read it and stated "You can't argue with that" and handed it to me.
I didn't say anything else but thank you and let him go. I wasn't going to argue with him. To be honest, I think he pulled that knife out to intimidate me and truth be said, I am a bit of scared of him at this point.
Dkt. 57-16 p. 10 (bold in original).
As explained by Olson, he owns "a Smith and Wesson pocket knife that [he] used at work and which [he] used as a letter opener or for opening packages." Dkt. 57-1 ¶ 15. He typically stores documents on his phone by taking photos of them. Id. ¶ 16. Olson denies "there is anything inherently threatening about opening a letter with a knife." Id. ¶ 17. He also denies he "had any intent to frighten Ms. Blood." Id.
A meeting was set up for Olson to sign a request for accommodation form, but he was terminated before he could go to the meeting. Ameristar asserts that, because Olson moved "the machines from their designated locations, he did not complete his assigned task and caused a significant delay in the day shift team's work as they had to move the machines back to their correct location and then wire them, which they did not complete until much [*34]  later in the day, approximately 2:00 p.m." Dkt. 46-3 ¶ 55. Ameristar further asserts that "[a]s a result of [Olson] once again not adhering to leadership's instructions and setting the project back approximately six hours, Ameristar made the decision to terminate [Olson's] employment." Dkt. 46-3 ¶ 56.
According to McNeil, the decision to terminate Olson's employment was a "joint decision" between herself, Shaun Williams, who was the Vice President of Casino Operations, and Thleen Blood. Dkt. 69-2 p. 3. Blood testified, however, she "was not a part of the conversation to terminate Mr. Olson." Dkt. 69-3 p. 3. She stated Davis and Williams were. Id.
McNeil never personally asked Olson why he did not wire the machines or gave him an opportunity to explain to her why he did not complete his assigned tasks. Dkt. 57-5 pp. 4-5. She was not aware Zelenka asked Olson to do other work during the shift before making the decision to terminate his employment. Id. p. 4. When asked whether that would be a valid reason for Olson not to complete his assigned tasks, McNeil testified: "I do not know that." Id. p. 5. McNeil acknowledged it was permissible for slot techs to perform tasks at the request of [*35]  other supervisors for which they would not be disciplined. Id. pp. 11-12.
Olson was notified by Zelenka that his employment was terminated when he came back to the casino for the 11 p.m. shift on September 27. Olson was also told he was banned for life from going on the premises. Zelenka described the meeting with Olson in a subsequent written statement:
On 9/27/17 approximately 1700, VP of Casino Ops Shaun Williams requested me to meet with Slot Tech Matt Olson to deliver his termination. Approximately 2300, Security Manager Rade Slavujevic and myself met with Matt in the interview room in the hold of the boat. We advised him based on his previous coaching and events over the last couple days his employment was being terminated. I asked if he would like to read the coaching, he said no. I asked if he would like a copy, he again stated no. I asked him if he would sign a copy to acknowledge we went over it with him, he stated he is not f    signing anything. I advised him that he would not be allowed the option of management review and if he had any questions he could notify HR or talk with Shaun Williams. Slavujevic then notified him that he was being banned from property at this time. [*36]  He told us that he would see us in court. I asked him for his swipe cards and key fob, which he handed over. Slavujevic escorted him to retrieve his items from his locker. At this time Matt requested a copy of the coaching, I provided him with one. He told me that "they" had been targeting him for 8 months.
Dkt. 46-24. Olson was then escorted out of the casino. Id.
Another Ameristar employee, Dorothy Rousseau, also failed to complete her assigned task of wiring the games, same as Olson, during the graveyard shift on September 26 and 27. Instead, she helped bring games onto the floor from the levee. She received an "Improvement Coaching" but was not otherwise disciplined or terminated. According to Davis, there were no disciplinary actions taken against Rousseau prior to the verbal coaching she received on September 27. Dkt. 69-6 ¶ 6.
As noted in her statement, Zelenka told Olson that he could not appeal his termination. According to Heather Davis, this decision was made by herself and Paul Czak, the general manager of the casino, not Zelenka. Dkt. 57-8 p. 2; Dkt. 69 ¶ 118. Ameristar's Team Member Appeal Process affords employees two opportunities to appeal either a final written warning [*37]  or a termination of employment, i.e. a Management Review and a Peer Review. A terminated employee must submit a written request for a Management Review to Human Resources within three days after being notified of the termination; he must submit the written request for a Peer Review within three days after the Management Review is completed. Olson sent a text to McNeil the morning of September 28 stating: "I'm entitled appeals so will you give me either the direct phone number to Heather or hr please or set up my appeal with Paul and let me know when it is." Dkt. 57-15 p. 75.
When asked why Olson was not entitled to an appeal, Davis testified: "Based on the situation he had with Thleen Blood in our human resources office." Dkt. 57-8 p. 2. Davis indicated Blood was the individual responsible for facilitating an appeal but acknowledged somebody else could have done so. Dkt. 57-8 p. 3.

IV. OLSON'S CLAIMS AGAINST AMERISTAR
Olson initiated this action in Iowa state court, which was then removed to federal court by Ameristar, asserting seven separate claims. Dkt. 1-1. First, Olson asserted a claim for "retaliation" under the FMLA on the alleged basis Ameristar "took adverse and retaliatory actions [*38]  against Olson, which included unwarranted disciplinary action and, ultimately, his termination from employment" in response to Olson's use of intermittent FMLA leave to care for his daughter. Id. ¶¶ 34-38. Second, Olson asserted a claim for "interference with exercise of FMLA rights." Id. ¶¶ 40-41. In support Olson alleged:
Plaintiff's managers expressed frustration concerning Plaintiff's request for scheduling changes. Plaintiff was terminated after submitting a doctor's note relating to those shift changes.
Id. ¶ 41.
Third, Olson asserted claims under the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") for "failure to accommodate and retaliation" and in support alleged:
Plaintiff requested an accommodation for his disability immediately prior to his termination. After requesting such accommodation, Plaintiff was terminated.
Id. ¶¶ 43-45. Fourth, Olson asserted a disability discrimination claim under the Iowa Civil Rights Act and in support alleged:
Olson was disabled due to the fact that narcolepsy substantially limits one or more of Olson's major life activities. Defendant was aware of Olson's disability through conversations with his immediate supervisor McNeil and with Human Resources Manager Davis.
During his employment, Olson was [*39]  diagnosed with a disability consisting of a sleep disorder known as narcolepsy.
At all times relevant to this action, Olson was able to perform the essential functions of his job as a Slot Technician II if he were given reasonable accommodations.
However, Defendant unfairly discharged Olson on the very day that he submitted his doctor's letter in support of his request for accommodations in violation of Iowa Code 216.6(l)(a).
Id. ¶¶ 47-50.
Fifth, Olson asserted a claim for violations of the Iowa Wage Payment Collection Act alleging Ameristar failed to pay him for all time worked during his employment. Id. ¶¶ 54-55. Sixth, Olson asserted a claim for breach of contract alleging Ameristar "utilized a rounding system in computing payroll that was substantially rigged in Defendant's favor" and, as a result, Olson was not paid for all of the hours that he worked in violation of the terms of his employment." Id. ¶¶ 57-58. Seventh, Olson asserted a claim under the Fair Labor Standards Act for Ameristar's alleged "unlawful use of its time clock rounding procedures." Id. ¶¶ 60-62.
The sixth claim alleging a breach of contract was previously dismissed by the Court. Dkt. 29. Ameristar now moves for summary judgment on all remaining claims.

V. [*40]  ANALYSIS OF SUMMARY JUDGMENT MOTION
Ameristar insists the undisputed facts in the record demonstrate Ameristar is entitled to judgment in its favor as a matter of law on all of Olson's claims. Dkt. 46-1 p. 2. In support, Ameristar emphasizes Olson was granted each request made for leave under the FMLA and he returned to his former position at the same pay and benefits each time. Id. In addition, Ameristar contends Olson was also granted "any and all requests for accommodation for his disability under the ADA." Id. From the perspective of Ameristar, "[t]here is no evidence that [Olson's] FMLA leave or his request for an ADA accommodation played any role whatsoever in [his] termination." Id. Instead, Ameristar maintains Olson "was terminated because he failed to follow repeated directives to remain focused on his assigned tasks; an issue for which he had been counseled in the past." Id. In regard to the alleged unpaid wages, Ameristar contends the claims are barred by applicable statute of limitations. Id.

A. Family and Medical Leave Act
The Family and Medical Leave Act ("FMLA") is intended, inter alia, "to balance the demands of the workplace with the needs of families, to promote the [*41]  stability and economic security of families, and to promote national interests in preserving family integrity." 29 U.S.C. § 2601(b)(1). The FMLA entitles an eligible employee to take a total of twelve workweeks of leave during a twelve-month period under certain circumstances, including:
(C) In order to care for the spouse, or a son, daughter, or parent, of the employee, if such spouse, son, daughter, or parent has a serious health condition.
(D) Because of a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform the functions of the position of such employee.
29 U.S.C. § 2612(a)(1)(C), (D). FMLA leave to care for a child "may be taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule when medically necessary." Id. § 2612(b)(1). An employee who takes leave is entitled to return to the position of employment held when the leave commenced or to an equivalent position with equivalent employment benefits, pay, and other terms and conditions of employment. 29 U.S.C.A. § 2614(a).
The FMLA establishes prohibited acts and permits employees to enforce the prohibitions through a private right of action. 29 U.S.C. §§ 2615, 2617(a). Specifically, it is "unlawful for any employer to interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of or the attempt to exercise, any right provided under" the FMLA. [*42]  29 U.S.C. § 2615(a)(1). It is also "unlawful for any employer to discharge or in any other manner discriminate against any individual for opposing any practice made unlawful by" the FMLA. 29 U.S.C § 2615(a)(2).
The Eighth Circuit has recognized three types of claims arising under those two statutory prohibitions:
The first type, arising under § 2615(a)(1), occurs where an employer refuses to authorize leave under the FMLA or takes other action to avoid responsibilities under the Act. See Stallings v. Hussmann Corp., 447 F.3d 1041, 1050 (8th Cir. 2006); 29 C.F.R. § 825.220(b). An employee proceeding on this theory need not show that an employer acted with discriminatory intent. Throneberry v. McGehee Desha Cnty. Hosp., 403 F.3d 972, 979 (8th Cir. 2005). Our cases sometimes describe this type of claim as an "interference" claim, but that terminology may not illuminate, because all prohibited acts under § 2615(a) appear under the heading "Interference with rights." For clarity of analysis, we think it helpful to describe this as an "entitlement" claim—an employee claims the denial of a benefit to which he is entitled under the statute.
A second type of claim, arising under § 2615(a)(2), is analogous to retaliation claims that are familiar under Title VII and other federal antidiscrimination statutes. See, e.g., 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-3(a); Barker v. Mo. Dep't of Corr., 513 F.3d 831, 834 (8th Cir. 2008); see 29 C.F.R. § 825.220(e); 60 Fed.Reg. 2180, 2218 (Jan. 6, 1995) (explaining that the FMLA's "opposition clause is derived from Title VII"). If an employee opposes [*43]  any practice made unlawful under the FMLA—for example, if an employee complains about an employer's refusal to comply with the statutory mandate to permit FMLA leave—then the employer may not for that reason take adverse action against the employee who is engaged in the opposition. As under Title VII, this claim is naturally described as a "retaliation" claim.
A third type of claim recognized by this court's precedent arises when an employer takes adverse action against an employee because the employee exercises rights to which he is entitled under the FMLA. In this scenario, the employer does not prevent the employee from receiving FMLA benefits. Rather, it is alleged that after the employee exercised his statutory rights, the employer discriminated against him in the terms and conditions of employment. An employee making this type of claim must prove that the employer was motivated by the employee's exercise of rights under the FMLA. Sisk v. Picture People, Inc., 669 F.3d 896, 900 (8th Cir. 2012); Stallings, 447 F.3d at 1051. The textual basis for such a claim is not well developed in our cases, but the claim likely arises under the rule of § 2615(a)(1) that an employer may not "interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of or the attempt to exercise" rights defined by the FMLA. [*44]  See Quinn v. St. Louis Cnty., 653 F.3d 745, 754 n. 7 (8th Cir. 2011); Scobey v. Nucor Steel-Ark., 580 F.3d 781, 790 n. 9 (8th Cir. 2009); Phillips v. Mathews, 547 F.3d 905, 913-15 (8th Cir. 2008) (Colloton, J., concurring). To distinguish the "entitlement" claim under § 2615(a)(1), and the "retaliation" claim under § 2615(a)(2), we think it helpful to describe this sort of complaint as a "discrimination" claim. See 29 C.F.R. § 825.220(c) ("The [FMLA]'s prohibition against 'interference' prohibits an employer from discriminating or retaliating against an employee ... for having exercised or attempted to exercise FMLA rights.").
Pulczinski v. Trinity Structural Towers, Inc., 691 F.3d 996, 1005-06 (8th Cir. 2012); see also Brown v. Diversified Distribution Sys., LLC, 801 F.3d 901, 907 (8th Cir. 2015) (we have recognized three types of claims: entitlement, retaliation and discrimination); Johnson v. Wheeling Mach. Prod., 779 F.3d 514, 517-18 (8th Cir. 2015) (noting three categories of FMLA claims under §§ 2615(a)(1)-(2)); Brown v. City of Jacksonville, 711 F.3d 883, 890 (8th Cir. 2013) (same). The Eighth Circuit Model Jury Instructions § 14.00 discusses the three separate causes of action under FMLA for entitlement, retaliation and discrimination (citing Pulczinski, 691 F.3d at 1005-06) and provides model instructions respectively.
Other Eighth Circuit opinions, however, refer to just two types of FMLA claims: an interference claim where an employee alleges an employer denied or interfered with his substantive rights under the FMLA and a retaliation claim where an employee alleges an employer discriminated against him for exercising his FMLA rights. See Chappell v. Bilco Co., 675 F.3d 1110, 1115 (8th Cir. 2012); Sisk v. Picture People, Inc., 669 F.3d 896, 899 (8th Cir. 2012); Wierman v. Casey's Gen. Stores, 638 F.3d 984, 999 (8th Cir. 2011); Phillips v. Mathews, 547 F.3d 905, 909 (8th Cir. 2008); Stallings, 447 F.3d at 1050.
For consistency with the Pulczinski line of FMLA cases and the Eighth Circuit Model Jury Instructions, Olson's claims will be analyzed herein under [*45]  the three potential causes of action described therein: entitlement, retaliation and discrimination.

1. FMLA Entitlement (Interference) Claim
To establish an entitlement (also known as interference) claim under 29 U.S.C. § 2615, "an employee has the burden of proving that [he or] she was entitled to a benefit under the FMLA, that the employer 'interfered with,' i.e., denied the employee, that entitlement, and that the reason for denial was connected to the employee's FMLA leave." Massey-Diez v. Univ. of Iowa Cmty. Med. Servs., Inc., 826 F.3d 1149, 1158 (8th Cir. 2016); see also Hernandez v. Bridgestone Americas Tire Operations, LLC, 831 F.3d 940, 945 (8th Cir. 2016) (plaintiff must show entitlement to FMLA leave, plaintiff gave defendant notice of intent to take FMLA leave and defendant denied plaintiff FMLA benefits to which plaintiff was entitled); Hasenwinkel v. Mosaic, 809 F.3d 427, 432 (8th Cir. 2015) (plaintiff must show eligibility for FMLA leave, employer was on notice of need for FMLA leave, and employer denied benefits to which plaintiff was entitled to under FMLA). An actionable entitlement claim includes an employer refusing to authorize FMLA leave, Smith v. AS America, Inc., 829 F.3d 616, 621 (8th Cir. 2016), or taking action to avoid responsibilities under the FMLA. Diversified Distribution, 801 F.3d at 907.
"[T]he employee need not show any discriminatory intent by the employer" for an entitlement claim. Hudson v. Tyson Fresh Meats, Inc., 787 F.3d 861, 865 (8th Cir. 2015) (citing Pulczinski, 691 F.3d at 1005). But "[t]he employee must be prejudiced by the employer's FMLA violation." Id. "[A] claim for interference [*46]  will fail unless the employee also shows that the employer's interference prejudiced the employee as the result of a real, remediable impairment of her rights under the FMLA." Thompson v. Kanabec Cty., 958 F.3d 698, 705-06 (8th Cir. 2020) (quoting Massey-Diez, 826 F.3d at 1158).
Here, upon review of the summary judgment record in the light most favorable to Olson, the evidence does not show Ameristar denied Olson any benefit he was entitled to under the FMLA. Instead, Olson received the FMLA leave he requested both for his own health condition and to take care of his daughter. After the leave, he returned to his Slot Tech II position at the same rate of pay and other terms of employment. Under such facts, Olson is unable to establish an FMLA entitlement claim as a matter of law. See Hasenwinkel, 809 F.3d at 432 (affirming summary judgment for employer because employee "exhausted her FMLA benefits and thus has not been denied any entitlement under the statute"); City of Jacksonville, 711 F.3d at 891 (employee does not argue employer prevented her from taking FMLA leave; thus, she has no entitlement claim); Pulczinski, 691 F.3d at 1007 (affirming summary judgment on entitlement claim) (noting employee "must show that the employer denied him entitlements under the FMLA") (citing Quinn v. St. Louis Cty., 653 F.3d 745, 753-54 (8th Cir. 2011) (affirming summary judgment for employer because employee received FMLA leave to which [*47]  she was entitled)).
The texts and telephone calls Olson testified he would receive at home from coworkers, McNeil, and vendors are not sufficient evidence to survive summary judgment. Foremost, there is a lack of evidence as to the extent such texts and calls may have occurred during FMLA leave as opposed to Olson being off his work shift. Moreover, the receipt of short, nondisruptive communications during FMLA leave, without evidence of prejudice to Olson or impairment of his entitlement to FMLA leave, does not constitute actionable interference. SeeMassey-Diez, 826 F.3d at 1158 ("We decline to adopt the position that the act of contacting [plaintiff] to direct her to attend to inboxes and suggest she see patients on crutches, without more, mechanically raises an issue sufficient to survive a motion for summary judgment with no corresponding factual dispute as to whether those communications were coercive or whether she engaged in work involuntarily.").
Nor is Olson's completion of the quote for parts on April 21, 2017, while on FMLA leave, sufficient evidence to survive summary judgment on an entitlement claim. While Olson testified he felt pressure to complete the quote and would be punished if not completed, he [*48]  explicitly answered "no" when asked whether it was expected he complete the quote while on FMLA leave. As noted by the Eighth Circuit, "FMLA regulations . . . permit voluntary and uncoerced acceptance of work by employees on medical leave, so long as acceptance is not a condition of employment." Massey-Diez, 826 F.3d at 1159. Olson has not presented evidence that completion of the quote while on FMLA leave was a condition of his employment or coerced by Ameristar management or materially interfered with his medical leave. Consequently, Ameristar is entitled to judgment as a matter of law as to an entitlement claim. See Thompson, 958 F.3d at 706 (affirming summary judgment for employer which did not impose upon employee work-related duties that materially interfered with her medical leave).
In summation, Olson has not submitted sufficient evidentiary materials that set out specific facts showing there is a genuine issue for trial on an FMLA entitlement claim under 29 U.S.C. § 2615.

2. FMLA Retaliation Claim
As described within Pulczinski, a retaliation claim under 29 U.S.C. § 2615(a)(2) arises when an employer takes adverse action against an employee who opposes or complains about any practice made unlawful under the FMLA. Pulczinski, 691 F.3d at 1006; see also Diversified Distribution, 801 F.3d at 909 (quoting Pulczinski, 691 F.3d at 1005-06). The record before this Court for purposes [*49]  of the summary judgment motion does not present facts supporting such a claim or raising a genuine issue for trial. There is an absence of evidence for a reasonable jury to find Ameristar took adverse action against Olson for opposing an unlawful practice under the FMLA. Thus, such a claim fails as a matter of law.

3. FMLA Discrimination Claim
In contrast to the retaliation claim, a discrimination claim under the FMLA "'arises when an employer takes adverse action against an employee because the employee exercises rights to which he is entitled under the FMLA.'" Hudson, 787 F.3d at 866 (quoting Pulczinski, 691 F.3d at 1006); see also Diversified Distribution, 801 F.3d at 907 (same). Termination of employment is unquestionably an adverse action. Hasenwinkel, 809 F.3d at 433; Wierman, 638 F.3d at 999.
Taking FMLA leave, however, does not give an employee greater protections against termination for reasons unrelated to the FMLA than was available before. Estrada v. Cypress Semiconductor (Minn.) Inc., 616 F.3d 866, 871 (8th Cir. 2010). In other words, termination is actionable under the FMLA only if the employee was discharged because of her FMLA leave. Id. To proceed with her claim, [plaintiff] must present sufficient evidence for a jury to find that her termination was motivated by her exercise of rights under the FMLA. Pulczinski, 691 F.3d at 1007.
Beckley v. St. Luke's Episcopal-Presbyterian Hosps., 923 F.3d 1157, 1160 (8th Cir. 2019); see also Massey-Diez, 826 F.3d at 1160 ("a discrimination claim rests on a connection between an adverse employment [*50]  action and an illegal motive on the part of the employer"); Hudson, 787 F.3d at 866 ("'An employee making this type of claim must prove that the employer was motivated by the employee's exercise of rights under the FMLA.'") (quoting Pulczinski, 691 F.3d at 1006); Malloy v. U.S. Postal Serv., 756 F.3d 1088, 1090 (8th Cir. 2014) ("To avoid summary judgment, Malloy must present sufficient evidence for a jury to find that the Postal Service's decision to terminate her was motivated by her exercise of rights under the FMLA.").
A plaintiff "may demonstrate FMLA discrimination by introducing direct or indirect evidence." Thompson, 958 F.3d at 707. As explained by the Eighth Circuit:
"Direct evidence provides a strong causal link between the alleged discriminatory bias and the adverse employment decision." McCullough v. Univ. of Ark. for Med. Scis., 559 F.3d 855, 861 (8th Cir. 2009). Direct evidence may be circumstantial if the inferred causal link is strong enough. Griffith v. City of Des Moines, 387 F.3d 733, 736 (8th Cir. 2004). The bias, however, must be that of the decision maker and must relate to the decisional process. Doucette v. Morrison Cty., Minn., 763 F.3d 978, 986 (8th Cir. 2014).
Massey-Diez, 826 F.3d at 1160. "Direct evidence must be strong and clearly point to an illegal motive as the basis for the adverse employment action." Ebersole v. Novo Nordisk, Inc., 758 F.3d 917, 924 (8th Cir. 2014).
Here, in the Court's opinion, the summary judgment record submitted by the parties does not provide evidence of the requisite "strong causal link" that Ameristar decision makers were motivated by Olson's exercise of rights [*51]  under the FMLA in terminating his employment. In the absence of direct evidence that the employer terminated the employee for exercising FMLA rights, the claim is analyzed for purposes of summary judgment under the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework. See Thompson, 958 F.3d at 707; Massey-Diez, 826 F.3d at 1160; Hasenwinkel, 809 F.3d at 432; Hudson, 787 F.3d at 866.
First, the employee must establish a prima facie case of retaliatory discrimination by showing that "she exercised rights afforded by the Act, that she suffered an adverse employment action, and that there was a causal connection between her exercise of rights and the adverse employment action." Second, once the employee establishes a prima facie case, the burden shifts to the employer to artic[ulate] a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Finally, the burden shifts back to the employee to demonstrate that the "employer's proffered reason is pretextual." The employee must present evidence that "(1) creates a question of fact regarding whether [the defendant's] reason was pretextual and (2) creates a reasonable inference that [the defendant] acted in retaliation."
Massey-Diez, 826 F.3d at 1160 (quoted citations omitted); see also Hasenwinkel, 809 F.3d at 432 (analyzing FMLA discrimination claim under same burden-shifting framework); Diversified Distribution, 801 F.3d at 908 (same); Hudson, 787 F.3d at 866 (same). "A sufficiently [*52]  strong prima facie case may itself establish pretext" or it may be shown by establishing the employer's justification for the adverse employment action is "unworthy of credence." Massey-Diez, 826 F.3d at 1162 (quoted citations omitted).
After examining the summary judgment record in a light favorable to Olson, the Court is satisfied Olson has established a prima facie case of discrimination under the FMLA. It is undisputed Olson exercised rights under the FMLA by requesting and taking leave for both his own health condition and to take care of his daughter. Olson then suffered an adverse employment action when his employment was terminated. Finally, although disputed by Ameristar, Olson has satisfactorily shown a causal connection between his exercise of FMLA rights and the termination of his employment for a prima facie case.
Although disputed by Ameristar, Olson emphasizes both Blood and McNeil exuded negative animosity toward his requests for leave. For example, in a sworn declaration, Olson states:
During the nearly 19 years that I worked for Defendant, I was never given a formal discipline until 2017, when Ellie McNeil became my supervisor. McNeil always gave me the impression that my request for FMLA leave [*53]  related to my daughter and my requests for accommodation in September of 2017 were not welcome and created a disruption in her management of the department.
Dkt. 57-1 ¶ 22. When asked during his deposition whether he had any evidence that Ameristar discriminated against him because he took FMLA leave, he answered "Yeah":
The way that I was treated, her demeanor, them shaking their head, the texts from Ellie. The fact that I couldn't even explain what happened the day that I got fired and they wouldn't listen to me. And I was fired before I was even off shift.
Dkt. 57-3 p. 11. While Ameristar disputes Olson's statements as his "subjective belief," such sworn testimony provides support for a causal connection between his FMLA leave and the termination of his employment.
In addition, "[e]mployees may show the causal link based on the temporal relation of the protected activity and the adverse employment action." Ebersole, 758 F.3d at 924. Here, there is some temporal connection between the FMLA leave and the termination, especially given Olson was taking intermittent FMLA leave to care for his daughter. Olson emphasizes he had a long satisfactory work history at the casino, but after taking leave in January 2017 [*54]  he was "subject to a series of disciplinary actions" ending with the termination in September 2017 for events in which he insists he was acting in Ameristar's and coworkers' best interests. Dkt. 61 p. 2.
"Generally, more than a temporal proximity between protected activity and termination is required to present a genuine issue of fact for trial." Malloy, 756 F.3d at 109. "In order for temporal proximity alone to be sufficient, 'the temporal proximity must be very close.'" Sisk, 669 F.3d at 900 (quoting Hite v. Vermeer Mfg. Co.,446 F.3d 858, 866 (8th Cir. 2006) (internal quotation marks omitted)). "[E]vidence that the employer had been concerned about a problem before the employee engaged in the protected activity undercuts the significance of the temporal proximity." Malloy, 756 F.3d at 1091 (quoting Wierman, 638 F.3d at 1001). In this case, temporal proximity alone does not establish a causal link, but when viewed in favor of Olson, it does provide support for a causal connection between his FMLA leave and the termination of his employment.
Along with the timing of events, a jury will ultimately be required to assess the various interactions and communications between Olson, McNeil and Blood, including determining credibility, as to Olson's FMLA leave, various disciplinary incidents, and termination of his employment. Evidence related [*55]  to body language, tone of voice, demeanor and disputes over the content of personal conversations, and inferences to be drawn from text messages and email, are all for the jury to weigh at trial; not for the Court to determine as a matter of law from a paper record. But for purposes of establishing a prima facie case, Olson has sufficiently shown a causal link when the summary judgment record is viewed in his favor.
Shifting the burden, Ameristar has satisfactorily articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons for the termination of Olson's employment based on prior disciplinary incidents and the asserted events which then occurred during the graveyard shift on September 26 and 27, 2017. Specifically, Ameristar states in its supporting brief that Olson "was terminated because he failed to follow repeated directives to remain focused on his assigned tasks; an issue for which he had been counseled in the past." Dkt. 46-1. Again, a jury will ultimately be required to assess the articulated reasons for the termination of Olson's employment, including the credibility of decisionmakers. But for purposes of this summary judgment analysis, Ameristar has met its burden.
As a result, the burden [*56]  shifts back to Olson to demonstrate that Ameristar's proffered reasons for the termination are pretextual. Olson must "'identify evidence sufficient to create a genuine issue of material fact whether [Ameristar's] proffered explanation is merely a pretext for unlawful retaliation.'" Ebersole, 758 F.3d at 924 (quoted citations omitted). Upon review of the record, the Court finds Olson has satisfactorily done so.
There are many disputed material facts as to the circumstances involving Olson's prior disciplinary incidents and, particularly, the graveyard shift preceding the termination of his employment. As for the later, Olson maintains the placement of the three machines was approved by the supervisor on duty. He further characterizes this "alleged malfeasance" as a "minor deviation" and emphasizes McNeil never gave him an opportunity to explain. Dkt. 61 pp. 7-9. In addition, he emphasizes the shift was shorthanded and he was directed away from his assigned tasks by the on-duty supervisor. Olson further emphasizes he was entitled to an appeal under Ameristar policy but was denied. He believes he was repeatedly treated differently and unfairly in comparison to other employees, especially as to his last graveyard [*57]  shift. Ameristar disputes all those assertions.
A reasonable trier of fact may ultimately determine Ameristar's decisionmakers to be credible and the reasons for the discipline and termination to be valid. On the other hand, a reasonable trier of fact may find the reasons to be "unworthy of credence" and infer from the evidence the decisionmakers were unlawfully motivated by Olson's use of FMLA leave. According to the Eighth Circuit, pretext can be shown in various ways:
by demonstrating that the employer's proffered reason has no basis in fact, that the employee received a favorable review shortly before he was terminated, that similarly situated employees who did not engage in the protected activity were treated more leniently, that the employer changed its explanation for why it fired the employee, or that the employer deviated from its policies.
Massey-Diez, 826 F.3d at 1162 (quoting Stallings, 447 F.3d at 1052); Ebersole, 758 F.3d at 925 (setting forth same "multiple ways" to demonstrate pretext). The record before this Court, which raises various disputes as to circumstances which show pretext, contains sufficient evidence to create genuine issues of material fact whether Ameristar's proffered explanation for the termination of Olson's employment is pretext [*58]  for unlawful discrimination under the FMLA.
In summation, Olson has presented sufficient evidence to raise genuine issues of material fact for trial as to whether the termination of his employment was motivated by his exercise of rights under the FMLA. Ameristar is not, therefore, entitled to judgment as a matter of law on the claim of discrimination under the FMLA. See Diversified Distribution, 801 F.3d at 910 (reversing summary judgment for employer on FMLA claim because factual disputes and temporal proximity raised genuine issues of material fact on whether a prohibited reason rather than employer's stated reason actually motivated termination).

B. Americans with Disabilities Act & Iowa Civil Rights Act
Olson alleges Ameristar also discriminated against him because of his disability in violation of both the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") and Iowa Civil Rights Act ("ICRA"). The parties rely primarily, however, upon federal law under the ADA to address the summary judgment issues. "ADA and ICRA disability discrimination claims are analyzed in the same fashion." Faidley v. United Parcel Serv. of Am., Inc., 889 F.3d 933, 940 (8th Cir. 2018). Thus, when "the parties do not dispute the application of federal analysis, disability claims under the ICRA are generally analyzed in accord with the ADA." Gretillat v. Care Initiatives, 481 F.3d 649, 652 (8th Cir. 2007) (citing McElroy v. State, 703 N.W.2d 385, 391 (Iowa 2005)); see also Kallail v. Alliant Energy Corp. Servs., Inc., 691 F.3d 925, 930 (8th Cir. 2012) ("'[D]isability [*59]  claims under the ICRA are generally analyzed in accord with the ADA.'" (quoting Gretillat, 481 F.3d at 652)). Accordingly, for the purpose of addressing the summary judgment motion, this Court will analyze Olson's disability claims under the ADA and applicable caselaw.
Pursuant to the ADA, an employer shall not "discriminate against a qualified individual on the basis of disability in regard to . . . advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). The term "discriminate" includes
not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who is an applicant or employee, unless such [employer] can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business of such [employer.]
Id. § 12112(b)(5)(A). A "qualified individual" is a person "who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds." Id. § 12111(8).
The ADA also prohibits retaliation, providing as follows:
No person shall discriminate against any individual because such individual has opposed any act [*60]  or practice made unlawful by this chapter or because such individual made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this chapter.
42 U.S.C. § 12203(a). The Eighth Circuit "has held that a person who is terminated after making a good faith request for an accommodation may pursue a retaliation claim under the ADA." Withers v. Johnson, 763 F.3d 998, 1004 (8th Cir. 2014) (but noting textual basis for claim is unclear) (citing Hill v. Walker, 737 F.3d 1209, 1218 (8th Cir. 2013) ("This court also has held that a person who is terminated after unsuccessfully seeking an accommodation may pursue a retaliation claim under the ADA, if she had a good faith belief that the requested accommodation was appropriate.") (citing Heisler v. Metro. Council, 339 F.3d 622, 632 (8th Cir.2003))).
In his complaint, Olson claims Ameristar violated the ADA by failing to accommodate his limitations from narcolepsy and "immediately" terminating his employment in retaliation for requesting an accommodation. Dkt. 1-1 ¶¶ 44-45. In the present motion, Ameristar contends both claims fail as a matter of law. Dkt. 46 ¶ 3. Ameristar asserts Olson cannot establish Ameristar refused any request for an accommodation he made during his employment. Id. Ameristar further asserts Olson cannot establish his request for an accommodation caused [*61]  Ameristar to terminate his employment. Id. After examining the summary judgment record in Olson's favor, the Court finds there are genuine issues for trial on the ADA claims.

1. ADA Discrimination for Failure to Make Reasonable Accommodations
To survive summary judgment on his failure to accommodate claim, Olson "'must establish both a prima facie case of discrimination based on disability and a failure to accommodate it.'" Moses v. Dassault Falcon Jet-Wilmington Corp, 894 F.3d 911, 923 (8th Cir. 2018) (quoting Schaffhauser v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 794 F.3d 899, 905 (8th Cir. 2015)). To establish a prima facie case of discrimination, Olson must show (1) he is disabled within the meaning of the ADA, (2) is a qualified individual under the ADA able to perform the essential functions of the job with or without reasonable accommodation, and (3) suffered an adverse employment action because of his disability. See, e.g., id. (quoting Kallail, 691 F.3d at 930); Faulkner v. Douglas Cty. Nebraska, 906 F.3d 728, 733 (8th Cir. 2018); Faidley, 889 F.3d at 940; Kowitz v. Trinity Health, 839 F.3d 742, 745 (8th Cir. 2016); Walz v. Ameriprise Fin., Inc., 779 F.3d 842, 845 (8th Cir. 2015); Cody v. Prairie Ethanol, LLC, 763 F.3d 992, 996 (8th Cir. 2014).
In this Court's opinion, when the record is viewed in the light most favorable to Olson, he has sufficiently established a prima facie case of disability discrimination. Ameristar does not challenge within the summary judgment motion that Olson has a disability within the meaning of the ADA or is a qualified individual under the ADA. It is also unchallenged that termination of employment is an adverse [*62]  action. As for the final element, which is disputed by Ameristar, Olson has sufficiently shown a causal connection between the termination of his employment and his disability for Olson to survive summary judgment.
Foremost, there is a strong temporal proximity between the termination and Olson's disability which supports the requisite causal link. E.E.O.C. v. Product Fabricators, Inc., 763 F.3d 963, 969 (8th Cir. 2014) ("A temporal connection can demonstrate a causal link between an adverse employment action and the employee's disability."). Based on the summary judgment record: Olson informed McNeil of his health concerns and limitations related to narcolepsy in text messages on September 24, 2017; McNeil contemporaneously informed Blood about Olson's "health issues" and "restrictions" in an email; Olson discussed his "medical issue" with Davis on September 25; Olson delivered his doctor's letter referring to his "narcolepsy diagnosis" to the Human Resources office the morning of September 27; Olson was informed his employment was terminated later the same day. Along with this close temporal connection, there is evidence the decision to terminate Olson's employment involved the same three individuals who knew about his narcolepsy: McNeil, Davis and Blood. [*63]  In addition, Olson has presented evidence of supervisor animosity through sworn testimony that McNeil "showed frustration and being upset because I needed accommodations for my narcolepsy, and it shows it in the text messages" (Dkt. 57-2 p. 42) . . . "and not to mention the email from Thleen to Ellie degrading me and my disability with 'try' in quotation marks." Dkt. 57-3 p. 11.
Upon establishing a prima facie case, Olson "must also establish a failure to accommodate his disability." Schaffhauser, 794 F.3d at 906. For a failure to accommodate claim, "the 'discrimination' is framed in terms of the failure to fulfill an affirmative duty—the failure to reasonably accommodate the disabled individual's limitations." Peebles v. Potter, 354 F.3d 761, 767 (8th Cir. 2004). The ADA "compels employers to modify their work requirements to enable disabled individuals to have the same opportunities as their non-disabled counterparts." Id. The Eighth Circuit has explained:
it is not the employer's discriminatory intent in taking adverse employment action against a disabled individual that matters. Rather, discrimination occurs when the employer fails to abide by a legally imposed duty. The known disability triggers the duty to reasonably accommodate and, if the employer fails to [*64]  fulfill that duty, we do not care if he was motivated by the disability.
Id.; see also Withers, 763 F.3d at 1004 (employer's intent is not determinative on claim for failing to make reasonable accommodations).
"To determine whether an accommodation for the employee is necessary, and if so, what that accommodation might be, it is necessary for the employer and employee to engage in an 'interactive process.'" Sharbono v. Northern States Power Co., 902 F.3d 891, 894 (8th Cir. 2018). (quotation marks and citations omitted); see also Schaffhauser, 794 F.3d at 906 (same); Battle v. United Parcel Service, Inc., 438 F.3d 856, 862 (8th Cir. 2006) ("Where the employee requests accommodation, the employer must engage in an 'informal, interactive process' with the employee to identify the limitations caused by the disability and the potential reasonable accommodations to overcome those limitations."). "[T]he employer must make a good faith effort to assist the employee in finding an accommodation, but the employee must show she could have reasonably been accommodated if not for the employer's lack of good faith." Faulkner, 906 F.3d at 733. "'There is no per se liability under the ADA if an employer fails to engage in the interactive process,' but at the summary judgment stage such a failure is 'prima facie evidence that the employer may be acting in bad faith.'" Faidley, 889 F.3d at 943 (quoting Minnihan v. Mediacom Commc'ns Corp., 779 F.3d 803, 813 (8th Cir. 2015) (quoted citation omitted)); see also Kallail, 691 F.3d at 933 (quoting [*65]  Fjellestad v. Pizza Hut of Am., Inc., 188 F.3d 944, 952 (8th Cir. 1999)).
An employee can establish an employer failed to participate in the interactive process by showing:
(1) the employer knew about the employee's disability; (2) the employee requested accommodation or assistance for his or her disability; (3) the employer did not make a good faith effort to assist the employee in seeking accommodation; and (4) the employee could have been reasonably accommodated but for the employer's lack of good faith.
Minnihan, 779 F.3d at 813 (quoting Cravens v. Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Kansas City, 214 F.3d 1011, 1021 (8th Cir. 2000) (citing Fjellestad, 188 F.3d at 952)); see also Sharbono, 902 F.3d at 894 (employee must prove employer did not make good faith effort to assist employee in seeking accommodations); Schaffhauser, 794 F.3d at 906 (setting forth same elements) (quoting Peyton v. Fred's Stores of Ark. Inc., 561 F.3d 900, 902 (8th Cir. 2009) (quoting Fjellestad, 188 F.3d at 952)); Product Fabricators, Inc., 763 F.3d at 971 (same); Kallail, 691 F.3d at 933 (setting forth similar elements). If an employer fails to engage in the interactive process, then "a factual question exists as to whether the employer has attempted to provide reasonable accommodation as required by the ADA." Cravens, 214 F.3d at 1021 (quoting Fjellestad, 188 F.3d at 952).
The Eighth Circuit recently framed the elements for a claim of failure to make reasonable accommodations as follows: "(1) [employer] knew that [employee] was disabled; (2) [employee] requested an accommodation; (3) [employer] failed to engage in a 'flexible' and 'informal[ ] interactive process' with [employee] about [*66]  possible accommodations; and (4) [employee's] disability could have been reasonably accommodated had the interactive process taken place." Garrison v. Dolgencorp, LLC, 939 F.3d 937, 941 (8th Cir. 2019) (citing Fjellestad, 188 F.3d at 951-52; Schaffhauser, 794 F.3d at 906).
Upon review of the record in the light most favorable to Olson, there is evidence from which a reasonable jury could conclude each of the elements for failure to make reasonable accommodations has been met. First, Olson has raised a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Ameristar knew Olson has a disability. McNeil, Davis and Blood all were aware of Olson's narcolepsy. Second, Olson specifically requested an accommodation of maintaining a consistent schedule and not switching between the day shift and graveyard shift. There is not much dispute, if any, as to these first two elements or the fourth element: whether Olson's narcolepsy could have been reasonably accommodated. McNeil acknowledged it would not have been difficult to accommodate Olson by assigning him to a consistent schedule. Ameristar has not shown as a matter of law Olson's requested accommodation would impose an undue hardship on its business operation.
Ameristar maintains, however, that it not only engaged in the requisite interactive process but also "granted" [*67]  Olson "any and all requests for accommodation." Dkt. 46-1 p. 2. Thus, Ameristar insists the failure to accommodate claim fails as a matter of law. Id. p. 10. The record before the Court, however, does not support Ameristar's argument. Viewing the evidence in favor of Olson, a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether Ameristar participated in the interactive process with Olson in good faith.
Contrary to Ameristar's assertion that it "granted" Olson "any and all requests for accommodation," the record does not establish McNeil "agreed" to Olson's request for accommodation as indicated in Ameristar's brief. Dkt. 46-1 p. 11. Based on the evidence before the Court, McNeil did not actually change the posted schedule which switched Olson from the graveyard shift back to the day shift. Instead, McNeil told Olson: "I'll have to find someone else to work days this week while I figure out what's happening with your restrictions. I am not exactly able to discuss those or make them for you. . . . I don't get to decide restrictions." Dkt. 46-14 pp. 1-3. While McNeil indicated "[w]e will get this worked out" and "[i]n the meantime plan on the [graveyard shift] for this week," her text messages [*68]  to Olson and email to Blood reflect she did not make a decision as to a request for disability accommodations nor had authority to do so on behalf of Ameristar. Further, Blood's email in response on September 25 explicitly indicates no decision as to ADA accommodations had been made:
If he has a medical issue that makes him unable to work the shift you are giving him - he needs to talk to me about ADA accommodation. He cannot just refuse to work the shift.
The issue is going to be that we have to give them about 2 weeks to get the doctor's paperwork back to me and in the meantime we must "try" to do the best we can to accommodate. But without me having an interactive conversation with him, I cannot say what the accommodation might be. Just because he says that he can't work the shift doesn't mean that is a reasonable accommodation. And since those conversations have to go through me as you can't discuss his medical condition with him - we don't have to try to accommodate until him and I talk.
Dkt. 46-32. Likewise, according to the testimony of Davis, Ameristar's Vice President of Human Resources, no decision had been made: "I did tell [Olson] that if this is a medical issue, he needed [*69]  to go through the interactive ADA process." Dkt. 57-8 p. 4.
This evidence not only significantly undermines Ameristar's assertion it "granted" Olson "any and all requests for accommodation," but also raises a genuine dispute for the jury as to whether Ameristar acted in good faith given Olson's employment was terminated within hours after he engaged in the "interactive ADA process" as instructed by delivering his doctor's letter to Human Resources. According to Olson, McNeil showed frustration in her text messages and was upset he required accommodation for his narcolepsy. Dkt. 61 p. 13. In addition, Olson contends that Blood placing the word "try" in quote marks reflects a dismissive attitude toward his request for accommodation. Id. p. 14. Ameristar disputes those assertions, but it is for a jury to assess the language of the email and all the other related communication and circumstances between Olson, McNeil, Blood and Davis to determine whether Ameristar engaged in the requisite interactive process with Olson in good faith.
Under the paper record before this Court, Ameristar is not entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Garrison, 939 F.3d at 942 (reversing summary judgment for employer because reasonable [*70]  jury could conclude employer was aware of employee's disability, employee requested accommodation and employer, had it engaged in interactive process, could have reasonably accommodated employee); Cravens, 214 F.3d at 1021-22 (reversing summary judgment for employer because there is a genuine dispute as to whether employer acted in good faith to seek reasonable accommodations); Fjellestad, 188 F.3d at 953 ("summary judgment is typically precluded when there is a genuine dispute as to whether the employer acted in good faith and engaged in the interactive process of seeking reasonable accommodations").

2. ADA Retaliation for Requesting Accommodation
A retaliation claim under the ADA "follows the same direct evidence or burden-shifting analysis employed in discrimination claims." Oehmke v. Medtronic, Inc., 844 F.3d 748, 758 (8th Cir. 2016) (citing Product Fabricators, 763 F.3d at 969). As with the FMLA discrimination claim, "a party may prove intentional discrimination under the ADA either by direct or indirect evidence." Lipp v. Cargill Meat Sols. Corp., 911 F.3d 537, 543 (8th Cir. 2018). Again, the Court does not find sufficient direct evidence within the present record for Olson to survive summary judgment. Thus, in the absence of direct evidence, the claim is analyzed for purposes of summary judgment under the same McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework discussed above. Id. at 544; Oehmke, 844 F.3d at 755; Faulkner, 906 F.3d at 732-33; Product Fabricators, 763 F.3d at 969.
To begin, Olson [*71]  must establish a prima facie case. See, e.g., Lipp, 911 F.3d at 544; Oehmke, 844 F.3d at 755. "'A prima facie case of retaliation requires the plaintiff to show (1) [he] engaged in statutorily protected activity; (2) [he] suffered an adverse employment action; and (3) a causal connection between the two.'" Moses, 894 F.3d at 924 (quoting Oehmke, 844 F.3d at 758); see also Withers, 763 F.3d at 1004-05 (setting forth same elements to establish ADA retaliation claim) (quoting Hill, 737 F.3d at 1218). "[A] retaliation claim 'requires a but-for causal connection between the employee's assertion of [his or] her ADA rights and an adverse action by the employer.'" Moses, 894 F.3d at 924 (quoting Oehmke, 844 F.3d at 758). The burden then shifts to Ameristar to show a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse action. See, e.g., Lipp, 911 F.3d at 544 (quoting Oehmke, 844 F.3d at 755). Finally, the burden shifts back to Olson to show the articulated reason is a pretext for discrimination. Id.
Beginning with the prima facie case, Ameristar does not challenge that Olson engaged in statutorily protected activity or that termination of employment is an adverse action. Ameristar insists, however, there is no evidence Olson's "request for an ADA accommodation played any role whatsoever in" the termination of his employment. Dkt. 46-1 p. 2. Thus, Ameristar argues Olson cannot establish a genuine issue for trial as [*72]  to the requisite causal connection between his request for an accommodation and the termination. Id. p. 12.
From the Court's view, however, the evidence in the summary judgment record reflects the strongest temporal proximity of any of Olson's claims as to the termination of his employment and request for an accommodation: Olson delivered a doctor's letter to the Human Resources office the morning of September 27 as directed to engage in the "interactive ADA process" for an accommodation; his employment was terminated within hours. Ameristar correctly notes, as stated by the Eighth Circuit, "timing alone is not sufficient to create a genuine issue of fact, particularly given that [the employer's] proffered reason for the termination arose in the same window of time." Withers, 763 F.3d at 1005 (citing Sprenger v. Fed. Home Loan Bank of Des Moines, 253 F.3d 1106, 1114 (8th Cir. 2001)). But as noted by Olson, courts "look for proximity in conjunction with other evidence." Sprenger, 253 F.3d at 1114. Doing so here, there is again evidence the decision to terminate Olson's employment involved the same three individuals who were involved with his request for an accommodation: McNeil, Davis and Blood. In addition, when viewed in favor of Olson, the various communications and interactions between Olson, McNeil and Blood [*73]  reflect animus toward his request for accommodation which further supports the requisite causal link. Olson has sufficiently shown a causal connection between the termination of his employment and his request for an accommodation to establish a prima facie case.
Shifting the burden, Ameristar's statement that Olson "was terminated because he failed to follow repeated directives to remain focused on his assigned tasks; an issue for which he had been counseled in the past" (Dkt. 46-1 p. 2) again satisfactorily articulates a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the termination of Olson's employment. As before, a jury will ultimately be required to assess the articulated reasons for the termination, including the credibility of decisionmakers and various disputed factual circumstances of the prior disciplinary incidents and events which occurred during the graveyard shift on September 26 and 27, 2017. But for purposes of the summary judgment analysis under the ADA, Ameristar has met its burden.
Finally, the burden shifts back to Olson to show the reasons articulated by Ameristar are pretextual. Once again, as with the FMLA claim, Olson has satisfactorily done so. Not only is the temporal [*74]  proximity between the accommodation request and employment termination significantly close, but it involves the same individuals. In addition, as previously noted, Olson presents evidence of supervisor animosity: "McNeil always gave me the impression that . . . my requests for accommodation in September of 2017 were not welcome and created a disruption in her management of the department." Dkt. 57-1 ¶ 22. And Olson again points to the email from Blood wherein she indicates "we must 'try' to do the best we can to accommodate" which he contends was "degrading me and my disability." Dkt. 57-3 p. 11. Further, Olson reiterates the many disputed material facts as to the circumstances involving his prior disciplinary incidents and particularly the graveyard shift preceding the termination of employment, including but not limited to whether a supervisor approved his actions during the shift and directed him away from completing his assigned tasks, and whether he was denied an opportunity to explain those circumstances and then denied an appeal contrary to Ameristar policy. Under such circumstances, a reasonable jury may find Ameristar's articulated reasons for the termination of employment [*75]  to be "unworthy of credence" and infer from the evidence as a whole the termination was in retaliation for requesting a disability accommodation. Ameristar again denies Olson's various assertions and vehemently defends the decisions of its personnel, but the summary judgment record contains sufficient evidence to create genuine issues of material fact whether Ameristar's proffered explanation for the termination of Olson's employment is pretext for unlawful retaliation under the ADA.
For those reasons, when the totality of the undisputed and disputed circumstances presented in the record before this Court are viewed in Olson's favor, Ameristar is not entitled to judgment as a matter of law on Olson's claim his employment was terminated in retaliation for requesting an accommodation for his narcolepsy.

C. Unlawful Rounding Violations
Olson asserts claims against Ameristar under the Iowa Wage Payment Collection Act and the Fair Labor Standards Act for using an alleged unlawful time clock rounding procedure whereby Ameristar failed to pay him for all the hours worked during his employment. Ameristar contends it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law on the claims because Olson failed [*76]  to bring the claims within the applicable statute of limitations. Olson urges the Court to apply a discovery rule and equitable tolling to allow the claims to proceed to trial. Because those issues are separate from the matters discussed above, and involve different factual circumstances and analysis, the Court reserves ruling on those portions of the summary judgment motion at this time.

VI. CONCLUSION
For the reasons set forth above, Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment (Dkt. 46) shall be, and is hereby, granted in part, denied in part and reserved in part. The claims based on entitlement and retaliation under the FMLA, as defined herein, fail as a matter of law. This case shall proceed to a trial by jury on the claim for discrimination under the FMLA and the claims under the ADA and ICRA based on failure to make reasonable accommodations and terminating employment in retaliation for requesting an accommodation. Whether claims under the Iowa Wage Payment Collection Act and the Fair Labor Standards Act will also proceed to trial shall be determined under a separate order.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
Dated June 18, 2020.
/s/ Stephen B. Jackson, Jr.
STEPHEN B. JACKSON, JR.
UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE [*77]  JUDGE


End of Document

