Payan v. L.A. Cmty. Coll. Dist.
United States District Court for the Central District of California
October 16, 2018, Decided; October 16, 2018, Filed
2:17-cv-01697-SVW-SK

Reporter
2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 225042 *
Roy Payan, et al. v. Los Angeles Community College District, et al.
Subsequent History: Partial summary judgment denied by, Motion denied by, Injunction denied by Payan v. L.A. Cmty. College Dist., 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 42752 (C.D. Cal., Jan. 7, 2019)
Partial summary judgment granted by, in part, Summary judgment denied by Payan v. L.A. Cmty. College Dist., 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 231640 (C.D. Cal., Apr. 23, 2019)
Findings of fact/conclusions of law at Payan v. L.A. Cmty. College Dist., 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 85589, 2019 WL 2185138 (C.D. Cal., May 21, 2019)
Motion granted by Payan v. L.A. Cmty. Coll. Dist., 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 229113 (C.D. Cal., June 13, 2019)
Later proceeding at Payan v. L.A. Cmty. College Dist., 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 229109 (C.D. Cal., June 13, 2019)
Injunction granted at, Judgment entered by Payan v. L.A. Cmty. College Dist., 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 124495, 2019 WL 3298777 (C.D. Cal., July 22, 2019)
Stay denied by Payan v. L.A. Cmty. College Dist., 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 165337, 2020 WL 5289845 (C.D. Cal., May 29, 2020)
Later proceeding at Payan v. L.A. Cmty. College Dist., 2021 U.S. App. LEXIS 4352 (9th Cir. Cal., Feb. 16, 2021)
Decision reached on appeal by, Remanded by Payan v. L.A. Cmty. College Dist., 11 F.4th 729, 2021 U.S. App. LEXIS 25324 (9th Cir. Cal., Aug. 24, 2021)
Costs and fees proceeding at, Transferred by, Remanded by Payan v. L.A. Cmty. College Dist., 2021 U.S. App. LEXIS 31897 (9th Cir. Cal., Oct. 22, 2021)
Request denied by, Motion denied by, Motion granted by, Objection sustained by, in part, Objection overruled by, Summary judgment granted by, in part Payan v. L.A. Cmty. Coll. Dist., 2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 90303 (C.D. Cal., May 23, 2023)
Counsel:  [*1] For Roy Payan, Portia Mason, The National Federation of The Blind, Inc., The National Federation of The Blind of California, Inc., Plaintiffs: Ayman Mourad, Barbosa Group, Huntington Beach, CA USA; Jean M Zachariasiewicz, Joseph B Espo, Sharon Krevor-Weisbaum, PRO HAC VICE, Brown Goldstein and Levy LLP, Baltimore, MD USA; Patricia Barbosa, Barbosa Group, Huntington Beach, CA USA.
For Los Angeles Community College District, Defendant: Richard E Morton, LEAD ATTORNEY, Bethsaida Correa Obra-White, Kristian Moriarty, Yvette Davis, Haight Brown and Bonesteel LLP, Irvine, CA USA.
For Dr. Francisco C Rodriguez, in his official capacity as chancellor of the Los Angeles Community College District, Defendant: Richard E Morton, LEAD ATTORNEY, Yvette Davis, Haight Brown and Bonesteel LLP, Irvine, CA USA.
Judges: STEPHEN V. WILSON, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: STEPHEN V. WILSON
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES - GENERAL

Proceedings: IN CHAMBERS ORDER RE: RECONSIDERATION OF PLAINTIFFS' MOTION FOR PARTIAL SUMMARY JUDGMENT [48]
Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act (the "ADA" or "Title II"), 42 U.S.C. §§ 12131 et seq., and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act ("Section 504"), 29 U.S.C. § 794, guarantee students with disabilities equal opportunity and equal access to programs at federally-funded [*2]  institutions of higher education. Technology has transformed these institutions; students now register through online systems, submit homework and tests using software, conduct research online, and receive assignments and grades online.
Plaintiffs Roy Payan, Portia Mason, the National Federation of the Blind, Inc. (the "NFB"), and the National Federation of the Blind of California, Inc. (the "NFBCA") moved for partial summary judgment on their claims under the ADA and Section 504, arguing that (1) Defendant Los Angeles Community College District ("LACCD") has failed its obligations to ensure equally effective communication and equal opportunity to participate in programs and services to students with disabilities, and (2) LACCD's failure constituted intentional disability discrimination due to LACCD's deliberate indifference to the needs of blind students. In their motion, Plaintiffs state that LACCD does not ensure that their technology is accessible to blind students and failed to provide effective, reasonable accommodations to those students. On January 1, 2018, the Court denied Plaintiffs' motion based on the existence of genuine disputes of material fact. See Dkt. 66. Thereafter, in February 2018 [*3]  the Court reconsidered its ruling on Plaintiffs' motion and vacated the upcoming trial dates. See Dkts. 141, 143.
Now, although the Court has identified undisputed evidence presented by the parties lending support for summary judgment in favor of Plaintiffs, the Court cannot find as a matter of law that LACCD has violated the ADA and Section 504 based on the arguments Plaintiffs presented in its motion. Accordingly, the Court DENIES Plaintiffs' Motion for Partial Summary Judgment.

I. Factual Background1

A. The Parties
LACCD is a public educational entity that operates nine community colleges in the County of Los Angeles, including Los Angeles City College ("LACC"). Plaintiffs Roy Payan and Portia Mason are blind. Payan first enrolled as a student at LACC in the Fall 2015 semester and is still currently enrolled as a student. Plaintiffs' Statement of Undisputed Facts, Dkt. 48-2 ("PSUF"), ¶ 5. Mason most recently enrolled as a student at LACC in the Spring 2016 semester and, as of October 11, 2017, intended to return to LACC in the spring of 2018. PSUF ¶ 6. LACC recognizes Payan and Mason as students with disabilities eligible for services through the LACC Office of Special Services ("OSS"), whose goal [*4]  is to promote "educational equality for students with disabilities by facilitating equal access to educational programs, services, and campus activities." PSUF ¶ 7.
The NFB was founded in 1940 and is the largest organization of blind people in the United States. PSUF ¶ 8. The NFB and the NFBCA provide support for blind people and their families in a variety of ways, including through public education about blindness, information and referral services, and adaptive equipment. PSUF ¶ 9.

B. LACCD's Accessibility Guidelines and Provisions2
In 2000, the Chancellor's Office of all California Community Colleges issued Guidelines for Producing Instructional and Other Printed Materials in Alternate Media for Persons with Disabilities (the "Chancellor's Guidelines"). PSUF ¶ 11; Declaration of Joseph B. Espo, Dkt. 48-4 ("Espo Decl."), Ex. A-17 (the Chancellor's Guidelines). These guidelines addressed access requirements for students with sensory disabilities and advised LACCD and other community colleges that Title II and Section 504 require that community colleges "take appropriate steps to ensure that communications with persons with disabilities are as effective as communications with others." PSUF ¶ 12. [*5]  The guidelines also stated that "the three basic components of effective communication include: timeliness of delivery, accuracy, and provision in a manner and medium appropriate to the significance of the message and the abilities of the individual with the disability." PSUF ¶ 13.
Each of the nine college campuses within LACCD maintains a Disabled Students Program and Services office, which, for LACC, is OSS. OSS provides support and assistance to students who have any sort of disability, challenge, or other need for assistance. Defendant's Additional Undisputed Material Facts, Dkt. 54-1 ("DSUF"), ¶ 2. OSS employs disability specialists, two counselors, over ten staff members, and student workers and graduate students to assist students with disabilities. DSUF ¶ 3. Disabled students at LACC can receive a brief orientation about OSS, assistance in completing an OSS application, and an appointment with a counselor. DSUF ¶ 4. If OSS determines that a student needs a reasonable accommodation, OSS can provide an accommodations form for the student to provide to his professor, which outlines reasonable accommodations for the student based on the student's particular disability. DSUF ¶¶ 2, [*6]  5-6. OSS can also convert textbooks, web pages, and other documents to an accessible format for disabled students. DSUF ¶¶ 7, 12, 14. Furthermore, LACC has a computer lab otherwise known as the High Tech Center, featuring numerous assistive technologies, software, and hardware for disabled students, including Job Access to Speech ("JAWS"), a screen reader software. DSUF ¶¶ 19, 23. Screen readers, including JAWS, are software applications that convey to a blind person what sighted people see on a screen, often using "text-to-speech" functionality via an audio narration of words that appear on-screen. PSUF ¶ 55. The High Tech Center provides training for JAWS in its computer lab as well. DSUF ¶ 22. The High Tech Center also has a help desk, where students can request assistance with these programs or request additional technology unavailable in a different department. DSUF ¶ 25.
LACC also developed an "Alternate Media Production Policy," which states: "The Dean of Educational Technology will review all instructional equipment purchase requisitions and contract requests to ensure compliance with federal and state regulations regarding the purchasing and leasing of instructional materials." [*7] 3 PSUF ¶ 17. Each of LACC's written contracts with software providers includes language requiring that the software meet ADA compliance standards. DSUF ¶ 52.
If a student with disabilities disagrees with an accommodation or requests an accommodation that was not provided by OSS, the student must address the matter with the dean of OSS or LACC's ADA Coordinator. DSUF ¶ 66. If no satisfactory solution is reached, the student can follow up with a senior administrator on campus, and then with the district coordinator that oversees the disabled students' program and the policies, regulations, and accommodations for students. DSUF ¶¶ 66-67.

C. Plaintiff Payan's Experiences at LACC
In 2013 and 2014, Payan took courses at the Braille Institute, located adjacent to LACC, to learn to type, read Braille, and use JAWS. PSUF ¶ 53; DSUF ¶ 27. At the start of the Fall 2015 semester, Payan enrolled in classes at LACC and signed a Student Education Contract and Authorized Accommodations form from OSS for the 2015-2016 academic year. See Espo Decl. Ex. A-6 (Payan's accommodations form). The accommodations form was counter-signed by Robert Dominick, an academic counselor at OSS. See id. at 2. The accommodations [*8]  form provided that Payan was educationally limited regarding his sight and required tape recorded lectures, front area seating, and "etext" availability in the classroom. Id. at 1. For test taking, Payan's accommodations form allowed for twice the normal time for taking tests, enabled Payan to take tests in a "distraction reduced setting," and allowed him to use e-text or, alternatively, an aide or proctor to read him the test and scribe his answers. Id. The form also noted that Payan would receive priority registration for classes. Id. at 2. By signing the form, Payan agreed that the approved accommodations as outlined in the form "are reasonable for certain classes or educational settings at LACC" and confirmed Payan's right to file an appeal through the college's formal grievance process in the event that Payan and OSS cannot reach an agreement about particular accommodations. Id. at 2.
For the Fall 2015 semester, Payan signed up for French I and Philosophy I. PSUF ¶ 54. In Philosophy I, Payan asked his professor several times if he could provide quizzes or homework assignments handed out in class in a digitized format so that Payan could access the material. Espo Decl. Ex. A-2 (Deposition of Roy Payan), [*9]  at 134:20-135:12. Payan's professor refused to do so, noting that it was against the professor's policy. PSUF ¶ 56; Espo Decl. Ex. A-2, at 134:11-12. Without digital copies of these materials, Payan could not follow along in class like his sighted peers, who could read the words on the paper without accommodations. PSUF ¶ 56.
During the Winter 2016 semester, Payan took a noncredit algebra refresher course, and in the Spring 2016 semester he enrolled in Math 124A (Intermediate Algebra A). PSUF ¶ 57. The section of Math 124A in which Payan enrolled required students to use a software program, MyMathLab, that was not fully accessible with JAWS, preventing Payan from completing homework and understanding educational videos, extra credit assignments, practice tests, and tests. PSUF ¶ 58.
Plaintiffs' expert witness Peter Bossley, an expert in accessibility technology at Ohio State University, reviewed MyMathLab and corroborated that the software is incompatible with JAWS. See Declaration of Peter Bossley, Dkt. 48-35 ("Bossley Decl."), ¶¶ 1-6. Mr. Bossley noted issues with the "landmarking" and headers of the Pearson homepage,4 features on which screen readers rely to inform users of the layout [*10]  of the main content of the website and direct users to the appropriate navigation or search tools. See Bossley Decl. Ex. C-2 (Expert Report of Peter Bossley), at 10. Mr. Bossley further discovered that screen reader users are unable to access the link on the sign-in page to confirm their sign-in credentials if they forget. Id. at 11-12. Mr. Bossley continued to encounter issues using the screen reader software once the user was logged in to the Pearson system, making it difficult for students to know how to get to the desired location within the system or when they have already navigated to a new page. Id. at 12-14. In the MyMathLab program specifically, Mr. Bossley found that screen reader users are given no notice when they navigate successfully to a new page in the program or when they select a button or link to trigger an action on the page. Id. at 14-15. These similar problems persist when users try to access videos posted on MyMathLab or complete assignments on the program. Mr. Bossley observed that links available to be selected, or fields used for entering solutions to math problems, are not accompanied by descriptive text to notify the user as to the purpose of the link or field. Id. at 15-20. Screen reader users also had [*11]  limited control over the functionality of video recordings and little to no access to important features such as the graphing tool embedded in the software. Id. at 16-17, 19.
Payan reported his inability to use MyMathLab to his professor and OSS office staff, including Mr. Ryan Kushner, who specializes in helping students with technology. PSUF ¶ 59. When Mr. Kushner tried to help Payan use MyMathLab with JAWS, he ultimately concluded that "the system just didn't work." PSUF ¶ 110; Espo Decl., Ex. A-9 (Deposition of Ryan Kushner), at 45:16-46:11. Payan states that he was offered no remedy to make the MyMathLab program accessible. PSUF ¶ 59. Mr. Kushner discussed the matter with Payan's math professor, and both determined that it would be better to assign problems to Payan from the course textbook, outside of the MyMathLab program. DSUF ¶ 78; Espo Decl. Ex. A-9, at 48:1-16.
Payan also reported MyMathLab's inaccessibility to the chair of the Math Department at LACC, Dr. Kian Kaviani, who suggested that Payan switch to a section of Math 124A that did not use the MyMathLab program. PSUF ¶ 62; DSUF ¶ 76. Mr. Dominick corroborated that it was possible that blind students at LACC are steered away from sections [*12]  of a class where a professor uses inaccessible technology to a section where the professor does not use that technology. PSUF ¶ 63; Espo Decl. Ex. A-15 (Rule 30(b)(6) Deposition of Robert Dominick), at 33:12-17. Payan also told Dr. Kaviani that other blind students had voiced the same concerns about MyMathLab. PSUF ¶ 64; Espo Decl. Ex. A-2, at 83:3-16. Several blind students had separately made a complaint about the inaccessibility of math software to Mr. Kushner, their professors, or others at OSS in the past. PSUF ¶ 65; Espo Decl. Ex. A-9, at 48:17-21; see also Declaration of Stephen Cargill, Dkt. 57-25 ("Cargill Decl."), ¶¶ 4-6 (complaints from blind student to math professors and OSS about math software); Declaration of Virginia Romero, Dkt. 57-26 ("Romero Decl."), ¶¶ 4, 6 (complaint to math professors, notetakers, and OSS about MyMathLab). After Payan complained to Dr. Kaviani about not being able to use MyMathLab, Dr. Kaviani contacted Pearson, the publisher of the software, and asked what the plans were, if any, to make the software compatible for blind students. The publisher's representative informed Kaviani that the publisher was "working on it." DSUF ¶ 75.
Following Payan's complaint, [*13]  LACC's Liaison for Disabled Students took steps to verify that Payan's math professor was administering only accessible math problems to students, and after his investigation, the liaison determined that the inaccessibility of MyMathLab was a "technology issue." DSUF ¶¶ 78, 80-81. Ultimately, Payan sought to have OSS digitize the textbook used for Math 124A, but OSS could only digitize chapters at a time at a slower pace than the class progressed. See Espo Decl., Ex. A-2, at 73:24-75:23. As a result, Payan states that he fell behind in class even when using the textbook in lieu of MyMathLab. Id. at 75:8-11.
In the Fall 2016 semester, Payan took Math 124B (Intermediate Algebra B). PSUF ¶ 67. The Math 124B course did not require the use of software, but it did use the same textbook. Espo Decl. Ex. A-2, at 94:20-25. Payan states that he continued to have difficulty with the textbook, especially in light of the greater quantity of graphical materials not easily translatable via screen reader software once in digital form. PSUF ¶ 68; Espo Decl. Ex. A-2, at 95:1-22. Payan states that Mr. Dominick and other individuals at OSS told Payan that he would not be provided with a notetaker—an individual [*14]  who assists students with disabilities by taking notes in class on their behalf and provides the notes in an accessible format—and instead Payan used his in-home support services worker at school to assist him with Math 124B. Espo Decl. Ex. A-2, at 43:24-44:4, 100:6-22.
Payan also enrolled in General Psychology during that same Fall 2016 semester. PSUF ¶ 73. His psychology professor used a software program, Etudes, that Payan states was inaccessible to him because it was incompatible with JAWS. PSUF ¶ 74. Sighted students in the class participated in online forums through Etudes, where they discussed homework and other course materials, but Payan asserts that he was unable to partake in such learning opportunities because of the program's inaccessibility. PSUF ¶ 76; Espo Decl. Ex. A-2, at 212:1-12. Payan informed his professor that he had difficulty using Etudes, so his psychology professor downloaded the assignments posted to Etudes and emailed them to Payan. PSUF ¶ 75. Payan then submitted his assignments to his professor directly using Microsoft Word, a program that was compatible with Payan's screen reader. Espo Decl. Ex. A-2, at 210:5-11.
Mr. Bossley reviewed the functionality of [*15]  Etudes and confirmed the existence of accessibility issues for screen reader users. Bossley Decl. Ex. C-2, at 20-21. Specifically, Mr. Bossley identified illogical or inconsistent ordering of landmarks or features on certain pages that made it difficult for screen reader users to navigate to their desired location. Id. at 20. Mr. Bossley also found repeated failures of the website to notify the user when their action or navigation on a page was successful. Id. at 20-21. Users also had difficulties accessing the messages system in the program due to deficiencies in notifying the user of certain actions and the lack of descriptive explanations for entry fields used for composing messages. Id. at 21.
Payan also notes that, since the spring of 2017, he has encountered difficulties navigating the LACC website while using JAWS. PSUF ¶ 77. Mr. Bossley independently assessed the LACC website and identified numerous compatibility issues with screen reader software. Bossley Decl. Ex. C-2, at 4-10. Mr. Bossley noted that the PeopleSoft program—a student information system used throughout the district that allows students to access materials regarding their enrollment at LACC—exhibited deficiencies in heading and landmark structure [*16]  that prevents screen reader users from understanding the layout of the website's pages. Id. at 4-5. As with MyMathLab and Etudes, Mr. Bossley observed a failure to notify the user when an action has been completed on numerous different pages, and some links that appeared on the page were not accessible to screen readers at all. Id. at 5. Mr. Bossley found searching for classes on PeopleSoft difficult because no descriptive text existed that explained the function of the various search fields, the table format of the class search results prevented screen readers from comparing course information, and the interface used for selecting a class subject was wholly inaccessible to screen reader users. Id. at 6-8. The LACC website itself also exhibited a poor page structure and navigational feedback, making it difficult for a screen reader user to understand the purpose of the webpage he or she was viewing. Id. at 8-10.
Because of the accessibility issues identified above, Payan has been unable to independently locate and download his transcript or register for classes through the PeopleSoft program on the website. PSUF ¶ 78. However, Plaintiffs do not allege that Payan ever notified anyone at LACC of the inaccessibility of PeopleSoft [*17]  or the LACC website.

D. Plaintiff Mason's Experiences at LACC
Mason, a high school graduate in 1988, attended LACC for a short time in 2002 and thereafter returned to LACC in 2015. PSUF ¶ 80; Espo Decl. Ex. A-4 (Deposition of Portia Mason), at 8:4-18. On July 21, 2015, Mason signed an Application for Services form provided by OSS for the 2015-2016 academic year. See Espo Decl. Ex. A-7 (Mason's accommodations form). The application noted that Mason's disability was "total blindness" and that she required accommodation services including test reading, notetakers, and braille services. Id. at 1. By signing the application, Mason certified that she would update the application each semester and would meet with an academic counselor each semester to update her educational plan and academic accommodations. Id. at 3. Mason also acknowledged that she could be suspended from services at OSS if she fails to comply with the rules for OSS resources, including a 48-hour notice of cancelling a service or appointment. Id. Mr. Dominick counter-signed the form on August 6, 2015, noting that Mason was approved for the OSS program and services and confirming her disability as "primary" and "visual." Id. at 4.
When assisting Mason [*18]  with the Application for Services, Mr. Dominick informed Mason that OSS did not provide notetakers and instead only offered to loan digital records to students who needed notetaking assistance in class. PSUF ¶ 81; Espo Decl. Ex. A-4, at 60:12-18, 61:9-17. LACC did not provide Mason with a notetaker at any time while Mason was enrolled as a student. PSUF ¶ 81.
During her two semesters at LACC, Mason often received handouts during class sessions that the instructors would use during class as part of the learning material. PSUF ¶ 82. However, Mason could not read the handouts given to her in class because she was blind, and she never received the handouts in advance of class, which would give her the opportunity to convert them to an accessible format that would allow her to follow along in class. Id. Instead, Mason would only be able to convert the handouts after the class period ended, at a time when the teaching opportunity has passed.
In the Spring 2016 semester, Mason enrolled in three classes, including Introduction to Psychology with Dr. April Pavlik and Abnormal Psychology with Professor Blythe Daniel. PSUF ¶ 83. Professor Daniel required the use of a handbook she had created for [*19]  her course, but OSS did not have a digitally accessible copy of the handbook. PSUF ¶ 89; Espo Decl. Ex. A-4, at 48:15-20, 116:7-9. However, Mason states that she had a copy of the handbook on a digital audio player, which she could use at home to read the material. Espo Decl. Ex. A-4, at 116:10-14. Even though Mason could access the material at home using her audio player, Mason did not know what material would be discussed for any given class session, because Professor Daniel did not inform the class ahead of time which pages of the handbook they would use in the upcoming class session. PSUF ¶ 90. Mason's audio player would not help her participate in class, since using the audio player in class to listen to the relevant portions of the handbook would prevent her from simultaneously listening to her instructor and her peers discuss the material. Thus, without prior notice of what portions of the handbook would be discussed in class, Mason states that she could not follow along with the handbook in class. See id. However, LACCD notes that during the class sessions Professor Daniel would read aloud the parts of the handbook being discussed. DSUF ¶¶ 72, 74. Mason also testified at her [*20]  deposition that she never asked Professor Daniel to clarify what she was writing on the board in the event that Mason could not hear Professor Daniel's explanation clearly. Espo Decl. Ex. A-4, at 65:24-66:18.
Similarly, Dr. Pavlik used PowerPoint presentations in almost every class session of Introduction to Psychology. PSUF ¶ 91. Mason was unable to download and convert Dr. Pavlik's PowerPoint slides into a format accessible through JAWS because of issues with the formatting of the digital version of the slides. PSUF ¶ 92; Espo Decl. Ex. A-4, at 126:12-127:11. Mason testified in her deposition that she never told anyone at LACC about the difficulty downloading Dr. Pavlik's slides. Espo Decl. Ex. A-4, at 127:12-18. Dr. Pavlik testified in her deposition that she took steps to make her PowerPoint presentations and class handouts more accessible for blind students, including by using "alt text"—which adds a text description of a picture used on a slide when viewing the digital version of the document—and by giving blind students the option to have Dr. Pavlik or another student describe the handouts in detail during class. Declaration of Bruce Cleeland, Dkt. 54-2, Ex. 12 (Deposition of [*21]  Dr. April Pavlik), at 84:9-13, 91:25-92:9.
Mason attempted to access the LACC website in the summer of 2017 to review the courses offered and possibly register for classes. PSUF ¶ 93. She was unable to search for particular classes on PeopleSoft using the JAWS program, likely for the same reasons as Mr. Bossley identified in his report as articulated above. PSUF ¶ 95. However, as with Payan, Plaintiffs do not allege that Mason ever notified the school about the inaccessibility of PeopleSoft or the LACC website.

E. Expert Reports
Plaintiffs' expert witnesses describe LACC's policies and procedures, and the software programs employed by LACC on campus, to elucidate the obstacles blind students encounter during their enrollment. As described previously in this section, Plaintiffs' expert Mr. Bossley reviewed MyMathLab, Etudes, PeopleSoft, and LACC's website, concluding that these technologies prevent significant accessibility barriers to blind students using screen reader software. See Bossley Decl. Ex. C-2 (Peter Bossley Expert Report), at 25-26. However, Mr. Bossley does not identify screen reader programs other than JAWS that would remedy the problems he identified in the above software programs. Neither does he identify [*22]  alternative software programs LACCD could have used instead of MyMathLab, PeopleSoft, or Etudes that would have been fully compatible with JAWS and would have provided the same benefits to students.
Dr. Jon Gunderson, Plaintiffs' other expert witness, is an expert in accessibility at the University of Illinois. Declaration of Jon Gunderson, Dkt. 48-32 ("Gunderson Decl."), ¶¶ 1-6. Dr. Gunderson reviewed deposition transcripts, LACC administrative regulations, and other materials regarding LACC's policies and procedures for accommodating students with disabilities such as Plaintiffs. Gunderson Decl. ¶ 7. Dr. Gunderson concluded that LACC lacked the requisite policies, procedures, and training protocol to ensure that blind students are given the same opportunities as other students. Gunderson Decl. Ex. B-2 (Expert Report of Dr. Jon Gunderson), at 3. In his expert opinion, Dr. Gunderson expressed that blind students should receive accessible versions of class materials "at the same time, or in many cases before, sighted students receive them so blind students can be equally prepared to participate in classroom discussions or ask questions during class lectures." Id. Dr. Gunderson concluded [*23]  that LACC instructors are not adequately trained to fulfill their responsibilities owed to blind students, including by providing accessible versions of class materials to blind students in a timely manner and by describing what they write on the board in the classroom to blind students. Id. at 3-4. Dr. Gunderson also criticized LACCD for the absence of clear written policies or procedures governing how faculty must provide blind students with accessible materials. Id. at 4. In Dr. Gunderson's view, it is ineffective to make blind students bear the burden to obtain accessible versions of class materials on their own initiative. Id.
Regarding accessibility barriers to software programs, Dr. Gunderson reiterated that LACCD's reliance on a complaint-driven approach is insufficient because it places the onus on blind students to determine in the first instance whether they can access the entirety of the software, something that can be difficult for the student to determine if the technology is only partially accessible. Id. at 5. Because blind students are not suitably equipped to know when to seek assistance with technology over the duration of a semester-long course, blind students often are unable to obtain a [*24]  suitable accommodation in a timely manner. Id. Dr. Gunderson was particularly wary of LACCD's use of MyMathLab without ensuring that blind students were capably trained to use the program, and Dr. Gunderson noted that it was "unlikely" that OSS staff was familiar with the technology to be able to assist blind students if any issues arose. Id. at 7-8. Dr. Gunderson concluded his expert report with fifteen recommendations for policies, procedures, and training that LACCD should implement in order to satisfy its legal obligations owed to blind students. Id. at 9-11.
LACCD's expert witness, Gaeir Dietrich, is the director of the High Tech Center Training Unit, which provides support to 114 community colleges in California regarding technological accommodations for students with disabilities. PSUF ¶¶ 46-48; Espo Decl. Ex. A-28 (Deposition of Gaeir Dietrich), at 9:13-25. Ms. Dietrich testified about the policies and procedures applicable to accommodations for blind students and the extent to which those policies and procedures are implemented on college campuses. Ms. Dietrich stated that merely having policies guiding administrative action "do[es] not tend to have much of an effect" in the absence of concrete [*25]  procedures to effectuate those policies. Espo Decl. Ex. A-28, at 28:3-23. Regarding LACCD specifically, Ms. Dietrich reviewed policy documents addressing accessibility for disabled students but she "didn't see anything at the level of actual workflow daily procedures." Id. at 28:24-29:5. Ms. Dietrich confirmed that accessibility of technology is a campus-wide responsibility that cannot be delegated to an office of disability services to respond to requests from disabled students on an ad hoc basis, which actually may become more expensive for the university. Id. at 57:10-58:3, 118:2-21. Most notably, Ms. Dietrich reviewed the expert reports of Mr. Bossley and Dr. Gunderson and stated that she did not have any disagreements with anything in their reports. Id. at 69:18-70:3.5

II. Standard of Review
Summary judgment should be granted where "the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). The moving party "bears the initial responsibility of informing the district court of the basis for its motion, and identifying those portions of . . . [the factual record that] demonstrate the absence [*26]  of a genuine issue of material fact." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). Once the moving party satisfies its initial burden, the non-moving party must demonstrate with admissible evidence that genuine issues of material fact exist. Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 585-86, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986).
A material fact for purposes of summary judgment is one that "might affect the outcome of the suit" under the applicable law. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). A genuine issue of material fact exists where "the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party." Id. The Court must accept as true the evidence offered by the non-movant and must draw all inferences from the facts in the non-movant's favor. Id. at 255.

III. Legal Standards

A. Title II of the ADA
Title II of the ADA provides that "no qualified individual with a disability shall, by reason of such disability, be excluded from participation in or be denied the benefits of the services, programs, or activities of a public entity, or be subjected to discrimination by any such entity." 42 U.S.C. § 12132. To prove a violation of Title II, a plaintiff must show that: (1) the plaintiff "is a qualified individual with a disability"; (2) the plaintiff "was either excluded from participation in or denied the benefits of a public entity's services, programs, or [*27]  activities, or was otherwise discriminated against by the public entity"; and (3) "such exclusion, denial of benefits, or discrimination was by reason of [the plaintiff's] disability." Duvall v. County of Kitsap, 260 F.3d 1124, 1135 (9th Cir. 2001) (citation and quotation marks omitted). In the context of Title II, "[d]iscrimination includes a failure to reasonably accommodate a person's disability." Sheehan v. City and County of San Francisco, 743 F.3d 1211, 1231 (9th Cir. 2014), rev'd in part on other grounds, 135 S. Ct. 1765, 191 L. Ed. 2d 856 (2015); see also Henrietta D. v. Bloomberg, 331 F.3d 261, 273 n. 7 (2d Cir. 2003) (noting that the definition of "discrimination" in Title I, which includes the failure to make reasonable "accommodations," 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A), applies equally to Title II).
Title II directed the DOJ to promulgate regulations to implement its provisions. 42 U.S.C. § 12134(a). The second element necessary to prove a Title II violation—the "discrimination" requirement—is the source of a significant number of regulations. The regulations specifically provide that a "public entity shall make reasonable modifications in policies, practices, or procedures when the modifications are necessary to avoid discrimination on the basis of disability, unless the public entity can demonstrate that making the modifications would fundamentally alter the nature of the service, program, or activity." 28 C.F.R. § 35.130(b)(7)(i).
The actions required of public entities to avoid discriminating [*28]  against a person with a disability—or, to put it another way, to reasonably accommodate a person with a disability—are described in the regulations. First, the regulations require that a public entity "take appropriate steps to ensure that communications with . . . participants . . . are as effective as communications with others." 28 C.F.R. § 35.160(a)(1). "In order to be effective, auxiliary aids and services must be provided [by the public entity] in accessible formats, in a timely manner, and in such a way as to protect the privacy and independence of the individual with a disability." 28 C.F.R. § 35.160(b)(2). Second, the regulations require that a public entity "furnish appropriate auxiliary aids and services where necessary to afford individuals with disabilities . . . an equal opportunity to participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, a service, program, or activity of a public entity." 28 C.F.R. § 35.160(b)(1). Notably, as defined in 28 C.F.R. § 35.104, "screen reader software" is a type of auxiliary aid under Title II.
Title II's emphasis on "program access" as a whole necessitates that "a public entity's programs and services, viewed in their entirety, must be equally accessible to disabled persons." Cohen v. City of Culver City, 754 F.3d 690, 695 (9th Cir. 2014). Determining the reasonableness of accommodations under the [*29]  dual prongs of effective communications and equal opportunity "depends on the individual circumstances of each case" and requires a "fact-specific, individualized analysis of the disabled individual's circumstances and the accommodations that might allow him to meet the program's standards." Vinson v. Thomas, 288 F.3d 1145, 1154 (9th Cir. 2002) (quoting Wong v. Regents of the Univ. of Cal., 192 F.3d 807, 818 (9th Cir. 1999)).
In addition, in order for a public entity to face an affirmative obligation to "furnish appropriate auxiliary aids and services . . . to afford individuals with disabilities . . . an equal opportunity," the aids and services must be "necessary." 28 C.F.R. § 35.160(b)(1). That is, this provision limits a public entity's obligation to furnish auxiliary aids to contexts where "necessary" to afford equal opportunity. The type of auxiliary aid or service "necessary" to ensure effective communication and equal opportunity "will vary in accordance with . . . the context in which the communication is taking place." 28 C.F.R. § 35.160(b)(2). Furthermore, "[i]n determining what types of auxiliary aids and services are necessary, a public entity shall give primary consideration to the requests of individuals with disabilities." Id.
The analysis does not end with a finding that a public agency failed to afford disabled persons equal access to [*30]  its services—a violation under the ADA does not exist if the accommodations requested by the disabled individual are not feasible. The Title II regulations provide that a public entity need not "take any action that it can demonstrate would result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of a service, program, or activity or in undue financial and administrative burdens." 28 C.F.R. § 35.164. While the plaintiff bears the burden to establish a prima facie case of discrimination, the public entity bears the evidentiary burden to prove that the requested accommodations
would result in undue burden or fundamental alteration, and the decision "must be made by the head of the public entity or his or her designee after considering all resources available for use in the funding and operation of the service, program, or activity and must be accompanied by a written statement of the reasons for reaching that conclusion."
K.M. ex rel. Bright v. Tustin Unified Sch. Dist., 725 F.3d 1088, 1096-97 (9th Cir. 2013) (quoting 28 C.F.R. § 35.164). The public entity must "take any other action that would not result in such an alteration or such burdens but would nevertheless ensure that, to the maximum extent possible, individuals with disabilities receive the benefits or services provided by the public entity." 28 C.F.R. § 35.164. Thus, even [*31]  if a disabled individual's requested accommodation is not feasible, the public entity must still take any actions to establish equality, or as close thereto as possible, between disabled and non-disabled individuals using the public entity's services.
In sum, "Title II and its implementing regulations, taken together, require public entities to take steps towards making existing services not just accessible, but equally accessible to people with communication disabilities, but only insofar as doing so does not pose an undue burden or require a fundamental alteration of their programs." Tustin, 725 F.3d at 1097.
The Ninth Circuit has recognized that the DOJ's Title II-implementing regulations are afforded due deference under Chevron, U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837, 104 S. Ct. 2778, 81 L. Ed. 2d 694 (1984). Tustin, 725 F.3d at 1096. Indeed, the regulations "should be given controlling weight unless they are arbitrary, capricious, or manifestly contrary to the statute." Id. (quoting Armstrong v. Schwarzenegger, 622 F.3d 1058, 1065 (9th Cir. 2010)).

B. Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, 29 U.S.C. § 794, "bars the exclusion of individuals with disabilities from any program or activity receiving federal funds." Tustin, 725 F.3d at 1098. To prove a violation of Section 504, a plaintiff must establish the same three elements as an ADA claim outlined above—namely, that (1) a qualified individual with a disability [*32]  (2) was excluded from public services or was otherwise discriminated against by a public entity (3) by reason of his or her disability—and, in addition, show that the public program at issue receives federal financial assistance. Lovell v. Chandler, 303 F.3d 1039, 1052 (9th Cir. 2002); see also Weinreich v. L.A. Cty. Metro. Transp. Auth., 114 F.3d 976, 978 (9th Cir. 1997). With respect to the element requiring discrimination against a plaintiff by reason of his disability, under Section 504 the plaintiff must additionally show that he was discriminated against "solely" by reason of his disability. 29 U.S.C. § 794(a).
The Supreme Court has interpreted Section 504 to require that a recipient of federal financial assistance provide "meaningful access" to its programs and benefits to individuals with disabilities. Alexander v. Choate, 469 U.S. 287, 301, 105 S. Ct. 712, 83 L. Ed. 2d 661 (1985). As the Court noted in Choate, "an otherwise qualified handicapped individual must be provided with meaningful access to the benefit that the grantee offers. The benefit itself . . . cannot be defined in a way that effectively denies otherwise qualified handicapped individuals the meaningful access to which they are entitled . . . ." Id.
Like Title II, Section 504 requires that the head of any relevant government agency "promulgate such regulations as may be necessary" to carry out the requirements under Section 504. 29 U.S.C. § 794(a). When Congress "explicitly delegate[s] authority to [*33]  construe [a] statute by regulation . . . [courts] must give the regulations legislative and hence controlling weight unless they are arbitrary, capricious, or plainly contrary to the statute." United States v. Morton, 467 U.S. 822, 834, 104 S. Ct. 2769, 81 L. Ed. 2d 680 (1984). The Section 504 regulations thus receive the same judicial deference as the Title II regulations.
The relevant Section 504 regulations require that a public program receiving federal financial assistance "[a]fford a qualified handicapped person an opportunity to participate in or benefit from . . . aid, benefit, or service that is . . . equal to that afforded others" and "[p]rovide a qualified handicapped person with an aid, benefit, or service that is . . . as effective as that provided to others." 34 C.F.R. § 104.4(b)(1)(ii)-(iii). The regulations were established to guarantee "equal opportunity to obtain the same result [for handicapped and nonhandicapped persons] . . . in the most integrated setting appropriate to the person's needs." 34 C.F.R. § 104.4(b)(2).
Specifically, regulations implementing Section 504 prohibit postsecondary education facilities, such as LACC, from "exclud[ing] any qualified handicapped student from any course, course of study, or other part of its education program or activity." 34 C.F.R. § 104.43(c). Even where a college or university offers educational programs or activities [*34]  that are not operated wholly by the school itself, the school is obligated to ensure "that the other education program or activity, as a whole, provides an equal opportunity for the participation of qualified handicapped persons." Id. § 104.43(b). Additionally, colleges and universities are directed to operate its educational programs "in the most integrated setting appropriate." Id. § 104.43(d).
To meet these standards, colleges and universities "shall make such modifications to its academic requirements as are necessary" to avoid discrimination against handicapped students. Id. § 104.44(a). As relevant to Plaintiffs here, necessary modifications may include the "adaptation of the manner in which specific courses are conducted," id., or the provision of educational auxiliary aids, id. § 104.44(d). However, a college does not need to make reasonable modifications for handicapped students regarding "[a]cademic requirements that the recipient can demonstrate are essential to the instruction being pursued by such student." Id. § 104.44(a).
The text of the Section 504 regulations cited above reveals that Choate's "meaningful access" requirement is coextensive with the concepts of "effective communications" and "equal opportunity" under Title II. This conclusion [*35]  is bolstered by the fact that Choate itself at times seems to use the terms "meaningful" and "equal" interchangeably. See, e.g., Choate, 469 U.S. at 306 ("Because the handicapped have meaningful and equal access . . ."). Furthermore, the Court in Choate noted that, "to assure meaningful access, reasonable accommodations in the grantee's program or benefit may have to be made." Id. at 301 (emphasis added). The Court's reference to "reasonable accommodations" invokes the concepts of effective communications and equal opportunity under Title II.
The Ninth Circuit has also commented directly on the question of how to interpret Choate:
We have relied on Choate's construction of Section 504 in ADA Title II cases, and have held that to challenge a facially neutral government policy on the ground that it has a disparate impact on people with disabilities, the policy must have the effect of denying meaningful access to public services. See Crowder v. Kitagawa, 81 F.3d 1480, 1484 (9th Cir. 1996). As in Choate, in considering Title II's "meaningful access" requirement, we are guided by the relevant regulations interpreting Title II. See Duvall, 260 F.3d at 1136; accord Chisolm v. McManimon, 275 F.3d 315, 325-26 (3d Cir. 2001).
Tustin, 725 F.3d at 1102. The Ninth Circuit thus observed that the Court in Choate relied on the Title II regulations as a basis for recognizing a "meaningful access" requirement under Section 504. [*36]  Those Title II regulations, discussed above, impose the dual requirements of effective communication and equal opportunity. This Court follows the Ninth Circuit's analysis and considers the doctrines of effectiveness and equal opportunity to be constitutive of "meaningful access" under Section 504.
Lastly, and relevant by analogy to Plaintiffs, the D.C. Circuit has observed that:
[w]here the plaintiffs identify an obstacle that impedes their access to a government program or benefit, they likely have established that they lack meaningful access to the program or benefit. By contrast, where the plaintiffs seek to expand the substantive scope of a program or benefit, they likely seek a fundamental alteration to the existing program or benefit and have not been denied meaningful access. For instance, the physically impaired lack meaningful access where mass transit or public buildings do not provide wheelchair access . . . and deaf individuals lack meaningful access to government activities or programs without the provision of interpretive assistance.
Am. Council of the Blind v. Paulson, 525 F.3d 1256, 1268-69, 381 U.S. App. D.C. 162 (D.C. Cir. 2008) (emphasis added).

C. Close Relationship Between Title II and Section 504
The Ninth Circuit has noted on several occasions that there is a close relationship between [*37]  Section 504 and Title II. Indeed, "Congress used the earlier-enacted Section 504 as a model when drafting Title II." Tustin, 725 F.3d at 1098 (citing Duvall, 260 F.3d at 1135). The Ninth Circuit has observed that "there is no significant difference in the analysis of rights and obligations created by the two Acts," Vinson, 288 F.3d at 1152 n.7, other than the minor elemental distinctions discussed above.
The close relationship between the two Acts extends to their implementing regulations. Indeed, Congress mandated that the federal regulations implementing Title II be consistent with many of the regulations enforcing Section 504. Specifically, Congress required that the Title II regulations as to "program accessibility, existing facilities, and communications" be consistent with the Section 504 regulations codified at 28 C.F.R. § 39. 42 U.S.C. § 12134(b) (quotation marks omitted). Those Section 504 regulations mirror the Title II regulations discussed above in wording and in substance:
The agency shall take appropriate steps to ensure effective communication with . . . participants . . . [and] [t]he agency shall furnish appropriate auxiliary aids where necessary to afford a handicapped person an equal opportunity to participate in, and enjoy the benefits of, a program or activity conducted by the agency.
28 C.F.R. § 39.160(a)-(a)(1). This regulatory symmetry further explains [*38]  why the Title II and Section 504 analyses are so closely intertwined.

IV. Title II and Section 504 Liability
Based on the above legal standards, in order to be successful in their Title II and Section 504 claims, Plaintiffs must show that (1) Plaintiffs are qualified individuals with a disability; (2) for the Section 504 claim, LACCD was a recipient of federal financial assistance, (3) Plaintiffs were denied the benefits of LACCD's services, programs, or activities or were otherwise discriminated against by LACCD; and (4) the discrimination against Plaintiffs was by reason of their disability. See Duvall, 260 F.3d at 1135.
The parties do not contest that Plaintiffs have satisfied the first, second, and fourth elements listed above. It is undisputed that Plaintiffs are qualified individuals with a disability due to their visual impairment and their eligibility to enroll in classes at LACC. See 42 U.S.C. § 12131(2); id. §§ 12102(1), (2)(A); 29 U.S.C. §§ 705(9)(B), (20)(B). It is also undisputed that LACC is a public entity receiving federal financial assistance. And LACCD seems to concede that, if the Court found that Plaintiffs were discriminated against by LACCD, the discrimination would be by reason of Plaintiffs' disability. See Weinreich, 114 F.3d at 979 (noting that the nexus between discrimination and disability can be established by showing [*39]  that the burden imposed on the disabled individual was "based on the fact or perception that he has a disability"). Thus, the parties in their briefs focus primarily on the third element: whether Plaintiffs were discriminated against at LACCD.
In the context of Title II—and, by extension, Section 504—discrimination can be found where the public entity "fail[s] to reasonably accommodate a person's disability." Sheehan, 743 F.3d at 1231; see also 28 C.F.R. § 35.130(b)(7)(i). A plaintiff bringing a claim for failure to make reasonable accommodations6 must make a showing that (1) the plaintiff required an accommodation in order to enjoy meaningful access to the benefits of a public entity's program or services, (2) the public entity was on notice that the plaintiff required that accommodation but did not provide it, and (3) the accommodation was available and reasonable. See Mark H. v. Hamamoto, 620 F.3d 1090, 1097 (9th Cir. 2010).
An educational institution's obligations under the ADA include a "duty to make itself aware of the nature of the student's disability; to explore alternatives for accommodating the student; and to exercise professional judgment in deciding whether the modifications under consideration would give the student the opportunity to complete the program without fundamentally [*40]  or substantially modifying the school's standards." Wong, 192 F.3d at 817 (citation omitted). Thus, once a public entity receives "notification of [an individual's] disability and the desire for accommodation," it has an affirmative obligation to "engage in an interactive process to consider [the disabled individual's] requested accommodations." Vinson, 288 F.3d at 1154. This interactive process requires the public entity "to gather sufficient information from the disabled individual and qualified experts as needed to determine what accommodations are necessary." Mark H., 620 F.3d at 1098 (quoting Duvall, 260 F.3d at 1136). If the public entity fails to consider the accommodations through such an interactive process in good faith, the public entity may be liable "if a reasonable accommodation would have been possible." Vinson, 288 F.3d at 1154 (quotation marks omitted).
When bringing a failure to accommodate claim, a plaintiff bears "the initial burden of producing evidence that a reasonable accommodation was possible." Vinson, 288 F.3d at 1154 (citing Wong, 192 F.3d at 816-17); see also U.S. Airways, Inc. v. Barnett, 535 U.S. 391, 401-02, 122 S. Ct. 1516, 152 L. Ed. 2d 589 (2002) (endorsing circuit court opinions in the Title I employment context identifying a plaintiff's burden to "show that an 'accommodation' seems reasonable on its face").7 After the plaintiff satisfies this burden of production, "the burden shift[s] to the [public entity] [*41]  to produce rebuttal evidence that the requested accommodation was not reasonable." Vinson, 288 F.3d at 1154 (citing Wong, 192 F.3d at 817); see also 28 C.F.R. § 35.130(b)(7) (public entity not liable if it can show that the requested modifications "would fundamentally alter the nature of the service, program, or activity"); id. § 35.164 (public entity need not "take any action that it can demonstrate would result . . . in undue financial and administrative burdens").
The factual record established on summary judgment reveals that this is an atypical case when compared to the breadth of Ninth Circuit cases addressing a failure to accommodate in the Title II context. Generally, courts in precedent cases assume that, as part of a plaintiff's disability discrimination claim, the plaintiff requests a particular accommodation contemporaneously at the time the plaintiff puts the public entity on notice of the need for accommodation. See, e.g., Duvall, 260 F.3d at 1136-37 (plaintiff contemporaneously requested videotext display as a preferred accommodation for his hearing impairment and identified reasons why the accommodations offered by defendant were insufficient); Mark H., 620 F.3d at 1098 (public entity was on notice that plaintiff's children required autism-specific services based on a contemporaneous [*42]  report made to the entity by the children's psychologist). Here, Plaintiffs have shown that there was only one contemporaneous request for a particular accommodation—Payan requested that his Philosophy I professor provide Payan with digitized versions of handouts so that Payan could access them in class the same as his sighted classmates. Therefore, only a narrow portion of Plaintiffs' claims fits within the customary framework of failure to accommodate cases.
Nevertheless, the Ninth Circuit has affirmatively indicated that a public entity may be liable once it is on notice that accommodations are required, even if the disabled individual does not suggest what the proper accommodation might be. See Vinson, 288 F.3d at 1154 (noting the "mandatory obligation to engage in an informal interactive process" following a complaint of inaccessibility); Mark H., 620 F.3d at 1098; Wong, 192 F.3d at 817; see also 1 Americans with Disabilities: Practice and Compliance Manual § 1:247 (2015) ("[A] plaintiff's failure to expressly 'request' an accommodation is not fatal to a claim where the defendant otherwise had knowledge of an individual's disability and needs but took no action."). Accordingly, it is sufficient for Plaintiffs to identify what accommodations would be reasonable [*43]  during the litigation. See A.G. v. Paradise Valley Unified Sch. Dist. No. 69, 815 F.3d 1195, 1207 (9th Cir. 2016) (rejecting the district court's reasoning that the plaintiff's parents "never requested some of the services she later argued the school district should have provided" because the plaintiff's parents "did not have the expertise—nor the legal duty—to determine what accommodations" were available when providing notice to the school).
However, for many of the alleged deficiencies at LACC, Plaintiffs failed to provide any direct evidence of accommodations that exist to remedy Plaintiffs' lack of access, and Plaintiffs failed to argue before this Court that any such accommodations were "reasonable." Plaintiffs spend the majority of their motion pointing to the various barriers at LACC that prevented Plaintiffs from receiving equal access to the benefits of LACC's services as their peers, but Plaintiffs do not identify what steps LACCD could have and should have taken in response. There was no evidence submitted showing the existence of other screen reader programs that may have been compatible with the technology used in Plaintiffs' courses or on LACC's campus. Neither did Plaintiffs suggest that comparable learning programs could replace MyMathLab or Etudes without [*44]  any screen reader compatibility issues. Plaintiffs also do not specify any methods that could reasonably accommodate Plaintiffs' visual impairment regarding the use of handouts in class. And certainly, for all but one of the obstacles Plaintiffs encountered at LACC, Plaintiffs failed to put forward evidence in the record that they requested a particular accommodation at the time they notified LACC faculty of the need for further accommodation. The Court cannot tell what accommodations Plaintiffs seek the Court to find "reasonable" regarding Plaintiffs' purported lack of access to MyMathLab, Etudes, PeopleSoft, or in-class handouts.
It is evident that Plaintiffs misunderstood the applicable legal standards in arguing its motion for summary judgment. In the Title II context, it is not enough to establish disability discrimination simply by making factual arguments that a public entity failed to adhere to the applicable regulations. Although public entities are obligated to provide "equal opportunity" and "effective communication" to disabled individuals, a showing of discrimination on the basis of disability requires more. Plaintiffs have not put forward a viable argument that LACCD discriminated [*45]  against blind students by failing to make reasonable accommodations upon requests from blind students, because Plaintiffs have not even attempted to identify what reasonable accommodations existed to remedy blind students' lack of access. As noted above, Plaintiffs did not need to make requests for specific accommodations contemporaneously when notifying LACCD of their lack of access to certain course materials; it is enough for Plaintiffs to identify what the reasonable accommodation could be before this Court at the present time. But Plaintiffs plainly did not do so. The Court cannot speculate as to what accommodations would be sufficient to provide Plaintiffs with equal access for any of the accessibility barriers Plaintiffs identified at LACC, which would be required in order to find LACCD liable for failing to accommodate Plaintiffs' disability with respect to each barrier. Any such speculation by the Court would potentially deprive LACCD of the opportunity to respond to Plaintiffs' unmade assertions of what constitutes a reasonable accommodation.
Equally unclear is the arguments Plaintiffs purport to make regarding the extent of LACCD's notice of Plaintiffs' lack of access. As [*46]  it appears to the Court, Plaintiffs have produced undisputed evidence that Payan directly informed LACCD of his inability to access MyMathLab, and Payan specifically requested digital versions of class handouts from his Philosophy I professor. These direct reports would be sufficient to establish that LACCD had notice of Payan's need for further accommodations. There is no direct evidence regarding LACCD's knowledge of any other accessibility barriers Plaintiffs faced at LACC, and it is unclear on what basis Plaintiffs allege LACCD did have notice of these other barriers. Plaintiffs also have not argued what notice is sufficient to trigger obligations on the part of LACCD to engage in the appropriate "interactive process" to determine whether further accommodations are necessary. Vinson, 288 F.3d at 1154. Neither do Plaintiffs clearly argue that LACCD failed to engage in such an interactive process once LACCD was on notice of Plaintiffs' need for further accommodations regarding any of the identified barriers at the school, or whether LACCD failed to accommodate Plaintiffs even after investigating to determine whether Plaintiffs required further accommodations.
Lastly, even though Plaintiffs devote most of [*47]  their motion briefs to a discussion of the accessibility barriers Plaintiffs faced at LACC, Plaintiffs did not correctly argue that these barriers deprived Plaintiffs access to LACC's services or programs "in their entirety." Cohen, 754 F.3d at 695. The Court is inclined to agree with Plaintiffs that LACCD deprived Plaintiffs and other blind students meaningful access to important course materials in certain classes at LACC, but Plaintiffs have not clearly shown why the lack of access to these course materials prevents blind students from receiving equal access to the benefits of these courses as a whole.
Because the parties did not present arguments using the correct legal standard, the Court is reluctant to argue on the behalf of Plaintiffs for any of the above legal issues not addressed by Plaintiffs in their motion. Without any arguments from Plaintiffs that would support a finding of disability discrimination as a matter of law, the Court has no legal basis upon which to rule in favor of Plaintiffs on their motion. Therefore, Plaintiffs have not met their burden to show that they are entitled to summary judgment on the question of whether LACCD is liable under Title II or Section 504 for disability discrimination. [*48] 

V. Deliberate Indifference
In order to recover monetary damages under Title II or Section 504, individual plaintiffs must prove that the public entity intentionally discriminated against disabled individuals. Duvall, 260 F.3d at 1138 (citing Ferguson v. City of Phoenix, 157 F.3d 668, 674 (9th Cir. 1998)). In Duvall, the Ninth Circuit affirmatively adopted "deliberate indifference" as the standard for proving this intentional discrimination. 260 F.3d at 1138. To establish deliberate indifference, a plaintiff must show that (1) the defendant had "knowledge that a harm to a federally protected right is substantially likely," and (2) the defendant "fail[ed] to act upon that . . . likelihood." Id. at 1139. The first element of the deliberate indifference test—notice—is satisfied "[w]hen the plaintiff has alerted the public entity to his need for accommodation (or where the need for accommodation is obvious, or required by statute or regulation)." Duvall, 260 F.3d at 1139. The second element of deliberate indifference is satisfied where "the entity's failure to act [is] 'a result of conduct that is more than negligent, and involves an element of deliberateness.'" Updike v. Multnomah Cty., 870 F.3d 939, 951 (9th Cir. 2017) (quoting Duvall, 260 F.3d at 1139).
As set forth above, the Court cannot hold as a matter of law that LACCD was liable under Title II or Section 504 for disability discrimination by failing to make reasonable accommodations [*49]  for Plaintiffs. Without such a finding of liability for discrimination, the Court will not address the question of whether LACCD's conduct constituted intentional discrimination through deliberate difference. In any event, even if LACCD was liable for disability discrimination as a matter of law, the determination of whether LACCD was sufficiently culpable so that its conduct was "more than negligent" is generally not made on summary judgment, as it requires the trier of fact to weigh evidence and credibility of witnesses. Therefore, Plaintiffs are not entitled to summary judgment as to a determination of whether LACCD was deliberately indifferent.

VI. Conclusion
For the reasons mentioned above, the Court DENIES Plaintiffs' Motion for Partial Summary Judgment on all grounds.
Nevertheless, the Court is inclined to rule that, when applying the appropriate legal standards to the undisputed factual record, each of which has been thoroughly reviewed in this Order, there may exist grounds to grant summary judgment to Plaintiffs' to find LACCD liable under Title II and Section 504. Specifically, the Court would be inclined to rule at this time that LACCD failed to make reasonable accommodations for Payan's [*50]  visual impairment regarding Payan's inability to use MyMathLab and Payan's inability to access handouts during class sessions. The evidence presented to the Court indicates that LACCD had affirmative notice of Payan's lack of access to these course materials based on Payan's direct complaints to LACCD faculty. The Court also interprets the factual record as suggesting that a reasonable accommodation for Payan's disability regarding these obstacles would have been to provide Payan with an accessible version of the equivalent materials or assignments in a timely manner—i.e., before or at the same time as sighted students receive the same materials.
The Court deems it necessary to give Plaintiffs the opportunity to submit a renewed motion for summary judgment applying the correct legal standards. The parties will be limited to arguing only the issue of whether LACCD is liable under Title II and Section 504; the Court will not entertain further arguments regarding LACCD's deliberate indifference. Plaintiffs are advised to analyze, at a minimum, the following legal questions not previously addressed in the prior motion:
(1) whether Plaintiffs' lack of access to any course materials while at LACC deprived [*51]  Plaintiffs of the benefits of the courses in which they were enrolled, when viewing LACC's services "in their entirety";
(2) whether LACCD had notice of Plaintiffs' need for further accommodations for each of the accessibility barriers Plaintiffs identified at LACC;
(3) whether LACCD failed to engage in the appropriate investigation and interactive process required upon receiving a complaint from Plaintiffs about lack of access to course materials; and
(4) for each accessibility barrier, what reasonable accommodations exist that would give Plaintiffs the requisite level of access to their course materials.
The Court reiterates that, for Plaintiffs to be entitled to summary judgment, each of the above must be proven in an undisputed manner without any genuine disputes of fact that would preclude judgment as a matter of law at this stage in the litigation.
Plaintiffs may file a renewed motion for summary judgment using the correct legal framework in accordance with this Order on or before November 16, 2018. LACCD's opposition to Plaintiffs' renewed motion shall be due on or before November 30, 2018, and Plaintiffs' reply shall be due on or before December 7, 2018. The Court sets a hearing [*52]  on Plaintiffs' renewed summary judgment motion for December 17, 2018 at 1:30 p.m.
IT IS SO ORDERED.


End of Document

