Perez v. Fire Dep't of N.Y.
United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York
August 21, 2015, Decided; August 21, 2015, Filed
No. 12-CV-6172 (NGG) (RER)

Reporter
2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 175289 *
KIMBERLY A. PEREZ, Plaintiff, VERSUS FIRE DEPARTMENT OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK, Defendant.
Subsequent History: Adopted by, Summary judgment granted, in part, summary judgment denied, in part by Perez v. City of New York, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 8466 (E.D.N.Y., Jan. 21, 2016)
Counsel:  [*1] For Kimberly A. Perez, Plaintiff: Vincent P. White, LEAD ATTORNEY, The White Rose Group LLC, Jackson Heights, NY; Thomas Ricotta, White Ricotta & Marks, P.C., Jackson Heights, NY.
For City of New York, Defendant: Adam E Collyer, LEAD ATTORNEY, New York City Law Department, Office of the Corporation Counsel, New York, NY; Garrett Scott Kamen, LEAD ATTORNEY, Don Hanh Nguyen, New York City Law Department, New York, NY; Grace Diane Kim, LEAD ATTORNEY, Nukk-Freeman & Cerra, P.C., Chatham, NJ.
Judges: Ramon E. Reyes, Jr., United States Magistrate Judge.
Opinion by: Ramon E. Reyes, Jr.
Opinion



REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION
TO THE HONORABLE NICHOLAS G. GARAUFIS, SENIOR UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE:
Ramon E. Reyes, Jr., U.S.M.J.:
This is an action by plaintiff Kimberly A. Perez ("Plaintiff") against the Fire Department of the City of New York ("Defendant") pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. § 12112 ("ADA") and Rehabilitation Act, 29 U.S.C. § 794.1 Although not entirely clear from the complaint, Plaintiff alleges that she was discriminated and retaliated against when she was denied various transfers, and that Defendant failed to accommodate her disability. (See generally Dkt. No. 1 ("Compl").) Defendant has moved for summary judgment on all [*2]  claims. Your Honor referred the motion to me for a report and recommendation. For the reasons stated below, I respectfully recommend that the motion be granted in part and denied in part.

BACKGROUND2
Plaintiff was provisionally appointed to be an Emergency Medical Technician ("EMT") with the New York City Health and Hospital Corporation on April 3, 1995. (Def.'s 56.1 Stmt. ¶ 2; Pl.'s 56.1 Stmt. ¶ 2; Kim Decl., exh. D.) Effective March 17, 1996, Emergency Service personnel and functions were transferred to Defendant. (Def's 56.1 Stmt. ¶ 3; Kim Decl., exh. E) In 1997, Plaintiff injured her right wrist on-the-job carrying a patient. (Def's 56.1 Stmt. ¶ 4.) In March 2001, Defendant's Medical Board Committee concluded that Plaintiff "cannot do the full duty of an EMT since she cannot carry or lift." (Def.'s 56.1 Stmt. ¶ [*3]  5; Kim Decl., exh. F.) Effective May 8, 2001, Defendant granted Plaintiffs request for a reasonable accommodation by reassigning her to a position in the Ambulance Call Report Review Unit in Division 3. (Def.'s 56.1 Stmt. ¶ 6.) However, in April 2003, while working in the Ambulance Call Report Review Unit, Plaintiff injured her hand carrying office supplies. (Id. ¶ 7.) Effective November 19, 2003, Defendant granted Plaintiffs request for a reasonable accommodation following her 2003 injury. (Id. ¶ 8.) Plaintiff was interviewed and selected for an assignment in the Recruitment Initiatives and Diversity Unit as a recruiter. (Id.) With regards to this assignment she was advised that "the assignment is not permanent and is subject to the ongoing review of the needs of the department." (Id.; Kim Decl., exh. H.)
Plaintiff's assignment in the Recruitment Initiatives and Diversity Unit was eliminated on July 2, 2010 due to budget cuts. (Def.'s 56.1 Stmt. ¶ 9.) While the parties agree that Plaintiff subsequently was directed to report to the Bureau of Health Services ("BHS"), there is a dispute as to whether Plaintiff was directed to report for consideration for a position, as Defendant alleges, [*4]  or for reassignment on the orders of the Chief of EMS Command, as Plaintiff alleges. (Def.'s 56.1 Stmt. ¶ 9; Pl.'s 56.1 Stmt. ¶ 9.)
Further, there is a dispute as to the events surrounding Plaintiff's arrival at BHS. Defendant alleges that Plaintiff arrived at BHS before July 11, 2010, where she introduced herself to Lieutenant Steven Goldstein ("Lt. Goldstein"), but left before speaking with anyone about reassignment possibilities with BHS. (Def.'s 56.1 Stmt. ¶ 10.) Defendant further alleges that Lt. Goldstein did not know that Plaintiff was seeking a position with BHS, so he went to ask his supervisor, however Plaintiff left before Lt. Goldstein returned. (Id.) Plaintiff disputes Defendant's version of the events and adds that Plaintiff explained to Lt. Goldstein that she had an order reassigning her to BHS, but Lt. Goldstein alleged that he did not have the paperwork regarding this reassignment and no one would work in his unit without going through him first. (Pl.'s 56.1 Stmt. ¶ 10.)
It is undisputed that Plaintiff reported for duty at BHS on July 11, 2010. (Def.'s 56.1 Stmt. ¶ 11.) The parties dispute whether anyone at BHS was aware that Plaintiff was coming to work. (Id.; Pl.'s [*5]  56.1 Stmt. ¶ 11.) Nevertheless, Plaintiff was directed to take FDNY employees' blood pressure, but she aggravated her wrist injury while operating a blood pressure machine. (Def.'s 56.1 Stmt. ¶ 11.)
Plaintiff met with Lt. Goldstein the next day, July 12, 2010, however the parties dispute the events surrounding this meeting. Defendant characterizes the meeting as Plaintiff interviewing for a position as a "Heath Assessment Technician" ("HAT") within BHS and alleges that Plaintiff was not selected for this position for a number of reasons: 1) Plaintiff arrived forty minutes late for the interview; 2) Plaintiff was unfamiliar with the HAT job requirements, which included rotating through all BHS stations, including taking blood pressure; 3) Plaintiff was non-committal in her willingness to participate in covering BHS' satellite offices in other parts of New York City; and 4) Plaintiff scored an average of eleven out of thirty points for her interview score, which is lower than past successful candidates. (Def.'s 56.1 Stmt. ¶ 12; Kim Decl., exh. J ("Goldstein Email").)
Plaintiff disputes Defendant's allegations. Plaintiff alleges that she was to be reassigned to, not interviewed for, BHS, [*6]  knew of the job requirements and all the stations within BHS, and was able to perform the essential functions of this job. (Pl.'s 56.1 Stmt. ¶ 12.)
After her "interview" at BHS, Plaintiff immediately went to Defendant's EEO office and requested a reasonable accommodation. (Def.'s 56.1 Stmt. ¶ 13.) Plaintiff was offered an opportunity to interview for an off-line position with Emergency Medical Dispatch ("EMD"), but Plaintiff indicated that she was not interested in any assignment in EMD because she believed it would require her to type for long periods of time. (Id.) From July 12, 2010 through August 2011, Plaintiff was offered the opportunity to interview for no less than nine vacant positions for which she was qualified for as an EMT. (Id. ¶ 14.) Plaintiff declined to apply to seven of nine of these positions because she believed they involved excessive typing. (Id. ¶ 15.) Plaintiff did apply for an EMT/EPCR project team position on January 4, 2011; a position that did not require any typing, but was not selected. (Id. ¶ 16.) She also applied for a citywide resource senior coordinator position, another position that Plaintiff believed did not require "excessive" typing, but was not [*7]  selected. (Id.)
Plaintiff exhausted her leave balances and received workers' compensation benefits. (Id. ¶ 17.) She was put on leave without pay status on August 5, 2010. (Id.) From July 15, 2011 to July 20, 2011, Defendant paid for Plaintiff to attend a program as part of her five-year EMT recertification, which allowed Plaintiff to keep her EMT certification. (Id. ¶ 18.) Plaintiff was paid while she attended the program, but returned to leave without pay status on July 21, 2011. (Id. ¶¶ 18-19.)
On August 25, 2011, Plaintiff was informed that because she had "been absent from and unable to perform the duties of [her] position as a civil service Emergency Medical Specialist-EMT with the Fire Department" her employment was subject to termination. (Id. ¶ 20; Kim Decl., exh. O.) On September 8, 2011, Plaintiff's union attorney wrote on her behalf to request that Defendant continue to identify potential reasonable accommodations for Plaintiff. (Def.'s 56.1 Stmt. ¶ 21.) Defendant responded to Plaintiff's union attorney's letter on October 12, 2011. (Id. ¶ 22.) On that same day Plaintiff was notified by letter that due to her absence from work and inability to perform the duties of her position [*8]  as a civil service Emergency Medical Specialist-EMT from July 11, 2010, her employment with Defendant was terminated. (Id. ¶ 23.)
On August 4, 2010, Plaintiff filed a verified complaint with the New York State Division of Human Rights and the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission alleging that Defendant discriminated against her on the basis of her disability and failed to accommodate same. (Id. ¶ 24.) On July 27, 2012 the New York State Division of Human Rights found there was no probable cause that Defendant discriminated against Plaintiff and on September 17, 2012, the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission issued a right to sue letter adopting the findings of the New York State Division of Human Rights. (Id. ¶¶ 25-26.)

DISCUSSION3

I. ADA Legal Standards
The ADA prohibits "discriminat[ion] against a qualified individual on the basis of disability in regard to job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). Claims alleging disability [*9]  discrimination in violation of the ADA are subject to the burden-shifting analysis originally established by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). See McBride v. BIC Consumer Prods. Mfg. Co., 583 F.3d 92, 96 (2d Cir. 2009). "A plaintiff must establish a prima facie case; the employer must offer through the introduction of admissible evidence a legitimate non-discriminatory reason for the [adverse action]; and the plaintiff must then produce evidence and carry the burden of persuasion that the proffered reason is a pretext." Sista v. CDC Ixis N. Am., Inc., 445 F.3d 161, 169 (2d Cir. 2006).
"To establish a prima facie case [of disability discrimination] under the ADA, a plaintiff must show by a preponderance of the evidence that: (1) [her] employer is subject to the ADA; (2) [s]he was disabled within the meaning of the ADA; (3) [s]he was otherwise qualified to perform the essential functions of his job, with or without reasonable accommodation; and (4) [s]he suffered adverse employment action because of his disability." Klaper v. Cypress Hills Cemetery, No. 10-CV-1811 (NGG) (LB), 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 46470, 2014 WL 1343449, at *5 (E.D.N.Y. Mar. 31, 2014) (quoting Sista, 445 F.3d at 169).
"Discrimination" in violation of the ADA also includes "not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who is an applicant or employee, unless such covered entity can demonstrate that [*10]  the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business of such covered entity . . . ." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). A plaintiff makes out a prima facie case of disability discrimination arising from a failure to accommodate by showing each of the following:
(1) [P]laintiff is a person with a disability under the meaning of the ADA; (2) an employer covered by the statute had notice of h[er] disability; (3) with reasonable accommodation, plaintiff could perform the essential functions of the job at issue; and (4) the employer has refused to make such accommodations.
McBride, 583 F.3d at 96-97 (quoting Graves v. Finch Pruyn & Co., 457 F.3d 181, 184 (2d Cir. 2006)). If a plaintiff can establish a prima facie case for discrimination, "the burden shifts to the employer to demonstrate that the employee's proposed accommodation would result in an undue hardship." Scalera v. Electrograph Sys., Inc., 848 F. Supp. 2d 352, 360 (E.D.N.Y. 2012) (citing Stone v. City of Mt. Vernon, 118 F.3d 92, 97 (2d Cir. 1997)).
Retaliation claims brought under the ADA are also examined under the same McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework. See, e.g., Treglia v. Town of Manlius, 313 F.3d 713, 719 (2d Cir. 2002). To establish a prima facie case of retaliation under the ADA, the plaintiff must show the following elements: "(1) [s]he engaged in an activity protected by the ADA; (2) the employer was aware of this activity; (3) the employer took adverse employment action against [her]; and (4) a causal connection [*11]  exists between the alleged adverse action and the protected activity." Id. If the plaintiff establishes a prima facie case the burden then shifts to the defendant to proffer "some legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason" for the complained-of conduct. McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802; see also Fincher v. Depository Trust & Clearing Corp., 604 F. 3d 712, 720 (2d Cir. 2010). Where the defendant articulates such a reason, then the presumption of retaliation is rebutted, and it "simply drops out of the picture." St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 510-11, 113 S. Ct. 2742, 125 L. Ed. 2d 407 (1993) (citation omitted). The burden then shifts back to the plaintiff to show, without the benefit of any presumption, that a reasonable jury could conclude by a preponderance of the evidence that the employer's explanation is merely a pretext for impermissible retaliation. Treglia, 313 F.3d at 721.

II. Analysis
Plaintiff makes two basic claims in this case. First, Lt. Goldstein's denial of her transfer to BHS in July 2010 constituted (a) disability discrimination, (b) failure to accommodate her disability, and (c) retaliation.4 (Dkt. No. 28-3 ("Pl.'s Opp'n") at 8-9, 12-13, 17.) Second, that she was denied reasonable accommodations in relation to the nine potential post-BHS reassignments. (Id. at 14-15.) Each claim and corresponding summary judgment argument will be analyzed in turn.
A. Denial of BHS Reassignment in July 2010
1. Disability Discrimination
Defendant's summary judgment motion vis-a-vis Lt. Goldstein's denial of Plaintiff's reassignment to BHS is predicated on the argument that there were no vacant HAT positions within BHS in July 2010, and that even if a HAT vacancy existed, Plaintiff's responses during her "interview" demonstrated that she could not perform the essential functions of the position. (Def.'s Reply at 4-6.) Thus, Defendant appears to argue that Plaintiff cannot make out a prima facie case of discrimination.5 The record, however, is not so clear, [*13]  and for that reason summary judgment should be denied.
First, it is not at all clear that there were no vacant HAT positions at the time Plaintiff was "interviewed" on July 12, 2010. In his declaration, Lt. Goldstein explains that prior to July 1, 2010 there were eighteen HAT positions in BHS, fifteen that were funded through a federal grant and three that were funded by Defendant. (Dkt. No. 29-1 ("Goldstein Decl."), ¶ 5.) On or about July 1, 2010 one of the three Defendant-funded HAT positions was to be paid by the federal government. (Id. ¶ 8.) This change in funding, however, did not change the total number of eighteen HAT positions. (Id.) Lt. Goldstein's then states that in conjunction [*14]  with the change in funding, he "released the FDNY-funded line occupied by EMT Margaret Donahue [] back to the agency [and] EMT Donahue was reassigned to Division 1 pursuant to EMS Operations Personnel Order 2010-028 . . . . By releasing EMT Donahue's [FDNY-funded] line, no HAT vacancy was created." (Id.) What Lt. Goldstein fails to explain, however, is whether releasing EMT Donahue's line eliminated a HAT position. Indeed, one could conclude the opposite—"[t]he total number of HAT positions remained at eighteen (18), although now sixteen (16) were funded by NIOSH and two (2) were funded by FDNY." (Id.) Nowhere in Lt. Goldstein's declaration or any of the other evidence submitted by Defendant is any indication that after the changes in funding there were only seventeen HAT positions. If eighteen HAT "lines" existed after the change in funding, and EMT Donahue was reassigned out of one of those lines, why was there no "vacancy" created?6
Second, it [*15]  is not entirely clear from the record that Plaintiff was reassigned to BHS to fill a HAT, and only a HAT position. Although Lt. Goldstein may have interpreted the July 2, 2010 operations order as reassigning Plaintiff to a HAT position (Kim Decl., exh. C, Tr. 11:2-4; Dkt. No. 28-1 ("Ricotta Decl."), exh. 2 ("Goldstein Depo."), Tr. 49:24-25; 50:2-4), the operations order itself makes no such designation. Rather, it merely indicates that effective Sunday, July 11, 2010, Plaintiff was administratively reassigned to "BHS," with no specific mention of a HAT position. (Kim Decl., exh. I ("7/2/2010 Operations Order").) This can be contrasted with the May 25, 2010 Operations Order where EMTs DePietro and Tsang were specifically transferred to "BHS-HAT." (Goldstein Decl. ¶ 6, exh. Y ("5/25/2010 Operations Order").) Further, Plaintiff testified at her deposition that it was her understanding that she was transferred to BHS. (Ricotta Decl., exh. 1 ("Pl.'s Depo.") Tr. 78:16-21.) There is nothing in the record or any explanation in Defendant's moving papers why Plaintiff was only considered for a HAT position, and not a "non-HAT" position within BHS. This is especially problematic given the fact [*16]  that when Plaintiff initially reported for duty at BHS on July 11 she was temporarily assigned to work in the Triage unit in a non-HAT position previously vacated by EMT Richard Berger upon his reassignment to Station 47. (See Goldstein Decl. ¶10 (declaring Berger was not HAT, but was assigned to perform light duty in Triage area of BHS).) While Defendant may have an explanation for why this occurred, it is not beyond challenge and certainly does not eliminate all factual disputes concerning Plaintiff's reassignment to BHS.
Third, there is a genuine dispute as to whether Plaintiff's responses during the interview indicated that she could not perform the essential functions of the HAT position, either with or without an accommodation.7 (Pl.'s Mem. of Law at 9-10; Dkt. No. 27-4 ("Def.'s Mem. of Law") at 5-6; see also Goldstein Email.) According to Lt. Goldstein, he informed Plaintiff during the interview that "vital signs were a major component of the HATs responsibilities," and that "all HATs were rotated through all of the stations on weekly basis and that there would be week long stretches where she would be responsible to take blood pressures." (Goldstein Email.) Lt. Goldstein contends [*17]  that upon hearing this Plaintiff responded "that she hoped that she would be assigned only to EKGs or Vison testing" because of her difficulty in taking blood pressures due to her disability. (Id.)
Plaintiff contends that she "was ready, willing, and able to perform her job at BHS with an accommodation (including her purchasing equipment in order to accommodate her), but was not granted the opportunity to do so." (Pl.'s Mem. of Law at 10.) Plaintiff testified at deposition that Lt. Goldstein did not respond to her inquiry "if it's a requirement for all employees of BHS to take blood pressure at a given time?" (Pl.'s Depo. Tr. 89:5-7.) In any event, Plaintiff claims that during the interview she suggested an accommodation to assist in her working the blood pressure station, namely an electrical blood pressure machine. "I could have been trained on everything and what I suggested, there are electrical blood pressure. I even suggested—I said if I cannot take the blood pressure and that's [*18]  the only thing that's hindering me, I said I can bring my own. I'll purchase my equipment." (Id. Tr. 89:19-23.) According to Plaintiff, Lt. Goldstein did not engage in any discussion about the electronic blood pressure equipment and simply responded, "No." (Id. Tr. 90:1.)
Putting aside that Lt. Goldstein's email is insufficient as an evidentiary matter to sustain Defendant's burden on a motion for summary judgment,8 Plaintiff's counter argument is persuasive. This is a "he said, she said" dispute that must be decided by a jury. Viewing the evidence in a light most favorable to Plaintiff, it would not be unreasonable for a jury to believe her version of events and determine that Lt. Goldstein's non-selection of Plaintiff was due to her disability.
Taken as a whole Defendant fails to demonstrate that there is no genuine dispute as to the existence of a vacancy at BHS at the time that Plaintiff was administratively reassigned and interviewed. Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to Plaintiff, a reasonable juror could find that there [*19]  was a vacancy at BHS at the time of Plaintiff's reassignment. The operations orders produced by Defendant do not fully support and explain how EMT Donahue's transfer did not create a vacant HAT position. Further, while EMT Berger's transfer out of BHS may not have created a HAT vacancy, there is a question as to whether this transfer created a BHS vacancy. Furthermore, a question remains as to whether Plaintiff was qualified to perform the essential functions of a HAT with a reasonable accommodation, even if that was the only position available at the time. I, therefore, respectfully recommend that Defendant's motion for summary judgment be denied to the extent that it relates to Plaintiff's claim that she was discriminated against in connection with a position in BHS.
2. Reasonable Accommodation for BHS/HAT Position
Under the ADA, an employer must make reasonable accommodations for a disabled employee, unless the employer is able to demonstrate that such accommodation "would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). An accommodation is not reasonable if it eliminates a job's essential function. Rodal v. Anesthesia Grp. of Onondaga, P.C., 369 F.3d 113, 121 (2d Cir. 2004) (citing Shannon v. N.Y.C. Trans. Auth., 332 F.3d 95, 100 (2d Cir. 2003)). At trial, Plaintiff bears the burden of establishing, with [*20]  more than "mere speculation" that "an effective accommodation exist[ed] that would render her otherwise qualified." Jackan v. N.Y.S. Dept. of Labor, 205 F.3d 562, 566 (2d Cir. 2000) (quoting Borkowski v. Valley Cent. Sch. Dist., 63 F.3d 131, 139 (2d Cir. 1995)). Once a plaintiff demonstrates that there is a "plausible accommodation, the costs of which, facially, do not clearly exceed its benefits," the defendant bears the burden of proving that the requested accommodation is not reasonable. Borkowski, 63 F.3d at 138. A "reasonable accommodation" may include, inter alia, "job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, reassignment to a vacant position, acquisition or modification of equipment or devices . . . ." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(9)(B).
As discussed above, there is a dispute as to whether Plaintiff was able to perform the essential functions of the HAT position, either with or without accommodation. Essential functions of a position are "the fundamental job duties of the employment position . . . ." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n). An employer's view of what constitutes an essential function of a job should be given "considerable deference," however there are a number of other factors that courts must consider when engaging in this analysis. McMillan v. City of N.Y., 711 F.3d 120, 126 (2d Cir. 2013); see 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(3). "Determining whether physical qualifications are essential functions of a job requires the court to engage in a highly fact-specific inquiry . . [*21]  . ." Welch v. United Postal Serv., 871 F. Supp. 2d 164, 187 (E.D.N.Y. 2012) (internal citation omitted) (emphasis in original). Even if the ability to measure blood pressure was an essential function of the HAT position, additional factual questions remain.
The question becomes whether Plaintiff's requested accommodation, an electronic blood pressure machine, would be a reasonable accommodation that would allow her to perform this essential function of the HAT position. Plaintiff has the burden at trial of establishing that the electronic blood pressure machine would be an effective accommodation that would render her otherwise qualified. See Jackan, 205 F.3d at 566. If Plaintiff successfully demonstrates that there is a "plausible accommodation, the costs of which, facially, do not clearly exceed its benefits," Defendant bears the burden of proving that the requested accommodation is not reasonable. Borkowski, 63 F.3d at 138. There is, at the very least, a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Plaintiff's requested accommodation was reasonable and would have allowed her to perform an essential function of the HAT position. I, therefore, respectfully recommend that Defendant's motion for summary judgment be denied to the extent that it relates to Plaintiff's claim that she was denied a reasonable [*22]  accommodation in connection with a position in BHS.
3. Retaliation
In its opening brief, Defendant assumes that the adverse action of which Plaintiff complains is her October 12, 2011 termination. (Def.'s Mem. of Law at 9.) Defendant argues that Plaintiff cannot prove a temporal link between that adverse action and her July 2010 request for accommodation—the activity protected by the ADA. (Id.) Defendant further argues that even if Plaintiff succeeded in showing such a causal relationship, it could rebut the presumption of retaliation with a legitimate, non-retaliatory reason—Civil Service Law § 71, which allows for an employee to be discharged based on her absence from work in excess of one year due to an occupational injury. N.Y. Civ. Serv. L. § 71. (Def.'s Mem. of Law at 10.) Furthermore, Defendant argues that "[P]laintiff cannot establish that her termination pursuant to Civil Service Law § 71 was pretextual, particularly in light of the numerous efforts to afford her a reasonable accommodation prior to termination." (Id. at 11.)
In opposition, Plaintiff clarifies that the adverse employment action of which she complains is not the termination per se, but the denial of the transfer to BHS which "ultimately culminat[ed] in her termination." (Pl.'s [*23]  Mem. of Law at 17.) In reply, Defendant argues simply that because there were no HAT vacancies, the denial of the HAT position cannot support Plaintiff's retaliation claim. (Def.'s Reply at 8-9.) In other words, Defendant again argues that Plaintiff cannot establish a prima facie case of retaliation within the meaning of the ADA. I disagree.
It appears undisputed that Plaintiff engaged in protected activity—she requested the accommodation of using an electronic blood pressure machine. Defendant fails to dispute that Goldstein was aware of this activity. That Plaintiff was subjected to an adverse employment action—denial of the BHS position—cannot be disputed. There also appears to be a causal connection, at least temporally, between the protected activity and the adverse action, as they both occurred on the same day. That is all Plaintiff needs to establish a prima facie case of retaliation. While Defendant could have argued that Plaintiff has failed to rebut the legitimate, non-retaliatory reason for the adverse employment action—her poor interview performance—it has not done so. Again, it would be inappropriate for the Court to make such arguments for Defendant, who is represented [*24]  by counsel. Accordingly, I respectfully recommend that summary judgment be denied as to Plaintiff's retaliation claim.
B. Plaintiff's Post-BHS Request for Reasonable Accommodation
Following the denial of her reassignment to BHS, Plaintiff immediately requested a reasonable accommodation, her third,9 in the form of a reassignment to a suitable position. (Def.'s 56.1 Stmt. ¶13.) It is undisputed that following this request, from July 12, 2010 to August 2011, Defendant offered Plaintiff the opportunity to interview for nine different positions, but Plaintiff only applied for two because she believed that seven of the positions involved "excessive typing", which she claims she could not do. (Id. ¶¶ 14-16; Pl.'s Mem. of Law at 14; see also Pl.'s Depo. Tr. 108:8-10, 15-17 ("Q. Do you recall being offered any other positions by the Fire Department? A. No. . . . Q. EEO had offered you opportunities to interview for nine different positions as we discussed before? A. Yes.")
To the extent Plaintiff claims that the nine offers of reassignment were [*25]  insufficient in number and not a reasonable accommodation, summary judgment must be granted in Defendant's favor. "[W]here a comparable position is vacant and the disabled employee is qualified for the position, an employer's refusal to reassign the employee to that position—absent some other offer of reasonable accommodation—constitutes a violation of the ADA." Norville v. Staten Island Univ. Hosp., 196 F.3d 89, 99 (2d Cir. 1999) (citations omitted). However, "an employer need not reassign an employee if no position is vacant. Nor is the employer obliged to create a new position to accommodate the employee." Id. (citations omitted). Defendant correctly argues that "the record does not support any finding of the existence of other vacant positions for which [P]laintiff was qualified that [D]efendant could have or should have offered to her." (Def.'s Mem. of Law at 7-8.) Plaintiff fails to point to anything in the record indicating that there were additional vacant positions for which she was qualified other than the nine that were offered. Plaintiff, therefore, fails to raise a genuine issue of material fact regarding the denial of a reassignment to any additional vacant positions as a reasonable accommodation.
With respect to the two positions that were offered to Plaintiff and [*26]  to which she applied, summary judgment should also be granted in Defendant's favor. "Under the ADA, [Defendant] had no 'affirmative duty to provide [Plaintiff] with a job for which [s]he was qualified; [Defendant] only had an obligation to treat [her] in the same manner that it treated other similarly qualified candidates.'" Shannon, 332 F.3d at 104 (quoting Wernick v. Fed. Reserve Bank of N.Y., 91 F.3d 379, 384-85 (2d Cir. 1996)). Unlike her counter to the assertions regarding Lt. Goldstein's refusal to honor her reassignment to BHS, Plaintiff offers no evidence, let alone admissible evidence, to contest her non-selection for these two positions. Although Plaintiff was not chosen for either of these positions, she has not shown that she was treated any differently than other similarly qualified candidates or was otherwise discriminated against in these non-selections.
As for the seven positions to which Plaintiff did not apply because she believed they required "excessive typing," summary judgment should also be granted to Defendant. It is well understood that a district court generally "should not weigh evidence or assess the credibility of witnesses" when deciding a motion for summary judgment. Hayes v. N.Y.C. Dep't of Corr., 84 F.3d 614, 619 (2d Cir. 1996). Indeed, weighing evidence and assessing the credibility of witnesses fall exclusively [*27]  within the province of the fact-finder. See McClellan v. Smith, 439 F.3d 137, 144 (2d Cir. 2006). A party may not, however, rely on mere speculation or conjecture to overcome a motion for summary judgment. Hicks v. Baines, 593 F.3d 159, 166 (2d Cir. 2010); Sanborn v. Jennings, No. 12-CV-00228, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 111825, 2013 WL 4040391, at *2 (D. Vt. Aug. 8, 2013) ("Summary judgment cannot be defeated by mere conjecture, allegations, or speculations without hard evidence for support." (citing D'Amico v. City of N.Y., 132 F.3d 145, 149 (2d Cir. 1998))); Billhofer, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 32495, 2013 WL 866778, at *3 ("[T]he non-moving party may not rely simply on conclusory allegations or speculation to avoid summary judgment, but instead must offer evidence to show that its version of the events is not wholly fanciful." (quoting Morris v. Lindau, 196 F.3d 102, 109 (2d Cir. 1999))). While it is apparently undisputed that these seven positions involved some typing or computer use, none of the job descriptions for these vacant positions quantify the amount of typing. (See Kim Decl., exh. M (containing minimum requirements of interview opportunities offered to Plaintiff).) It is simply conjecture and speculation that they involved "excessive" typing, whatever definition of "excessive" Plaintiff may seek to employ. Plaintiff has not cited to any admissible evidence in the record to support her claim that any of these positions, let alone all seven, involved "excessive" typing.
Plaintiff's claim that Defendant failed to accommodate her disability with respect to these seven [*28]  "excessive typing" positions by rejecting her offer "to purchase, out of her own pocket, software that would accommodate her disability and allow her to perform more excessive typing" fares no better. (Pl.'s Mem. of Law at 14.) In order to establish her prima facie case of failure to accommodate, Plaintiff would have to show that she requested an accommodation and that it was refused. See Graves, 457 F.3d at 184-85 ("An underlying assumption of any reasonable accommodation claim is that the plaintiff-employee has requested an accommodation . . . ." (quoting Flemmings v. Howard Univ., 198 F.3d 857, 861, 339 U.S. App. D.C. 110 (D.C. Cir. 1999))).
The only support in the record for Plaintiff's claim is her unsupported deposition testimony where she states, "I had offered a program . . . . They told me about a dragon program software that I speak and they type for you." (Pl.'s Depo. Tr. 97:20-23.) Plaintiff contends that she was told "we don't accommodate software." (Id. Tr. 97:24-25.) However, when asked who told her that such software would not be accommodated, Plaintiff replied "I don't know." (Id. Tr. 98:1-2.) Plaintiff further testified that she was told "they don't have the budget," to which she offered to pay for the software, but she testified that she was told "[t]hat's not how we work." (Id. Tr. [*29]  98:2-5.) Plaintiff never made this request in writing and this is the only mention in the record of same. (Id. Tr. 98:7-8.) Plaintiff cannot remember to whom she made this request for an accommodation and Plaintiff fails to provide any specific details as to who denied her request. Without any evidence or testimony as to whom Plaintiff made her request, no reasonable jury could find on this record that such a request was ever made to an employer10 or that it was denied.
I, therefore, respectfully [*30]  recommend that summary judgment be granted to the extent that Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim relates to her post-BHS requests for accommodations.

IV. Leave to Amend Should be Granted
Defendant argues that regardless of whether summary judgment should be granted, all of Plaintiff's claims should be dismissed because she sued the wrong party—the Fire Department of the City of New York. (Def.'s Mem. at 4-5.) Defendant correctly notes that the proper defendant in such cases is the City of New York. See Wray v. City of N.Y., 340 F. Supp. 2d 291, 303 (E.D.N.Y. 2004) (quoting N.Y.C. Charter § 396 ("All actions and proceedings for the recovery of penalties for the violation of any law shall be brought in the name of the city of New York and not in that of any agency, except where otherwise provided by law.")). Plaintiff concedes her error, but requests leave to amend the complaint under Rule 15(a) to substitute the City of New York as the proper defendant. (Pl.'s Mem. of Law at 7.) Defendant replies simply that leave to amend should be denied as futile, given that summary judgment should be granted on the substantive claims. (Def.'s Reply Mem. of Law at 3.)
A protracted discussion of the requirements of Rules 15(a) and 16(b) and the interplay of the futility standards of Rules 12(b)(6) and [*31]  56 is unnecessary. See Morritt v. Stryker Corp., 973 F. Supp. 2d 177, 182-83 (E.D.N.Y. 2013) (discussing applicable standards). In its reply, Defendant fails to address most of the factors that the Court must balance to determine whether leave to amend should be granted—bad faith, dilatory motive, undue prejudice, and undue delay. Rather, Defendant relies exclusively on the futility of the amendment. As set out above, however, there are triable issues of fact regarding Plaintiff's ADA and retaliation claims, and therefore the amendment is not futile.
Plaintiff simply wants to change "Fire Department of the City of New York" to "The City of New York." Corporation counsel has been representing Defendant, under the name Fire Department of the City of New York, and defending this litigation from its inception. Corporation counsel has conduced full discovery and briefed the instant motion, such that if the name of Defendant was changed to "The City of New York," no additional discovery would have to be conducted and the case would be ready for trial. Although Plaintiff proffers no reason for the delay in seeking the necessary amendment, delay, without more, is insufficient to deny Plaintiff's request. State Teachers Ret. Bd. v. Fluor Corp., 654 F.2d 843, 856 (2d Cir. 1981) ("Mere delay, however, absent a showing of bad faith or [*32]  undue prejudice, does not provide a basis for a district court to deny the right to amend.").
I, therefore, respectfully recommend that Plaintiff's request to amend the complaint so that "The City of New York" is named as the proper defendant and not the "Fire Department of the City of New York" be granted.

CONCLUSION
For the reasons set forth above, I respectfully recommend that Plaintiff be given leave to amend her complaint to substitute the City of New York as the proper defendant. I also respectfully recommend that Defendant's motion for summary judgment be granted in part and denied in part. The only claims that should be permitted to proceed are those related to the denial of Plaintiff's reassignment to BHS.
Any objections to the recommendations made in this Report must be filed with the Clerk of the Court and the Honorable Nicholas G. Garaufis within fourteen days of receipt hereof. Failure to file timely objections waives the right to appeal the District Court's Order. See 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1); Fed. R. Civ. P. 72; Small v. Sec'y of Health & Human Servs., 892 F.2d 15, 16 (2d Cir. 1989).
Dated: August 21, 2015
Brooklyn, New York
SO ORDERED.
/s/ Ramon E. Reyes, Jr.
Ramon E. Reyes, Jr.
United States Magistrate Judge


End of Document

