Perez v. M2 Global Tech.
United States District Court for the Western District of Texas, San Antonio Division
May 4, 2009, Decided; May 4, 2009, Filed
CIVIL NO. SA-07-CA-943-FB

Reporter
2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 142178 *
RICHARD PEREZ, Plaintiff, v. M2 GLOBAL TECHNOLOGY, LTD., Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Richard Perez, Daniel Valdez, Plaintiffs: Glenn Deutsch Levy, LEAD ATTORNEY, Law Office of Glenn D. Levy, San Antonio, TX USA.
For M2 Global Technology, Ltd., Defendant: Jesse Roy Botello, LEAD ATTORNEY, Law Offices of Jesse R. Botello, San Antonio, TX USA.
Judges: PAMELA A. MATHY, UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE. Honorable Fred Biery, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: PAMELA A. MATHY
Opinion



REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE
TO: Honorable Fred Biery
United States District Judge
Pursuant to the order of referral in the above-styled and numbered cause of action to the undersigned United States Magistrate Judge1 and consistent with the authority vested in United States Magistrate Judges under the provisions of 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(i)(B) and Rule 1(d) of the Local Rules for the Assignment of Duties to United States Magistrate Judges in the Western District of Texas, the following report is submitted for your review and consideration.

I. JURISDICTION
This Court has federal question subject matter jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1331.

II. PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Plaintiff Richard Perez ("Mr. Perez" or "plaintiff")2 initially filed his original petition and request for jury trial on or about October 26, 2007, in the 73rd Judicial District Court [*2]  of Bexar County, Texas, in case number 2007-CI-16278.3 Plaintiff's original petition, in the "nature of action" section, describes the six causes of action asserted in the petition as being based on "the Texas Labor Code, the Americans with Disabilities Act, Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Common Law to correct unlawful employment practices on the basis of disability and perceived disability."4
On November 20, 2007, defendant M2 Global Technology, LTD ("M2 Global" or "defendant") removed the case to federal court based on federal question subject matter jurisdiction and plaintiff's description of the "nature of the action" as asserting disability discrimination in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12101, et seq.,5 and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 ("Title VII"), 42 U.S.C. § 2000(e), et seq.6 The original petition also asserts state law claims for: disability discrimination; retaliation;7 intentional infliction of emotional distress; and negligent hiring, training, supervision, and retention.8 As relief, Mr. Perez seeks: lost wages, front pay, lost profits past and future, an accounting of M2 Global's actions, exemplary damages, pre and post-judgment interest, attorney's fees, costs, [*3]  and any other relief to which plaintiff might be entitled.9
On January 7, 2008, M2 Global filed an answer to Mr. Perez's original petition.10 On August 28, 2008, M2 Global filed a motion to dismiss pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 41(b) for failure to prosecute the case.11 The District Judge denied M2 Global's motion to dismiss without prejudice on October 14, 2008,12 and granted Mr. Perez's cross-motion for issuance of an amended scheduling order to allow plaintiff more time.13 Following the entry of the October 14, 2008 Order, until M2 Global filed a motion for protective order or alternative motion to dismiss on February 6, 2009,14 the docket sheets reflect no entries other than the parties' filings of separate ADR reports on November 7, 2008, and M2 Global's notice of filing its witness and exhibit list.15
On March 9, 2009, the case was referred to the undersigned for disposition of all remaining pretrial matters.16 As a response and reply to M2 Global's motion for protective order or to dismiss had been filed,17 the undersigned, on March 10, 2009, denied M2 Global's motion for protective order, sustained certain of defendant's objections to plaintiff's discovery requests, denied plaintiff's request for an extension of [*4]  deadlines, and reserved its recommendation regarding defendant's renewed motion to dismiss.18 On March 11, 2009, the undersigned issued a report recommending M2 Global's alternative motion to dismiss be denied.19 M2 Global's objections to the report are currently pending before the District Judge.20
On March 28, 2009, M2 Global filed a motion for summary judgment with appendix of supporting documents, arguing, in sum, that Mr. Perez has failed to show the ADA is applicable to his medical condition, plaintiff failed to participate in the interactive process anticipated by the ADA, plaintiff was terminated for cause, and plaintiff's ancillary claims and pleadings are defective.21 The same day, M2 Global filed a motion for reconsideration of its motion to dismiss pursuant to Rule 41(b), with appendix of supporting documents and exhibits.22 On April 6, 2009, plaintiff filed a response to defendant's motion for summary judgment.23 On April 10, 2009, defendant filed a reply.24 The docket sheets do not show that plaintiff has filed any response to M2 Global's motion for reconsideration, denominated as such.25

III. FACTUAL BACKGROUND
As the parties appear to dispute many key facts, the following factual statement is provided [*5]  for background. The following factual summary has been prepared using the allegation in the original petition, as well as the evidence submitted in connection with the summary judgment motion at issue in this report. For clarity, at times the facts are designated as either "alleged" or "undisputed" or the source of the fact is referenced. Under the applicable summary judgment standard, undisputed facts are construed in favor of Mr. Perez, as nonmovant.
It is undisputed that plaintiff Richard Perez was employed by defendant M2 Global during the time relevant to this case. Mr. Perez alleges in his original petition that he was first employed by Harris Corporation in October 1990, which in January 2000, was divested into defendant M2 Global Technology, Ltd., a smaller company.26 In his summary judgment response, plaintiff also alleges M2 Global f/k/a Harris Corporation hired him in October 1990.27 Mr. Perez alleges he worked for defendant for twenty-six years.28 M2 Global alleges it "has only been in existence since late summer of 1999 and has never been 'f/k/a Harris Corporation.'"29
Mr. Perez alleges he was "hired to work in the chemical room as a [s]heet [m]etal [f]abricator," where he worked [*6]  from 1990 to 2000 "cutting material, forming material, [and] graining parts[.]"30 It is undisputed the work also included "chemical[ly] finishing the parts[.]"31 In addition, Mr. Perez allegedly worked in "2nd Ops (drilling and tapping holes), tested water for contamination, was in charge of Hazmat Team and supplies for Hazmat Team, ordered supplies for the entire shop," and "signed manifest to dispose of hazardous materials, even though not licensed to do so."32 Mr. Perez alleges that in 2000, he experienced "difficulty breathing and chest pains,"33 or "an asthma attack,"34 and his supervisor at the time moved him to the paint room.35 It is undisputed that in the paint room Mr. Perez "prepared small components for painting, painted them, wrapped them, and packaged them for shipping."36
Mr. Perez allegedly worked in the paint room without incident until January 2006, when a new supervisor sought to return him to work in the chemical room.37 M2 Global alleges plaintiff was asked, but refused, in September 2005, "to do some work in the [chemical room]."38 It is undisputed plaintiff informed his supervisor of his respiratory condition.39 Plaintiff alleges he told the [*7]  supervisor the breathing problem "was the reasoning behind his being previously transferred to the paint room."40 Plaintiff alleges the supervisor asked for a physician's letter "specifying why he could not work in the chemical room."41 It is undisputed plaintiff was immediately limited to performing work as "Workplace Organization Specialist," or "Secondary Operations" ("2nd Ops"),42 which is "neither in the chemical room, nor the paint room[.]"43 M2 Global alleges Mr. Perez's work in 2nd Ops included "duties related to compliance with on-the-job health and safety matters for fellow workers and himself, overseeing proper procedures in handling of hazardous materials, cardio-pulmonary resuscitation, and providing safety equipment and aids, including breathing protection and respirator masks."44
Mr. Perez alleges he received the letter from his doctor on January 24, 2006, stating he was unable to return to work in the chemical room.45 Mr. Perez alleges the letter "did not state that Plaintiff could not work in the paint room," he was able to work in that room without difficulty, and the "physician approved it and was aware."46 It is undisputed that despite his insistence, Mr. [*8]  Perez was not returned to work in the paint room.47 Mr. Perez alleges that after he provided the physician's letter, his employment was terminated "because he could not perform the essential functions of his position in the chemical room."48 In addition, plaintiff alleges he asked to be "accommodated by being placed in another area and his request was denied," but other workers received accommodations.49 Plaintiff concedes he would have continued to work in 2nd Ops if his employment had not been terminated.50
M2 Global alleges "supervisors discovered Mr. Perez was not at his work station nor on the premises of M2 Global[] during work hours" on Friday, February 24, 2006.51 Defendant alleges Mr. Perez did not inform anyone at M2 Global that he was leaving work.52 Additionally, plaintiff allegedly had a pattern of leaving "work without notice or permission" on Friday afternoons.53 Plaintiff was also allegedly absent from work without notice on Saturday, February 25, 2006, and Monday, February 27, 2006.54 M2 Global contends Mr. Perez frequently took time off work, and the company had never "denied or refused to let Mr. Perez off whenever necessary."55 M2 Global alleges that when plaintiff returned [*9]  to work on February 28, 2006, he met with: Douglas Carlberg, President and CEO of M2 Global; Beverly West, the Human Resources Clerk; and Bert Sisson, Manager of the Fabrication Department, to discuss the absences.56 It is undisputed that plaintiff's employment was terminated on February 28, 2006. Allegedly, Mr. Perez offered no explanation for his absences or leaving work without notice, and Mr. Carlberg discharged plaintiff because of the absences.57
Mr. Perez alleges he never left work without notifying someone, and on "February 26, 2006,"58 he told Amadeo Porras that he was leaving because his son was at school and sick.59 Plaintiff alleges he always provided "an excuse or a doctor's note as to why he was not at work."60 Further, Mr. Perez alleges "he was discharged for not being able to fulfill his work duties."61

IV. ISSUES
1. Whether M2 Global's motion for summary judgment should be granted or denied.
2. Whether M2 Global's Rule 41(b) motion to dismiss should be reconsidered.

V. SUMMARY JUDGMENT STANDARD
The standard to be applied in deciding a motion for summary judgment is set forth in Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56, which provides in pertinent part as follows:
The judgment sought should be rendered if the pleadings, [*10]  the discovery and disclosure materials on file, and any affidavits show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.62
Mere allegations of a factual dispute between the parties will not defeat an otherwise proper motion for summary judgment. Rule 56 requires that there be no genuine issue of material fact.63 A fact is material if it might affect the outcome of the lawsuit under the governing law.64 A dispute about a material fact is genuine if the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party.65 Therefore, summary judgment is proper if, under governing laws, there is only one reasonable conclusion as to the verdict; if reasonable finders of fact could resolve a factual issue in favor of either party, summary judgment should not be granted.66
The movant on a summary judgment motion bears the initial burden of providing the court with a legal basis for its motion and identifying those portions of the record which it alleges demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact.67 The burden then shifts to the party opposing the motion to present affirmative evidence in order to defeat [*11]  a properly supported motion for summary judgment.68 All facts and inferences drawn from those facts must be viewed in the light favorable to the party resisting the motion for summary judgment.69 Thus, summary judgment motions permit the Court to resolve lawsuits without the necessity of trials if there is no genuine dispute as to any material facts and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.70
The movant may satisfy the burden to show the "absence of a genuine issue of material fact by pointing out that the record contains no [evidence to] support for the nonmoving party's claim."71 If nonmovant cannot provide some evidence to support its claim, summary judgment is appropriate.72

VI. ARGUMENTS AND ANALYSIS

A. Motion for Summary Judgment

1. Disability Discrimination in Violation of the ADA and the Texas Labor Code73

a. summary of the arguments
M2 Global has moved for summary judgment on Mr. Perez's disability discrimination claims, arguing, in sum, that plaintiff: cannot establish a prima facie case of discrimination; did not participate in the "interactive process" required by the ADA; and was discharged for cause.74 With respect to the prima facie case, M2 Global argues in particular that "Plaintiff never did provide medical proof to Defendant during his employment nor during the course of this lawsuit that his condition qualified him to invoke the protection of the ADA."75 M2 Global contends [*13]  "[i]t is beyond dispute that as soon as supervisory personnel . . . were informed of Plaintiff's self described health problem, his duties were changed such that he would not be exposed to conditions that Plaintiff or Defendant thought could affect his health,"76 and plaintiff did not subsequently return to work in the paint or chemical rooms, "despite his demands to return to the paint room."77 Contending these measures "were not a legally required accommodation" and cannot be construed as proof Mr. Perez was regarded as disabled, M2 Global argues the "precautions were reasonable and prudent under the circumstances and were an effort to preclude jeopardizing Mr. Perez's health."78 M2 Global asserts there has been no determination of whether "Mr. Perez could have been able to continue to work with or without a reasonable accommodation,"79 and, other than termination of employment for absences, there is no evidence plaintiff "sustained a reduction in pay or benefits during the time he was working in [2nd Ops]" or "other type of adverse employment action."80
With respect to the "interactive process" required under the ADA, M2 Global additionally argues "there is no evidence that Mr. Perez [*14]  requested any type of accommodation much less a reasonable one that could have allowed him to safely return to work for Defendant in the Paint Room or the [Chemical] Room."81 Moreover, "Plaintiff's pleadings are devoid of any assertion that he could have continued to perform his work duties, with or without a reasonable accommodation," and "Mr. Perez's only colorable attempt" at engaging in the "interactive process" was demanding to work in the paint room and refusing to work in the chemical room.82 Defendant contends Mr. Perez had no incentive to interact after he was assigned to 2nd Ops at full pay for part-time work.83
With respect to Mr. Perez's discharge, M2 Global argues further that plaintiff failed to provide notice to his supervisors before leaving work early on February 24, 2006, and for his absences on February 25 and 27, 2006.84 M2 Global contends that upon his return to work on February 28, 2006, Mr. Perez "offered no explanation of any type" for the absences, and his employment was terminated.85 As support for its motion for summary judgment, M2 Global has provided copies of: the original petition; the affidavits of Amadeo Porras, Bert Sisson, and Douglas F. Carlberg; plaintiff's [*15]  photograph; acknowledgments of Mr. Perez's receipt of the employee handbook; and M2 Global's answers to interrogatories.86
In response, Mr. Perez asserts, in sum, he has shown that:
(1) Plaintiff has Asthmatic Bronchitis, a life-threatening pulmonary disease which he developed while working for Defendant. As a result, Plaintiff cannot overexert himself and is no longer able to work in the chemical room; (2) Plaintiff is qualified to continue to work for Defendant because he could easily work in another area of the company besides the chemical room; and (3) Defendant terminated Plaintiff's employment.87
Mr. Perez also argues that M2 Global failed to address his "cause of action for being 'regarded as disabled.'"88 Asserting M2 Global "has changed its reason for Plaintiff's termination numerous times," Mr. Perez argues defendant's proffered reason is pretext for discrimination.89 As support for his arguments, Mr. Perez has provided copies of: his affidavit; EEOC documents regarding plaintiff's charge of discrimination; M2 Global documents regarding plaintiff; medical documents regarding plaintiff's impairment; e-mail communications between M2 Global and its attorney, Jesse R. Botello; and the [*16]  affidavit of Mr. Perez's attorney, Glenn D. Levy.90
In reply, M2 Global argues, in sum, that plaintiff's response contains many mistakes and misrepresentations of fact, and Mr. Perez's affidavit "materially misrepresents what he was hired to do, what his duties were, when he worked in the various departments at M2 Global, and is wrong about the various conversations he claims to have had with M2 Global personnel."91 Additionally, M2 Global asserts Mr. Perez's affidavit is "rife with internal contradictions and contains alleged facts that are irrelevant to his claims or to the issues in Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment[.]"92 M2 Global argues that, "significantly," Mr. Perez has admitted he was accommodated when he was transferred to 2nd Ops and he would have continued his work in that department if he had not been discharged.93 M2 Global objects to Mr. Perez's reliance on documents protected by privilege, such as e-mail communications between M2 Global and its attorney.94 Arguing Mr. Perez's response "is replete with the conclusory and non-specific assertions," M2 Global asserts the "response is insufficient to overcome" summary judgment.95 M2 Global contends Mr. Perez did "not even attempt [*17]  to address his unexcused absences on February 25th and 27th, 2006," thus failing to negate the articulated reason for his discharge.96 Moreover, plaintiff failed to "acknowledge his legal responsibility to participate in the interactive process . . . developing a reasonable accommodation that would address his health issues, and also, the reasonable needs, feasibility and expense to the employer in this process."97

b. standards

i. ADA Amendments Act of 2008
As a threshold matter, the undersigned considers the effect of the ADA Amendments Act of 2008.98 In part, the amendments: instruct that "[t]he definition of disability in this Act shall be construed in favor of broad coverage of individuals under this Act, to the maximum extent permitted by the terms of this Act;"99 reject the EEOC's definition of "substantially limits" as "significantly restricted" because it "expresses too high a standard" and is "inconsistent with congressional intent;"100 and reject directives of the United States Supreme Court that the ADA's terms be "interpreted strictly."101
Generally, courts are to apply laws and interpretations in force at the time the alleged acts occurred.102 A statute is not afforded retroactive effect "unless such a construction is required by [*18]  explicit language or by necessary implication."103 The ADA Amendments Act of 2008 expressly provides the amendments are effective on January 1, 2009.104 Plaintiff does not argue that the recent amendments should apply to his cause of action which arises out of events occurring in 2006. Further, "it appears that every court that has addressed this issue . . . has concluded that the 2008 Amendments cannot be applied retroactively to conduct that preceded its effective date."105 In that light, the undersigned concludes the 2008 amendments to the ADA are not retroactively applicable to the present case.

ii. prima facie case under the ADA
The ADA prohibits discrimination "against a qualified individual with a disability because of the disability of such individual in regard to job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment."106 Claims of disability discrimination are analyzed under the well-established burden-shifting framework set forth [*19]  in McDonnell Douglas Corporation v. Green,107 when only circumstantial evidence is presented.108 Plaintiff does not contend that he is relying on direct evidence of disability discrimination.
Under the McDonnell Douglas framework, a plaintiff must carry the initial burden of establishing a prima facie case of disability discrimination.109 If the plaintiff establishes a prima facie case, the burden shifts to the defendant to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason.110 Once the defendant articulates such a reason, the burden shifts back to plaintiff to prove the articulated reason is a mere pretext for unlawful discrimination.111
To establish a prima facie case under the ADA, plaintiff must show: (1) he is disabled; (2) he is qualified for the job; (3) he was subject to an adverse employment action; and (4) he was replaced by a nondisabled person or was treated less favorably than nondisabled employees.112 M2 Global has challenged plaintiff's ability to establish the first and second elements of his prima facie case, to show he was disabled and qualified for the job he held prior to his discharge.113

iii. ADA "disability"
The ADA defines "disability" as:"(A) a physical or mental impairment [*20]  that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such individual; (B) a record of such impairment; or (C) being regarded as having such impairment."114 The original complaint alleges M2 Global discriminated against Mr. Perez under the first and third parts of the definition, or "because of his disability and/or was regarded as disabled."115
The record reflects Mr. Perez has been diagnosed with "reactive airway disease,"116 which he contends causes breathing difficulties in certain situations, including work in M2 Global's chemical room.117 The mere diagnosis of an impairment does not necessarily describe a disability for purposes of the ADA.118 The impaired individual must further demonstrate that the impairment substantially limits a major life activity.119 Although breathing is a major life activity,120 the question is whether Mr. Perez has shown his impairment substantially limits his ability to breathe such that he is disabled.
The ADA does not define "substantially limits." Nevertheless, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit has explained:
"The substantial-limit requirement is the linchpin of § 12102(2)(A). Without it, the ADA would cover any minor impairment [*21]  that might tangentially affect major life activities such as breathing, eating, and walking. For this reason, an impairment must not just limit or affect, but must substantially limit a major life activity."121
Pursuant to EEOC regulations, from which courts seek guidance in interpreting the ADA,122 the following factors are relevant to whether an impairment is substantially limiting:
(i) [t]he nature and severity of the impairment;
(ii) [t]he duration or expected duration of the impairment; and
(iii) [t]he permanent or long-term impact, or the expected permanent or long term impact of or resulting from the impairment."123
"[T]emporary, non-chronic impairments of short duration, with little or no long term or permanent impact, are usually not disabilities."124

c. analysis

i. prima facie case
Mr. Perez testified by affidavit that asthmatic bronchitis affects "all aspects of my life" as "I can no longer be outdoors for a long period of time due to difficulty breathing, cannot walk long distance, run, or exercise."125 He also avowed that he cannot "work in the chemical room due to ventilation issues."126 A February 15, 2006 letter from plaintiff's physician shows: he has reactive airway disease which could [*22]  result in a potentially fatal response upon exposure to noxious stimuli; plaintiff claimed to do well except in the chemical room; and on examination, respiration rate was eighteen, oxygen saturation was ninety-eight percent on room air, and "[a]usculation of heart and lungs is unremarkable."127 Other evidence shows: plaintiff had difficulty breathing in 2000, resulting in a transfer to the paint room; was diagnosed with asthma in 2002, when he worked in the paint room,128 and was absent from work from November 28, 2005 to December 8, 2005, due to breathing difficulties after he was transferred back to the chemical room.129
Even construing the evidence in Mr. Perez's favor, as non-movant, plaintiff has not addressed each of the factors relevant to determining whether his impairment substantially limits the major life activity of breathing. Severe asthma is an impairment that has the potential to substantially limit the life activity of breathing,130 but courts have found occasional allergic or asthmatic reactions do not rise to the level of substantially limiting.131 In the present case, the evidence shows Mr. Perez suffers from restrictive airway disease that might cause "a potentially [*23]  fatal episode of asthma" on exposure to "noxious stimuli."132 Nevertheless, other than evidence of some breathing difficulties in 2000, 2002, and 2005, there is nothing to suggest: Mr. Perez's breathing is frequently or persistently impaired by asthma or restrictive airway disease, both at work and outside work; the duration of asthmatic episodes; or the long-lasting or expected long-lasting impact of his asthma. Although Mr. Perez testified that breathing difficulties prevent him from being outside, walking distances, running, or exercising, there is no evidence supporting this conclusive testimony, medical or otherwise, showing how often plaintiff engages in these activities or attributing any limitations on these activities to asthma or restrictive airway disease. Mr. Perez has described no specific instances of having an asthmatic episode while engaged in outdoor activities or what may have trigger the episode. That Mr. Perez may experience breathing difficulties during distance walking, running, or exercising may suggest his asthma or restrictive airway disease is aggravated by overexertion, but it is not evidence showing his breathing is substantially limited on a frequent or long-term [*24]  basis in the normal course of his life. In sum, plaintiff has failed to show that he is disabled because an impairment substantially limits one of his major life activities.
Mr. Perez may also satisfy the first prong of his prima facie case by showing M2 Global regarded him as disabled. To establish a claim of "regarded as disabled," plaintiff may demonstrate he:
(1) has an impairment which is not substantially limiting but which the employer perceives as ... substantially limiting ...; (2) has an impairment which is substantially limiting only because of the attitudes of others towards such an impairment; or (3) has no impairment at all but is regarded by the employer as having a substantially limiting impairment.133
Although Mr. Perez alleged M2 Global regarded him as disabled,134 he did not expressly identify which of these prongs is at issue. Moreover, plaintiff has not argued how or cited evidence that M2 Global regarded him as disabled. Nor has Mr. Perez addressed M2 Global's argument that transferring plaintiff out of the chemical room and the paint room is not "proof that Defendant 'regarded Plaintiff [*25]  as disabled."135 This is evidence M2 Global may have had some concern about Mr. Perez's health and sensitivity to chemicals, but it does not suggest defendant regarded him as disabled by a substantially limiting impairment.136 In sum, plaintiff has not alleged how or shown that M2 Global regarded him as disabled.
To restate, Mr. Perez has not shown that asthma or restrictive airway disease substantially limits his major life activity of breathing. Nor has Mr. Perez shown that M2 Global regarded him as disabled by a substantially limiting impairment. Accordingly, Mr. Perez has failed to establish the first prong of his prima facie case, to show he was disabled for the purposes of the ADA and the Texas Labor Code. Therefore, M2 Global is entitled to summary judgment on plaintiff's disability discrimination claims.

ii. reasonable accommodation and interactive process
Assuming Mr. Perez has established he has a disability or was regarded as disabled, he must also show he was a "qualified individual with a disability." The ADA defines a "qualified individual with a disability" as "an individual who, with or without accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the [*26]  employment position that such individual holds or desires."137 Essential functions of the job are those "functions that bear more than a marginal relationship to the job at issue."138 Here, plaintiff asserts he is unable to work in the chemical room, where he was transferred in late 2005 or early 2006, and medical evidence shows plaintiff could have a potentially fatal allergic reaction on exposure to noxious stimuli, suggesting his impairment might affect his ability to perform essential functions in the paint room, where he desired to work. If the individual is unable to perform essential functions, then the question is whether "any reasonable accommodation by the employer would enable him to perform those functions.139
Plaintiff has the burden to demonstrate his requested accommodation was reasonable.140 "Once an employee has made a request for an accommodation, the ADA's regulations state that 'it may be necessary for the [employer] to initiate an informal, interactive process with the qualified individual with a disability in need of the accommodation' in order to craft a reasonable accommodation."141 EEOC regulations "stress that the interactive process requires the input of the employee as [*27]  well as the employer."142 Because "each party holds information the other does not have or cannot easily obtain," bilateral discussion is a must.143 When an employer is unwilling to engage in a good faith interactive process, such unwillingness "leads to a failure to reasonably accommodate an employee" and a violation of the ADA.144 On the other hand, "when responsibility for the breakdown of the 'informal, interactive process' is traceable to the employee," an employer does not violate the ADA.145
In this case, Mr. Perez alleges he requested that he be transferred back to the paint room or to some other work area. M2 Global argues "Mr. Perez's only colorable attempt at complying with the ADA's requirement that he engage in the 'interactive process' was to demand a return to the Paint Room and in refusing to work in the Finishing Room."146 Plaintiff has not addressed this argument.
First, it should be noted that when a reasonable accommodation cannot be made to the previously held job, the disabled employee may be transferred to another available position.147 But, a disabled plaintiff has no right to expect the accommodation will include the ability to choose the [*28]  job to which he will be assigned.148 Thus, to overcome summary judgment in this case, Mr. Perez must do more than merely show he requested to be returned to work in the paint room. Mr. Perez must also present evidence suggesting he actively engaged in the interactive process to show work in the paint room or assignment to other work at M2 Global were reasonable accommodations.
It is undisputed that upon learning of his medical condition, M2 Global removed Mr. Perez from work in both the paint room and chemical room, and did not allow him to return to work in either department prior to his discharge.149 It is also undisputed that Mr. Perez was assigned work in 2d Ops, where he worked from the time he informed M2 Global of his breathing condition until his discharge on February 28, 2006. The evidence shows M2 Global requested that plaintiff provide information from his physician regarding his impairment.150 In that regard, Mr. Sisson testified that:
In my judgment and in the judgment of management, we did not want to compromise his stated medical problems by letting him work in the Paint Room. We asked him to obtain a doctor's release or report informing us what duties he could perform without [*29]  jeopardizing his health. He never did so, except that he did bring a doctor's report that said he could not work in the "Chemical room" (Finishing Room) although it said nothing about the Paint Room. We did not let him work in the Paint Room unless he obtained a release from his doctor permitting him to work there."151
Mr. Carlberg testified that:
As a backdrop to the events preceding Mr. Perez's termination, Mr. Perez was assigned to Secondary Operations, on a full time basis, on or about September, 2005, when he verbally raised health limitations. This assignment was without reduction in pay or benefits, pending clarification of the health limitations which he claimed. No such clarification was ever reported to M2 Global.152
Although Mr. Perez avows his doctor was aware of and approved of his work in the paint room,153 such unsupported testimony does not controvert M2 Global's evidence showing plaintiff failed to provide a statement from the physician that plaintiff's health would not be jeopardized in the paint room, as M2 Global requested. Moreover, Exhibit Q to Mr. Perez's summary judgment response documents M2 Global's attempts to obtain clarification about Mr. Perez's limitations. Specifically, [*30]  Exhibit Q discusses various pieces of medical information M2 Global received from Mr. Perez between approximately December 7, 2005 and February 21, 2006.154
According to the information in Exhibit Q, Mr. Perez was absent from work from November 28, 2005 to December 8, 2006, and, on his return, provided a "stamped Dr. note and a copy of his discharge instructions, which released Rick to return to work, with limitations, on 12/7/05."155 Although Mr. Perez claimed he could return to the paint room, Exhibit Q reflects plaintiff would not be allowed to work in either that room or the chemical room until he provided a "letter from the physician that attended him in the hospital that would further define his limitations."156 Mr. Perez then provided a "note dated 12/6/05 from Dr. Zamora" that released plaintiff to return to work on December 8, 2005.157 The doctor's note states, "Pt to avoid exposure to chemicals at work,"158 which Exhibit Q describes as "not giv[ing] any additional information and [] open ended."159 Exhibit Q indicates Mr. Perez was scheduled for tests the week of December 22, 2005, and the doctor would provide information "stating his disabilities."160 When Mr. Perez again provided only a note [*31]  from Dr. Zamora dated December 22, 2005,161 which "could not [be] read," M2 Global requested "the letter that Dr. Zamora said she would provide."162 Mr. Perez provided another note on January 24, 2006, but "only a couple of words" could be "ma[d]e out."163 The note does say, in part, that "Mr. Perez may not work in the chemical room."164 Exhibit Q reflects that on February 21, 2006, Mr. Perez provided a letter from Dr. Zamora dated February 15, 2006,165 which: states the diagnosis of reactive airway disease; indicates plaintiff had claimed "he does well unless he is required to work in the chemical room;" and explains plaintiff "can have a potentially fatal response to noxious stimuli" and "runs the risk of potentially fatal episode of asthma should he be placed in any area to which his airways react."166
Even when construed in his favor, the medical evidence Mr. Perez provided to M2 Global fails to specifically address whether his impairment would be affected by work in the paint room or to reflect his physician was aware of the nature of such work. Although Mr. Perez claims his physician approved his work in the paint room, his unsupported [*32]  testimony is conclusory and speculative at best. Additionally, there is nothing in the record to suggest Mr. Perez ever informed M2 Global whether he considered work in 2nd Ops, or any other area outside the chemical and paint rooms, was a reasonable accommodation or to show whether or not the physician considered such work to be appropriate in light of plaintiff's diagnosis.
In sum, Mr. Perez did not expressly address M2 Global's argument that plaintiff failed to actively engage in the interactive process. Nor does the evidence suggest Mr. Perez actively engaged in, and did not interfere with, an interactive process with M2 Global to determine whether or not working in the paint room, or other areas, was a reasonable accommodation.
Accordingly, plaintiff has failed to raise a genuine issue of material fact that he was a qualified person with a disability who could perform the essential elements of his past work, or other work he desired at M2 Global, with or without reasonable accommodation. For that reason, M2 Global is entitled to summary judgment on Mr. Perez's disability discrimination claims.

d. conclusion
In sum, Mr. Perez has not established two elements of his prima facie case [*33]  of disability discrimination, namely, that he is disabled and that he is a qualified person with a disability. Therefore, under the accepted standards, the burden does not shift to M2 Global to articulate a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for terminating Mr. Perez's employment. As Mr. Perez has failed to establish a prima facie case of disability discrimination, M2 Global should be granted summary judgment and Mr. Perez's claims under the ADA and the Texas Labor Code should be dismissed.

2. Age Discrimination
Noting Mr. Perez has pleaded that "[a]ll conditions precedent to the initiation of this lawsuit have been fulfilled,"167 M2 Global argues plaintiff has not specified what conditions have been met with respect to an age discrimination claim for which defendant "is completely without notice."168 M2 Global asserts plaintiff has not established the right to bring an age discrimination claim.169
Mr. Perez has not addressed M2 Global's arguments regarding an age discrimination claim. Moreover, at page one of his summary judgment response, the list of Mr. Perez's causes of action does not include age discrimination.170 Nevertheless, because plaintiff's second cause of action, captioned as [*34]  disability discrimination, asserts defendant "intentionally engaged in unlawful employment practices involving Plaintiff because of his age" and that "Plaintiff was 50 years of age or older" (and does not actually make any factual assertions regarding disability or perceived disability discrimination),171 assuming Mr. Perez may have intended to bring an age discrimination claim based on assertions in the original petition, as M2 Global argues, this report addresses an age discrimination claim.
The scope of a discrimination "complaint is limited to the scope of the EEOC investigation which can reasonably be expected to grow out of the charge of discrimination."172 Plaintiff's "charge of discrimination" dated September 22, 2006, reflects that plaintiff did not mark "age" as an alleged basis of discrimination nor did plaintiff make any allegations that reasonably could be construed to support a claim of age discrimination.173 Further, the "notice of charge of discrimination" received by M2 Global on or about September 26, 2006, does not reflect the EEOC considered that plaintiff was pursuing an age discrimination claim.174 Thus, because nothing in plaintiff's "charge of discrimination" would have [*35]  caused or did cause an EEOC investigation into claims of age discrimination, plaintiff has failed to exhaust administrative remedies with respect to that claim.
Therefore, to the extent plaintiff's original petition asserts a claim of age discrimination or that plaintiff intended to assert an age discrimination claim, defendant's motion for summary judgment should be granted and any age discrimination claim should be dismissed.

3. Retaliation in Violation of the ADA and the Texas Labor Code

a. summary of the arguments
Although the original petition alleges a cause of action for "retaliation . . . in violation of Tex.Lab.Code § 21.053 and [§] 21.055 et seq." and a cause of action for "retaliation . . . in violation of Title VII," it does not include specific factual allegations relevant to retaliation.175 In particular, there is no specific factual allegation of what protected activity may have caused the retaliation; although under notice pleading, plaintiff's general allegations may suffice to state a claim, on summary judgment the Court considers the disputed material facts to determine if judgment as a matter of law may be entered. It is clear that plaintiff's original petition is not the source of any specific factual [*36]  averments, disputed or not disputed, in support of the claims at issue. With respect to his discharge, the adverse employment action at the heart of plaintiff's case, the original petition alleges only that "[a]fter Plaintiff provided a letter from his physician, Plaintiff was discharged because he could not perform the essential functions of his position in the chemical room."176 This allegation does not appear to be relevant to a retaliation claim, a fact Mr. Perez appears to acknowledge in his summary judgment response where he asserts for the first time, in sum, that he was discharged in retaliation for requesting a reasonable accommodation for his disability.177
M2 Global argues it "has proven that Mr. Perez was terminated for leaving his work station and the employer's premises without notice and failed to present himself to work on two consecutive days without calling in or giving a reason,"178 and "Plaintiff cannot truthfully allege that these facts are untrue or that these circumstances were not valid grounds for termination."179 Mr. Perez contends he "was fired just two weeks after he produced a written note from his doctor confirming that he had a pulmonary disorder,"180 and "Defendant's [*37]  proffered reason, that Plaintiff was absent from work, is merely pretext for a purely discriminatory and retaliatory discharge."181 M2 Global replies that Mr. Perez has failed to "address his unexcused absences" and to negate the articulated reason for his discharge.182

b. analysis
As a threshold matter, the undersigned observes that Mr. Perez failed to mark retaliation as a basis for his EEOC charge of discrimination,183 an issue M2 Global has not raised. In Pacheco v. Mineta, the Fifth Circuit noted that:
There is a disagreement in this circuit on whether a Title VII prerequisite, such as exhaustion, is merely a prerequisite to suit, and thus subject to waiver and estoppel, or whether it is a requirement that implicates subject matter jurisdiction. The Supreme Court has held that the EEOC or EEO filing deadlines are not jurisdictional. However, the reasoning . . . relies heavily on legislative history and Supreme Court precedents that characterize the filing deadlines as statutes of limitations. Neither the Supreme Court nor this Court sitting en banc has ruled the exhaustion requirement is subject to waiver or estoppel, and our panels are in disagreement over that question. [*38] 184
In that light, assuming the exhaustion requirement implicates subject matter jurisdiction, nothing in Mr. Perez's charge of discrimination can be construed to allege retaliation such that the EEOC would have investigated such a claim. Therefore, if the District Court considers exhaustion to be a prerequisite to this Court exercising subject matter jurisdiction over disability-based retaliation claims, Mr. Perez has failed to exhaust his administrative remedies and the retaliation claims under federal and state law should be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction. On the other hand, assuming the exhaustion requirement is akin to a statute of limitations, M2 Global has waived Mr. Perez's failure to exhaust, and the merits of M2 Global's arguments for summary judgment on the disability-based retaliation claims are considered.
As a second preliminary matter, Mr. Perez has alleged retaliation in violation of "Tex.Lab.Code § 21.053 and [§] 21.055 et seq." and " Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000(e), et seq."185 The original petition alleges only facts relevant to disability discrimination. Disability is not protected by Title VII.186 Therefore, to the extent plaintiff has alleged a disability-based discrimination [*39]  claim under Title VII, the claim should be dismissed. Relatedly, to the extent the original petition is seeking to allege a state retaliation claim under § 21.053, the claim should be dismissed as § 21.053, captioned "discrimination by labor organization,"187 addresses unions, but plaintiff's original petition otherwise contains no allegations involving a labor organization.
With respect to the disability-based retaliation claim, Mr. Perez argues in his summary judgment response that he "was engaging in a protected activity when he asked for reasonable accommodations;"188 this and other arguments by plaintiff support the conclusion plaintiff intended to bring a retaliation claim under the ADA and state law.189 Accordingly, this report does address the allegations set out in plaintiff's fifth and sixth causes of action for "retaliation" under state (§ 21.055) and federal law (the ADA). As noted, state law requirements generally track those in the corresponding federal law.190
ADA retaliation claims are analyzed under the McDonnell Douglas burden shifting framework.191 To establish a prima facie case of retaliation in violation of the ADA, a plaintiff must show: "(1) engagement in an activity protected by the ADA, [*40]  (2) an adverse employment action, and (3) a causal connection between the protected act and the adverse action."192 Once the plaintiff has established a prima facie case, the defendant must articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse employment action.193 If the defendant articulates such a reason, the plaintiff must raise a genuine issue of material fact that the proffered reason is a pretext for retaliation.194
As M2 Global does not challenge Mr. Perez's ability to establish the elements of his prima facie case, M2 Global appears to concede it has the initial burden on summary judgment to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for Mr. Perez's termination. To support its articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason that Mr. Perez was terminated for unexcused absences, M2 Global has provided the affidavits of Mr. Porras, Mr. Sisson, and Mr. Carlberg which reflect that Mr. Perez left work early without notice on February 24, 2006, and did not give notice he would be absent on the next two consecutive work days, or explain his absences on his return.195 Mr. Carlberg testified that M2 Global's employee handbook "provides an employee may be terminated for [*41]  'Any absence without notice; failure to report an absence or late arrival' and 'Unauthorized absence from a work station during the work day.'"196 The evidence shows Mr. Perez acknowledged receiving a copy of the handbook on April 17 and 19, 2002.197 The evidence also shows that on February 28, 2006, Mr. Perez was afforded the opportunity to "justify his absences," but he did not provide an explanation.198 Mr. Perez's employment was terminated on February 28, 2006, because of his unexcused absences and abandonment of a work station without notice.199 This evidence supports M2 Global's articulated legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for Mr. Perez's discharge. Accordingly, the burden shifts to Mr. Perez to show the articulated reason, his absences, was pretext for retaliation.
"The ultimate issue of retaliation requires the employee to prove that the adverse employment action would not have occurred 'but-for' the protected activity."200 The burden of proving "but-for" causation is more onerous that establishing the "causal link" in the prima facie case.201 To withstand a motion for summary judgment, "[t]he plaintiff must reveal a conflict in substantial evidence on the ultimate issue of retaliation[.]" [*42] 202
Mr. Perez does not specifically cite evidence to support his conclusory assertion that M2 Global's articulated reason is pretext for retaliation. Nevertheless, a review of his evidence shows, Mr. Perez testified by affidavit that he "was told he was discharged for not being able to fulfill my work duties,"203 testimony supported by M2 Global's "Employee Termination and Exist Interview and "Termination Checklist" forms.204 In addition, Mr. Perez testified "I have never left the premises of M2 Global without notifying anyone. On February [24], 2006, I told Amadeo Porras that I received a call from my son's school telling me that my son was ill and I had to go pick him up and Mr. Porras said that it was ok to leave."205
At best, Mr. Perez's testimony controverts the evidence that he was absent from his workstation without notice on February 24, 2006.206 But, even construing the testimony in Mr. Perez's favor, he did not controvert the evidence showing that: he was absent on February 25 and 27, 2006, without notice or explanation; he failed to explain his absences on his return to work on February 28, 2006; and the employee handbook provided such absences may justify his discharge. Nor does [*43]  Mr. Perez's testimony controvert M2 Global's evidence that he was terminated because of his unexcused absences. Mr. Perez does not deny that he: was absent from work without notice on February 25 and 27, 2006; met with Mr. Carlberg and others on February 28, 2006; did not provide an explanation for the absences; and was discharged by Mr. Carlberg because of those absences. "An essential element of any . . . job is an ability to appear for work . . . and to complete assigned tasks within a reasonable period of time."207
Mr. Perez has presented an undated and unsigned document produced by M2 Global that states he was "discharged due to the content of a letter received from his physician, dated 2/15/06, notifying us of Rick's pre-existing condition which prohibits him from performing his assigned duties in the fabrication production area, in particular, the process room and the painting room."208 This document might have been relevant to pretext in the disability discrimination claims had Mr. Perez met his burden to establish a prima facie case of disability discrimination, but the document does not "reveal a conflict in substantial evidence on the ultimate issue of retaliation[.]"209 The [*44]  document expresses the view of some unidentified person that Mr. Perez was discharged after M2 Global received a letter from plaintiff's physician about his health, but the document fails to suggest that but for Mr. Perez requesting a reasonable accommodation, Mr. Carlberg would not have terminated his employment.
In sum, to the extent failure to exhaust administrative remedies may preclude the Court from exercising subject matter jurisdiction over Mr. Perez's retaliation claims under federal and state law, the claims should be dismissed. To the extent the failure to exhaust is may considered to be more akin to a statute of limitations and M2 Global waived the issue, Mr. Perez has failed to raise a genuine issue of material fact that "but for" his request for a reasonable accommodation, M2 Global would not have terminated his employment. Therefore, M2 Global's motion for summary judgment on plaintiff's claims for disability-based retaliation under federal and state law should be granted and Mr. Perez's disability-based retaliation claims under the ADA and the Texas Labor Code should be dismissed. As discussed, to the extent plaintiff's original petition can be construed to allege any [*45]  other retaliation claim, to include disability retaliation in violation of Title VII or a state claim based on §21.053, those claims should be dismissed as a matter of law.

4. Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress
M2 Global has moved for summary judgment on Mr. Perez's state law claim of intentional infliction of emotional distress, arguing that "Plaintiff cannot extend legislative limitations on statutory claims by attempting to pad his damages [by] claiming intentional infliction of emotional distress."210 In response, Mr. Perez explains, in sum, how he has established the elements of a cause of action for intentional infliction of emotional distress.211
The Texas Supreme Court has explained that:
intentional infliction of emotional distress was, first and foremost, a "gap-filler" tort, judicially created for the limited purpose of allowing recovery in those rare instances in which a defendant intentionally inflicts severe emotional distress in a manner so unusual that the victim has no other recognized theory of redress. The tort's "clear purpose," we noted, was "to supplement existing forms of recovery by providing a cause of action for egregious conduct" that might otherwise go [*46]  unremedied. We cautioned, however, that the tort was "a 'gap-filler' tort that should not be extended to circumvent the limitations placed on the recovery of mental anguish damages under more established tort doctrines."212
Nor, the Court explained, should the tort "be extended to thwart legislative limitations on statutory claims for mental anguish and punitive damages," such as by combining a sexual harassment claim under Texas Labor Code and a claim of intentional infliction of emotional distress.213 "If the gravamen of a plaintiff's complaint is the type of wrong that the statutory remedy was meant to cover, a plaintiff cannot maintain an intentional infliction claim regardless of whether he or she succeeds on, or even makes, a statutory claim."214 To have a claim of intentional infliction of emotional distress, it must be independent of a statutory claim.215
In the present case, the original petition contains factual allegations only of disability-based discrimination. As discussed, such discrimination is barred by the ADA and the Texas Labor Code, each of which provide for the recovery of damages for "emotional pain, suffering, inconvenience, [and] mental anguish" as well as punitive damages. [*47] 216 As Mr. Perez has alleged no set of facts regarding intentional infliction of emotional distress that are independent of his statutory claims of disability discrimination under the ADA and the Texas Labor Code, his state law action for intentional infliction of emotional distress is barred by Texas law.217 Accordingly, M2 Global's motion for summary judgment should be granted, and Mr. Perez's state law claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress should be dismissed.

5. Negligent Hiring, Training, Supervision, and Retention

a. summary of the arguments
M2 Global has moved for summary judgment on Mr. Perez's negligent hiring, training, supervision, and retention claim, arguing "Plaintiff's pleadings, even if arguably founded in state law, are so vague and without foundation that he cannot support this claim by any competent evidence."218 In addition, M2 Global asserts plaintiff has not identified "the supervisor against whom this allegation is leveled" and plaintiff has failed to state a claim for relief.219
In response, Mr. Perez asserts he has shown that "until January 2006, Plaintiff was able to work [*48]  in areas besides the chemical room without incident and no problems with past supervisors."220 Mr. Perez contends this is evidence that "Plaintiff's new supervisor was so unreasonable and discriminatory that Defendant was negligent to hire him and/or in his supervision, training and retention."221
To establish a claim for negligent hiring and retention, Mr. Perez must show M2 Global failed to investigate, screen, or supervise Mr. Perez's supervisor and such failure proximately caused Mr. Perez's injuries.222 "The basis of responsibility for negligent hiring and retention is the employer's negligence in hiring or retaining an incompetent employee who the employer knew or, in the exercise of ordinary care, should have known was incompetent or unfit, and thereby creating an unreasonable risk of harm to others."223 When an employee's background contains no information "that would cause a reasonable employer not to hire or retain the employee," the employer is not negligent.224 To establish negligent training, "a plaintiff must prove that a reasonably prudent employer would have provided training beyond that which was given and that failure to do so caused his injuries."225 To establish negligent supervision, [*49]  "a plaintiff must show that an employer's failure to supervise its employees caused his injuries."226
Mr. Perez has failed to respond to M2 Global's assertion that he can provide no evidence to establish a claim of negligent hiring, training, supervision, and retention. Although Mr. Perez argues that he has shown that "until January 2006, Plaintiff was able to work in areas besides the chemical room without incident and no problems with past supervisors,"227 this argument does not establish M2 Global's negligence. Nor does Mr. Perez's argument establish that his supervisor was "so unreasonable and discriminatory,"228 as Mr. Perez speculates. Mr. Perez has cited no evidence showing: the supervisor's background included information that would have caused a reasonable employer to refuse to hire or retain him; M2 Global failed to investigate, screen, or supervise the supervisor; or M2 Global failed to provide training or additional training beyond that normally provided. As Mr. Perez has no evidence to establish the elements of his claim, he has failed to raise a genuine issue of material fact that M2 Global was negligent in hiring, training, supervising, and retaining the supervisor. Accordingly, [*50]  M2-Global's motion for summary judgment should be granted and the claim of negligent hiring, training, supervision, and retention should be dismissed.

B. Motion for Reconsideration
M2 Global has moved for reconsideration of its motion to dismiss pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 41(b) "for Plaintiff's failure to prosecute his case in accordance with the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and the Court's Scheduling Orders.229 M2 Global initially filed its motion to dismiss on August 8, 2008,230 and the District Court denied the motion without prejudice on October 14, 2008.231 On February 6, 2009, M2 Global filed a motion for protective order and alternative motion to dismiss, re-urging its August 2008 motion.232 On March 10, 2008, after the case was referred by the District Court, the undersigned granted in part and denied in part the motion for protective order.233 On March 11, 2009, the undersigned issued a report recommending M2 Global's alternative motion to dismiss be denied.234 M2 Global's objections to the March 11 report are pending before the District Court.235
This report recommends that M2 Global's motion for summary judgment be granted and each of plaintiff's claims against M2 Global be dismissed. In that light, M2 Global's [*51]  motion for reconsideration of its motion to dismiss is moot. Therefore, the undersigned also recommends M2 Global's motion for reconsideration of its Rule 41(b) motion to dismiss be denied as moot.
VII. RECOMMENDATIONS
Based on the above discussion, it is recommended that:
• the Clerk may terminate Daniel Valdez as a party plaintiff based on Mr. Perez's representation he is not a party to this case;236
•
• M2 Global's motion for summary judgment237 be GRANTED and each of Mr. Perez's causes of action be DISMISSED; and
• M2 Global's motion for reconsideration238 of its Rule 41(b) motion to dismiss be DENIED as moot.
If the District Judge accepts this report, all claims will have been addressed and the Clerk may be directed to enter judgment.

VIII. INSTRUCTIONS FOR SERVICE AND NOTICE OF RIGHT TO OBJECT/APPEAL
The United States District Clerk shall serve a copy of this Report and Recommendation on all parties by either: (1) electronic transmittal to all parties represented by an attorney registered as a Filing User with the Clerk of Court pursuant to the Court's Procedural Rules for Electronic Filing in Civil and Criminal Cases; or (2) by certified mail, return receipt requested, to any party not represented by an attorney [*52]  registered as a Filing User.
As provided in 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1) and FED. R. CIV. P. 72(b), any party who desires to object to this Report must file with the District Clerk and serve on all parties and the Magistrate Judge written Objections to the Report and Recommendation within 10 days after being served with a copy, unless this time period is modified by the District Court. A party filing Objections must specifically identify those findings, conclusions or recommendations to which objections are being made and the basis for such objections; the District Court need not consider frivolous, conclusive or general objections.
A party's failure to file timely written objections to the proposed findings, conclusions and recommendations contained in this Report will bar the party from receiving a de novo determination by the District Court.239 Additionally, a party's failure to file timely written objections to the proposed findings, conclusions and recommendations contained in this Report will bar the aggrieved party, except upon grounds of plain error, from attacking on appeal the unobjected-to proposed factual findings and legal conclusions accepted by the District Court.240
SIGNED and ENTERED this 4th day of May, 2009.
/s/ Pamela [*53]  A. Mathy
PAMELA A. MATHY
UNITED STATES M AGISTRATE JUDGE


End of Document

