Perona v. Time Warner Cable
United States District Court for the Central District of California
December 6, 2016, Decided; December 6, 2016, Filed
EDCV-14-02501-MWF (SPx)

Reporter
2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 200311 *; 2016 WL 8941101
Katrina Perona -v- Time Warner Cable
Prior History: Perona v. Time Warner Cable Inc., 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 188651 (C.D. Cal., Aug. 12, 2016)
Counsel:  [*1] For Katrina Perona, an individual, Plaintiff: Audrey Lynn Priolo, LEAD ATTORNEY, Magnanimo & Dean, Woodland Hills, CA; Frank A Magnanimo, Magnanimo and Dean LLP, Woodland Hills, CA.
For Time Warner Cable Inc., a corporation, Defendant: James Allen Bowles, LEAD ATTORNEY, Casey Lee Morris, Elissa L Gysi, Hill Farrer and Burrill LLP, Los Angeles, CA.
Judges: MICHAEL W. FITZGERALD, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: MICHAEL W. FITZGERALD
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES—GENERAL

Proceedings (In Chambers): AMENDED ORDER RE APPLICATION FOR ATTORNEY'S FEES AND MOTION FOR JUDGMENT AS A MATTER OF LAW [96] [102]
Two Motions are before the Court. Following Plaintiff's verdict at trial, on October 5, 2016, Plaintiff filed a Motion for Attorneys' Fees, Costs and Expert Witness Fees (the "Fee Application") (Docket No. 96). Defendant Time Warner Cable ("TWC") opposed the Fee Application on October 13, 2016 (Docket No. 98); Plaintiff replied on October 24, 2016 (Docket No. 103).
On October 19, 2016, TWC filed a Renewed Motion and Motion for Judgment as a Matter of Law on Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process Claim, or, in the Alternative, for Partial New Trial (the "Motion"). (Docket No. 102). On October 28, 2016, Plaintiff filed [*2]  an Opposition. (Docket No. 105). TWC replied on November 7, 2016. (Docket No. 106). The Court reviewed and considered the papers submitted on the Motion and held a hearing on November 21, 2016.
TWC's Motion is DENIED. The jury's finding for TWC as to reasonable accommodation does not preclude, as a matter of law, a finding for Plaintiff as to failure to engage in the interactive process. Here, the jury could reasonably have found both that TWC reasonably accommodated Plaintiff when it gave her medical leave and that TWC later failed in its continuing duty to engage in the interactive process when it flatly denied Plaintiff's request to return to work.
Plaintiff's Fee Application is GRANTED in part. The Court finds Plaintiff's fee request to be largely reasonable. However, the Court only grants Plaintiff a 1.3 multiplier and does not authorize an award of expert fees for Plaintiff's human resources expert. In total, Plaintiff shall recover fees and costs in the amount of $1,025,268.74.
This Order has been amended to reflect the correct amount of the fee award.

I. BACKGROUND
The history of this action is well known to the parties. Accordingly, the Court will limit its recitation of facts [*3]  to those necessary for context. The following background facts are the undisputed facts as stated in the Court's previous Order re Cross Motions for Summary Judgment. (Docket No. 40)
TWC employed Plaintiff as a customer care representative from October 26, 2012, to October 17, 2013. A customer care representative's duties consist of answering telephone calls from TWC's customers and assisting them with various inquiries. TWC's description of the position lists the ability to work "day, evening, weekend, and split shifts" under the heading "Qualifications." The parties disputed whether such flexibility is an essential job function or merely an availability qualification.
TWC uses a "shift-bid" system based on a combination of seniority and performance to schedule employee shifts. In the shift-bid process, senior employees generally elect, and almost always receive, the most desirable morning shifts. From time to time, TWC permits its employees to change their shifts to accommodate school schedules and other functions. Each request for schedule modification is evaluated on a case-by-case basis.
On March 23, 2013, TWC conducted a formal shift bid, and Plaintiff was placed on the evening [*4]  shift from 1:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. Although there were no issues with Plaintiff's job performance, she struggled with serious health problems that made it difficult for her to work. Among other things, Plaintiff suffered from fibromyalgia—a disorder causing inflammation and pain in hips, knees and abdomen—as well as severe stress and anxiety. By April 29, 2013, Plaintiff's condition became so severe that her primary care physician, Jimmy Dung Thien Tran, M.D., placed her on a leave of absence. TWC, being aware of Plaintiff's ailments, approved the leave.
Plaintiff's leave was extended and approved a total of eleven times—from April 29, 2013, through September 26, 2013. Toward the end of that time period, another physician, Gerald R. Goodlow M.D., indicated that Plaintiff could return to work on July 8, 2013, as long as she were permitted to work for no more than four hours per day, specifically in the mornings, over a two-month period. In the event those accommodations could not be met, Dr. Goodlow directed TWC to continue Plaintiff's leave of absence. When Anne Long, the Human Resources Manager for the Ontario Call Center, received Dr. Goodlow's note, she responded, "We don't accommodate [*5]  mod [modified] duty for non w/c [worker's compensation] leaves of absence as the business cannot support it." TWC thus chose Dr. Goodlow's second option and extended Plaintiff's leave.
Sometime in September 2013, Long suggested that Plaintiff resign in good standing and then reapply for her position once her health improved. The parties dispute whether Long guaranteed that Plaintiff would be rehired or that she simply assured Plaintiff that her application would be considered. In any event, Plaintiff refused Long's offer and provided another physician's note extending her leave from September 26, 2013, to November 26, 2013.
TWC refused to grant the extension. On October 16, 2013, TWC sent Plaintiff a letter terminating her employment because "business conditions [could] no longer support [the] request" and because "it appeared unlikely" that Plaintiff would return back to work in November. Although the termination letter invited Plaintiff to reapply for her position once her condition improved, Plaintiff neither reapplied nor contacted TWC again.
On September 19, 2014, Plaintiff initiated this action, asserting the following claims arising under California law: (1) disability discrimination; [*6]  (2) failure to prevent discrimination and harassment; (3) failure to engage in the interactive process; (4) failure to accommodate disability; (5) retaliation; (6) impermissible non-job related inquiry; (7) wrongful termination in violation of public policy; (8) intentional infliction of emotional distress; (9) failure to provide meal/rest periods; and (10) unfair business practices. On March 24, 2016, the Court dismissed Plaintiff's claims for intentional infliction of emotional distress and failure to provide meal and rest periods. (See Docket No. 40).
On August 30, 2016, a jury trial was held. (Docket No. 77). During trial, Plaintiff dismissed her claim of retaliation. (Docket No. 95 at 4). Before the action was submitted to the jury, TWC moved for judgment as a matter of law under Rule 50(a)(1). (Docket No. 84). The case was submitted to the jury, subject to the Court's later deciding the issues raised in the motion, in accordance with Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 50(b). After due deliberation, the jury found for Plaintiff on her claim for failure to engage in the interactive process, awarding Plaintiff $160,000 in damages. (Id.). Judgment was entered in favor of TWC on the remaining claims. (Id.).
TWC now renews its motion for [*7]  judgment as a matter of law as to Plaintiff's claim for failure to engage in the interactive process; in the alternative, TWC moves for a new trial. Plaintiff, in turn, requests statutory attorneys' fees.

II. TWC'S MOTIONS

A. Motion for Judgment as a Matter of Law
Juries perform a vital role in our system of justice. As triers of fact, jurors become a part of the court itself, and judges are "rarely entitled to disregard jury verdicts that are supported by substantial evidence." Duk v. MGM Grand Hotel, Inc., 320 F.3d 1052, 1058 (9th Cir. 2003). But on occasion, the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure do permit a Court to enter judgment as a matter of law. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 50(b).
The party seeking to overturn the jury's verdict, however, "wages an uphill battle." Munafo v. Metro. Transp. Auth., 381 F.3d 99, 105 (2d Cir. 2004). Even when a verdict is inconsistent, the Seventh Amendment requires the court to reconcile the inconsistency in any possible way. Norris v. Sysco, 191 F.3d 1043, 1048 (9th Cir. 1999) ("When faced with a claim that verdicts are inconsistent, the court must search for a reasonable way to read the verdict as expressing a coherent view of the case . . . .") (quoting Toner v. Lederle Labs., 828 F.2d 510, 512 (9th Cir.1987)). The court may even assume that "the jury's lay understanding of a particular legal concept differs from the court's" when attempting to harmonize specific discrepancies. Floyd v. Laws, 929 F.2d 1390, 1396 (9th Cir. 1991). Only when all such efforts fail may the court [*8]  set aside the jury's verdict and enter judgment for the opposing party as a matter of law.
When presented with a motion for judgment as a matter of law, "the court . . . may not make credibility determinations or weigh the evidence." Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 150, 120 S. Ct. 2097, 147 L. Ed. 2d 105 (2000). Rather, the court must view all evidence "in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party . . . and draw all reasonable inferences in that party's favor." E.E.O.C. v. Go Daddy Software, Inc., 581 F.3d 951, 961 (9th Cir. 2009) (quoting Josephs v. Pac. Bell, 443 F.3d 1050, 1062 (9th Cir.2006)). The appropriate test is whether "the evidence permits only one reasonable conclusion, and that conclusion is contrary to the jury's verdict." Id.

1. Whether the Jury's Finding Regarding TWC's Reasonable Accommodation Requires Entry of Judgment as a Matter of Law for the Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process Claim
The heart of TWC's arguments concerns whether the jury's finding that TWC did not fail to provide a reasonable accommodation for Plaintiff's physical condition legally requires entry of judgment in TWC's favor as to the claim for failure to engage in the interactive process.
The special verdict form set out Plaintiff's claims in separate sections, separated by headings indicating what claim was at issue. (Redacted Verdict Form ("Verdict") at 3 (Docket No. 93)). In the second [*9]  section, titled "Failure to Reasonably Accommodate Claim," Question 12 asked the jury, "Did Time Warner Cable fail to provide reasonable accommodation for Katrina Perona's physical condition?" (Id.). The jury answered, "No." (Id.). The jury thus found for TWC as to that claim. Nevertheless, the jury found for Plaintiff on her third claim, for failure to engage in the interactive process.
California courts have repeatedly explained that "an employer's failure to properly engage in the process is separate from the failure to reasonably accommodate an employee's disability and gives rise to an independent cause of action." Swanson v. Morongo Unified Sch. Dist., 232 Cal. App. 4th 954, 971, 181 Cal. Rptr. 3d 553 (2014), as modified on denial of reh'g (Dec. 23, 2014) (citing Gelfo v. Lockheed Martin Corp., 140 Cal. App. 4th 34, 61, 43 Cal. Rptr. 3d 874 (2006)). It is also true, however, that under California Government Code § 12940(n), a claim for failure to engage in the interactive process requires the plaintiff "to identify a specific, available reasonable accommodation through the litigation process." Scotch v. Art Inst. of California-Orange Cty., Inc., 173 Cal. App. 4th 986, 1017, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d 338 (2009) (emphasis omitted). Therefore, the jury's factual finding that TWC provided Plaintiff with a reasonable accommodation could arguably preclude Plaintiff's interactive process claim, if the jury's finding implies that any further interaction regarding accommodation would have been futile.
The jury's factual [*10]  finding in Question 12 can be reconciled with the determination of liability as to Plaintiff's interactive process claim. "An employer has an 'affirmative duty' to reasonably accommodate a disabled employee, and that duty is a 'continuing' one that is 'not exhausted by one effort.'" Swanson, 232 Cal. App. 4th at 969 (quoting Humphrey v. Memorial Hospitals Assn., 239 F.3d 1128, 1138 (9th Cir. 2001)) (other internal citations omitted); accord Achal v. Gate Gourmet, Inc., 114 F. Supp. 3d 781, 799 (N.D. Cal. 2015) ("Once initiated, the employer has a continuous obligation to engage in the interactive process in good faith."). Here, the jury could have found that while TWC initially provided Plaintiff with a reasonable accommodation when it gave her paid leave, it failed to continue to engage in the interactive process with Plaintiff when it became clear that some different accommodation would be necessary.
Indeed, it possible to read the inconsistency TWC identifies another way—as an indication that the jury improperly found against Plaintiff on her reasonable accommodation claim. If anything, it seems that the jury read Question 12 to ask whether TWC ever reasonably accommodated Plaintiff, not whether it exhausted all possible reasonable accommodations. The fact that the jury, in Question 24 of the verdict form, identified reasonable accommodations that it believed [*11]  TWC could have — but did not — provided Plaintiff shows that the jury carefully considered whether TWC met its continuing duty to engage with and accommodate Plaintiff — and concluded that TWC failed. (Verdict at 5). The Court notes that the award of noneconomic damages bolsters this theory, as it indicates the jury considered the angst Plaintiff experienced while trying (and failing) to negotiate a reasonable accommodation with TWC to be worthy of compensation.
At the hearing, TWC argued that the Court's reading is temporally limited in a way not reflected in the language of Question 12. TWC would read Question 12 to ask, "Did Time Warner Cable [ever] fail to provide reasonable accommodation for Katrina Perona's physical condition?" This reading of Question 12 is reasonable and consistent with the case law. However, the question itself is ambiguous; it does not compel TWC's interpretation. While the jury could have interpreted the question in the manner that TWC suggests, its answers to Questions 19, 20, and 24 indicate that it did not. It is the Court's duty on a motion for judgment as a matter of law to harmonize the jury's verdict, see Norris, 191 F.3d at 1048, and here the ambiguity that TWC identifies simply does [*12]  not require vacating the jury's considered verdict.
Swanson is instructive. In that case, the plaintiff was a school teacher who became disabled as a result of her cancer treatments. Id. at 960. At first, the school district accommodated her; although the plaintiff expressed concern over receiving a new assignment as a reading specialist during her treatment, the school assured her that she would be able to attend a five day training in preparation. Id. The plaintiff did so, but nevertheless ended up missing much of the school year due to complications from her treatment. Id.
The next school year, the school district again gave the plaintiff a new assignment, this time as a fifth grade teacher. Id. The plaintiff explained that her health would not allow her to prepare for a new assignment and asked, if she must be reassigned, that it be to a second grade classroom, as she had recently taught that grade at a different school. Id. Instead, the school district assigned the plaintiff to a kindergarten class. Id.
The court held that a triable issue of fact existed as to whether the school district's actions constituted a failure to engage in the interactive process. Id. at 972. The court began by noting that [*13]  the employer's responsibility to engage in the interactive process is ongoing. Id. at 969. The school contended that it engaged in the interactive process when it switched the plaintiff from the fifth grade assignment, per her request. Id. at 972. The court disagreed:
The [Fair Employment and Housing Act ("FEHA")] required the District to engage in an ongoing dialogue regarding the accommodations Swanson believed she needed to mitigate her cancer-related conditions, but the District failed to present any evidence to show it engaged Swanson in such a dialogue. . . . To the contrary, the evidence shows the District simply assigned Swanson to teach kindergarten and failed to engage in any further discussion with her.
Id. The school district could not simply accommodate Plaintiff once and be done with its responsibilities under FEHA. Rather, it was required to continue to engage the plaintiff in conversation about what accommodations were reasonable and effective as circumstances changed.
Similarly, at trial, the parties agreed that TWC initially accommodated Plaintiff's condition by approving her requests for leave. However, the jury could have reasonably understood the evidence at trial to indicate that when [*14]  Plaintiff requested to return to work on a part time basis in July 2013, TWC failed to engage in the interactive process to determine whether that was a possibility.
First, the jury explicitly found that TWC, and not Plaintiff, was responsible for the breakdown in the interactive process. In response to Question 18, "Was Katrina Perona willing to participate in an interactive process to determine whether reasonable accommodation could be made so that she would be able to perform the essential job duties?" the jury answered "Yes." (Verdict at 4). In response to Question 19, "Did Time Warner Cable fail to participate in a timely good-faith interactive process with Katrina Perona to determine whether reasonable accommodation could be made?" the jury likewise answered "Yes." (Id.).
Second, the jury could have concluded from the testimony that part-time positions were available to some employees at TWC. Loren Rozatti, a customer care director at TWC, testified that, although TWC cannot undermine the shift bid criteria, TWC has "no rule" against allowing an employee to work part time as an accommodation. (Opp., Ex. E at 131: 10-12, 14-19). Rozatti further testified that if a request for part time work [*15]  falls within a customer care representative's shift, TWC may allow the representative to work either the first or second half of their shift. (Opp. Ex. E at 132:6-9).
Similarly, Nicole Jones, the Human Resources generalist in the Ontario call center, testified that there was no inherent reason that TWC could not provide a part-time shift for customer care representatives:
Q. Now, the only reason that you would say that part time is not available is because in your view, you have the customer care representatives working full-time shifts, correct?
A. Yes, all of our — all of our employees are full-time shifts except those that were grandfathered into the part-time shifts, before I even started with the company.
Q. . . . If Time Warner Cable wanted to start a shift of part-time customer care representatives, the job could be done on a part-time basis, correct?
A. If they could start that, yes. It could be — it could be done on a part time basis.
(Opp. Ex. C at 86:11-87:1).
And Jason Johnson, a customer service manager, testified that some employees at TWC actually worked part-time shifts:
Q. Are there any part-time customer care reps?
A. There are some part-time customer service reps that have [*16]  been with the company for quite some time. They were part of the legacy Adelphia. Actually they existed when I came to the call center eight years ago.
Q. Are you aware that other customer care reps can request to work part time?
A. If they requested part time, they would be referred to the human resources department to speak with them.
. . .
Q. An in fact, you had an employee who moved to working part time. It didn't cause any problems, did it?
A. No.
Q. So you did have an employee that moved to part time?
A. Correct. We had an employee that was employed by Time Warner and interacted with human resources. And based on their schedule, they were able to move part time to a lesser desirable schedule.
(Opp., Ex. E at 85:18-86:24).
From the foregoing testimony, the jury could have concluded that it was possible for TWC to provide Plaintiff with a part-time shift. However, Anne Long testified at trial that she took no affirmative steps to see if she could accommodate Plaintiff's request to return to work part time:
Q. You communicated that [Plaintiff's request for a part-time shift would be denied] to Ms. Perona?
A. Yes. What I did was I went back to Ms. Perona. . . . I told her that we weren't able [*17]  to accommodate the morning part-time shift. However, we can accommodate the second request of her physician, which was to continue her leave until 9/3.
. . .
Q. — did you do any research to determine whether there were other accommodations you could provide to Ms. Perona?
A. In our office? Well, you're asking if I did research. Are you asking if I did research in the office as to —
Q. I'm trying to figure out if you did anything between the time Mr. Rozatti told you no and the time you communicated that to Ms. Perona. Did you do anything to figure out if there were other accommodations you could provide to her?
A. There wouldn't have been other accommodations on a part-time schedule in the morning. So, no, I didn't.
Q. Did you look at any other types of accommodations, maybe reassigning her somewhere?
A. Ms. Perona couldn't have been reassigned without being trained for reassignment. So that wasn't an option.
From these exchanges, and other similar testimony, the jury apparently determined that TWC's flat rejection of Plaintiff's request for part-time employment did not constitute a good faith interaction. That is, the jury may reasonably have found that after allowing Plaintiff to take leave, [*18]  TWC, like the school administration in Swanson, "simply . . . failed to engage in any further discussion with her" about other means of accommodation. 232 Cal. App. 4th at 972. Therefore, the jury's verdict is not inherently contradictory. Even though the jury found that TWC initially provided a reasonable accommodation for Plaintiff, it could have also reasonably concluded that TWC failed to engage in the interactive process when Plaintiff requested to return to work from her extended medical leave.
At the hearing, counsel for TWC argued that the evidence at trial conclusively established that Plaintiff would not have taken a part-time afternoon shift even if she were offered one — and that her doctors would never have authorized afternoon work in any case. TWC's argument is contradicted by the trial record.
Plaintiff's doctor, Dr. Gerald Goodlow, testified that he would have considered authorizing her to take a part-time afternoon shift if asked:
Q. Could Ms. Perona have worked from 1:00 to 5:00, part time in your opinion, in July of 2013?
A. Could have been tried. This is not — its not a precise. My best estimation is when a person would be most likely to be less uncomfortable and more functional, morning [*19]  time. Probably could have worked afternoon. Each person is different. More of my best estimation.
Q. That is something you would have wanted Ms. Perona to try?
A. Yes. We encourage all members to try to work if they can. If it looks like they're able to.
(Opp. Ex. A at 75:15-25).
Plaintiff's medical expert, Dr. Stuart Silverman, similarly testified:
Q. What about working 1:00 to 5:00 part time —
A. Again, I don't know that exactly. But since it's four hours that would give her a chance to collapse around dinner time. It's possible that might have worked.
. . .
Q. In your practice, if an employer is unable to provide a morning shift, let's say, would you still want your patient to try and work a later shift?
A. Again, as I mentioned, counsel, my feeling is there is kind of a rabbit hole you can fall down to once you stop working. Disability feeds disability. I do my best to get people back to work. I'll try to intervene with employers if I can get them back to work in some capacity. I feel it's not simply working but it's also keep yourself on schedule, having self-esteem.
(Opp. Ex. B at 27:1-19).
Finally, Plaintiff herself testified that she asked Long about part-time work and about alternatives [*20]  to working the morning shift:
Q. . . . [W]as there any discussion between you and Ms. Long about this document? [The document being a letter from Plaintiff's doctor authorizing Plaintiff to return to work part-time.]
A. Yes.
Q. Can you tell me about that conversation?
A. Yes. Basically she told me that they would not allow me to return to work, because part time is for employees that are on workers' comp. And I was not on workers' comp., so I wouldn't be allowed to go back to work.
They wouldn't, you know, give me a morning shift or anything. I asked, Is there anything else that we could do so that I could return to work? She just said, No. If it's not your regular schedule and time, then no.
(Opp. Ex. B at 106:4-15).
From this testimony, the jury reasonably could have inferred that Plaintiff would have taken a part-time, afternoon shift if it had been made available to her. And indeed, in answer to Question 24 on the verdict form, the jury indicated it considered part-time work to be a reasonable accommodation that would have been available to Plaintiff, had TWC properly engaged in the interactive process. (Verdict at 24).

2. Whether the Jury's Finding Regarding TWC's Failure to Engage in the Interactive [*21]  Process Was Mere Surplusage
TWC next contends that the jury never should have reached the question of TWC's failure to engage in the interactive process, because the jury found that TWC reasonably accommodated Plaintiff. TWC believes that the verdict form should have instructed the jury to skip over the failure to engage section once the jury found that TWC reasonably accommodated Plaintiff. This contention merely repackages TWC's previous argument that a finding of reasonable accommodation legally precludes a finding of failure to engage in the interactive process. However, as explained above, the law does not require this result. See Swanson, 232 Cal. App. 4th at 969-72; Moore v. Regents of the Univ. of California, 248 Cal. App. 4th 216, 242, 206 Cal. Rptr. 3d 841 (2016) ("While a claim of failure to accommodate is independent of a cause of action for failure to engage in an interactive dialogue, each necessarily implicates the other."); Achal v. Gate Gourmet, Inc., 114 F. Supp. 3d 781, 799-800 (N.D. Cal. 2015). If anything, the law requires the Court to enter judgment in favor of Plaintiff on her reasonable accommodation claim.
The Court notes that because TWC failed to object timely to the language of the finalized verdict form, it arguably waived its right to contest the form of the verdict. (Opp. Ex. F at 4:6-10, 20-23); see Fed. R. Civ. P. 51(c)(2). "No party may assign as error the giving or the failure to [*22]  give an instruction unless that party objects thereto before the jury retires to consider its verdict, stating distinctly the matter objected to and the grounds of the objection. . . ." Ayuyu v. Tagabuel, 284 F.3d 1023, 1026 (9th Cir. 2002) (quoting Fed. R. Civ. P. 51). This rule applies not just to jury instructions, but also to the form of the verdict. Id. To the extent that alleged errors "are not claims about the way the jury answered the form's interrogatories, [but] are allegations that errors were built into the form itself," they are waived if no objection is raised "until after the jury had rendered its verdict and [is] discharged." Yeti by Molly, Ltd. v. Deckers Outdoor Corp., 259 F.3d 1101, 1109 (9th Cir. 2001).
As TWC explains, the day before the action was submitted to the jury, TWC's counsel submitted a special verdict form that would not have permitted the jury to reach the interactive process questions if the jury found that TWC reasonably accommodated Plaintiff. (See Declaration of Casey L. Morris ¶ 11, Ex. H (Docket No. 102-2)). TWC was thus demonstrably aware of the operation of the special verdict form. Nevertheless, the Court need not decide whether TWC waived its objection because there remains little doubt that the jury's verdict was carefully considered and consistent with the law.

3. Whether Plaintiff Suffered [*23]  Damages as a Result of TWC's Conduct
To prevail on her claim for failure to engage in the interactive process, Plaintiff was required to prove that TWC's conduct caused her to suffered damages. See CACI 2546 ("Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process"). TWC contends that because the jury found that TWC reasonably accommodated Plaintiff, she could not have suffered any damages as a result of TWC's failure to engage in the interactive process. This argument fails for the same reasons that TWC's previous two arguments fail. As discussed above, TWC's reading of the verdict form was apparently rejected by the jury. If the jury found that TWC failed to engage in the interactive process with Plaintiff after she requested a return to work, it follows that Plaintiff suffered damages from TWC's conduct, independent of TWC's earlier accommodation of Plaintiff's request for medical leave.

B. Motion, in the Alternative, for a New Trial
Finally, TWC requests a new trial on the same grounds already raised above. For the same reasons already discussed, TWC's Motion is DENIED.

III. PLAINTIFF'S FEE APPLICATION
In light of the jury verdict in her favor, Plaintiff requests the Court award counsel (1) attorneys' [*24]  fees in the amount of $1,635,800 and (2) non-statutory costs and expert fees in the amount of $84,638.59.

A. Attorneys' Fees
Under FEHA, the Court has the discretion to award reasonable attorneys' fees to the prevailing party. Young v. Exxon Mobil Corp., 168 Cal. App. 4th 1467, 1474, 86 Cal. Rptr. 3d 507 (2008) (citing Cal. Gov. Code § 12965(b)). "California courts . . . hold that, in exercising its discretion, a trial court should ordinarily award attorney fees to a prevailing plaintiff, unless special circumstances would render an award of fees unjust." Id. "[S]trong equitable considerations" support awarding attorneys' fees to a prevailing plaintiff, "including that fees are being awarded against a violator of federal law, and that the federal policy being vindicated by the plaintiff is of the highest priority . . . ." Id. The jury in this action returned a verdict in favor of Plaintiff's claim for failure to engage in the interactive process, and thus Plaintiff is the prevailing party for purposes of awarding fees.
California requires that the Court apply the lodestar method for awarding attorneys' fees under FEHA. See Ketchum v. Moses, 24 Cal. 4th 1122, 1134, 104 Cal. Rptr. 2d 377, 17 P.3d 735 (2001) ("[B]ecause the determination of the lodestar figures is so fundamental to arriving at an objectively reasonable amount, 'the exercise of that discretion must be based on [*25]  the lodestar adjustment method.'" (quoting Press v. Lucky Stores, Inc., 34 Cal. 3d 311, 322, 193 Cal. Rptr. 900, 667 P.2d 704 (1983)); Horsford v. Bd. of Trustees of Cal. State Univ., 132 Cal. App. 4th 359, 394, 33 Cal. Rptr. 3d 644 (2005) (describing the policy behind requiring use of the lodestar method).
To determine the lodestar, the Court must first determine all the hours reasonably billed. The Court must then multiply that total by "the hourly prevailing rate for private attorneys in the community conducting noncontingent litigation of the same type." Horsford, 132 Cal. App. 4th at 394. The moving party bears the burden to produce evidence that the rates and hours worked are reasonable. See Intel Corp. v. Terabyte Int'l, 6 F.3d 614, 623 (9th Cir. 1983) ("If the applicant satisfies its burden of showing that the claimed rate and number of hours are reasonable, the resulting product is presumed to be the reasonable fee.") (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). The Court may exclude hours it deems "excessive, redundant, or otherwise unnecessary." Jankey v. Poop Deck, 537 F.3d 1122, 1122 (9th Cir. 2008).
Plaintiff's counsel request the following attorneys' fees:

(Declaration of Frank Magnanimo ("Magnanimo Decl."), ¶ 13, Ex. 261 (Docket No. 96-2)).

1. Hours Billed
Plaintiff's attorneys provide detailed time sheets indicating that they have [*26]  spent a total of 1,227.8 hours prosecuting this action. (Magnanimo Decl., ¶ 13, Ex. 261). TWC does not contend that these hours were "excessive, redundant, or otherwise unnecessary . . . ." Hensley v. Eckerhart, 461 U.S. 424, 434, 103 S. Ct. 1933, 76 L. Ed. 2d 40 (1983). Rather, TWC contends that the Court should reduce the fee award to reflect the fact that Plaintiff prevailed on only one of her ten claims.
In Hensley, the Supreme Court cautioned that in cases where "a plaintiff has achieved only partial or limited success, the product of hours reasonably expended on the litigation as a whole times a reasonable hourly rate may be an excessive amount." Id. at 436. The Hensley court emphasized that these concerns are especially salient in complex civil rights litigation, because such litigation is often lengthy and includes a vast range of possibilities for success. Id. "That the plaintiff is a 'prevailing party' therefore may say little about whether the expenditure of counsel's time was reasonable in relation to the success achieved."
Accordingly, "where the prevailing party's success is partial or limited, it is within the discretion of the district court to award limited fees." Park, ex rel. Park v. Anaheim Union High Sch. Dist., 464 F.3d 1025, 1037 (9th Cir. 2006) (Beezer, J., concurring). The Court should ask, "[f]irst, did the plaintiff fail to prevail [*27]  on claims that were unrelated to the claims on which [s]he succeeded? Second, did the plaintiff achieve a level of success that makes the hours reasonably expended a satisfactory basis for making a fee award?" Id. at 434; see also, e.g., McCown v. City of Fontana, 565 F.3d 1097, 1103 (9th Cir. 2008) (applying Hensley test); Park, ex rel. Park, 464 F.3d at 1038 (same).
TWC contends that Plaintiff's unsuccessful claims for retaliation, wrongful termination, impermissible non-job related inquiry, intentional infliction of emotional distress, failure to provide rest period, and unfair business practices are completely unrelated to her claim for failure to engage in the interactive process. (Opp. at 8). However, most of these claims arise out of the same set of circumstances as Plaintiff's claim for failure to engage in the interactive process — namely, Plaintiff's medical leave, struggle to return to work, and subsequent termination by TWC. For example, Plaintiff's claim alleging an impermissible non-job related inquiry alleged that TWC's employees made non-job related inquiries regarding the nature and severity of the medical condition for which Plaintiff requested leave. (Compl. ¶ 82). Likewise, Plaintiff's claim of unfair business practices was premised on TWC's alleged failure to accommodate Plaintiff's [*28]  disability. (Compl. ¶ 110). Plaintiff's claim for failure to provide adequate rest periods, however, was unrelated to her disability and only related to the facts to be proved at trial inasmuch as the claim arises out of Plaintiff's employment with TWC. (See Compl. ¶¶ 99-108).
"[U]nder the FEHA, fees are not limited to a percentage of the plaintiff's recovery, and ordinarily, the attorney who takes an FEHA case can anticipate receiving full compensation for every hour spent litigating a claim." Beaty v. BET Holdings, Inc., 222 F.3d 607, 612 (9th Cir. 2000) (internal quotations omitted). "Only in the unusual case in which there are special circumstances which render such an award — that is, an award of the full lodestar for all hours reasonably spent—unjust does California FEHA law permit a lodestar reduction for results obtained." Id. (internal quotations omitted).
Here, only one of Plaintiff's claims — the inadequate rest periods claim — was truly unrelated to the underlying facts at issue in this action. Under the second prong of the Hensley test, and keeping in mind California's presumption in favor of awarding fees, the Court finds that the total number of hours reasonably expended is an appropriate basis for making the fee award. The unrelated [*29]  claim was dismissed on summary judgment, and Plaintiff did not spend an inordinate amount of time litigating that particular claim prior to the summary judgment ruling. (See Order re Cross-Motions for Summary Judgment at 1 (Docket No. 40)).
At the hearing, counsel for TWC argued that Plaintiff's retaliation claim was also unrelated to the underlying facts of the case, and asked that hours spent preparing that claim for trial be excluded. Plaintiff's counsel responded that the primary evidence introduced to support the retaliation claim (a letter purportedly sent by Plaintiff to Anne Long) also proved that Plaintiff consistently asked for accommodations while employed by TWC. And indeed, in closing argument Plaintiff's counsel contended that "regardless of whether Time Warner received them, the reason those letters are important is because they're contemporaneous records of what happened at Time Warner while [Plaintiff] was there." The jury could have relied on that evidence when making credibility determinations or to find that Plaintiff was willing to engage in the interactive process. The retaliation claim was sufficiently related to Plaintiff's other claims that the Court finds it [*30]  appropriate to compensate Plaintiff's counsel for time spent developing that claim.
Finally, at the hearing, TWC's counsel noted that both Magnanimo and Priolo attended certain depositions during discovery. TWC contends that it was unnecessary for two attorneys to attend any given deposition, and requests that counsel's time be reduced accordingly. The Court agrees that it was unnecessary for two attorneys to attend most of the depositions. See Mountjoy v. Bank of Am., N.A., 245 Cal. App. 4th 266, 278-79, 199 Cal. Rptr. 3d 495 (2016) (holding that trial court did not abuse its discretion in determining that the attendance of two attorneys at a deposition was duplicative and refusing to award fees to both). The Court will thus only count the hours of the attorney who actually took the deposition. Accordingly, the Court will reduce Priolo's hours by 7.5 and Magnanimo's hours by 15.
With the exception of the reductions just discussed, the Court concludes that Plaintiff's counsel spent a reasonable number of hours prosecuting this action.

2. Hourly Rate
"To determine a 'reasonable hourly rate,' the district court should consider: 'experience, reputation, and ability of the attorney; the outcome of the results of the proceedings; the customary fees; and the novelty or the difficulty [*31]  of the question presented.'" Hiken v. DOD, 836 F.3d 1037, 1044 (9th Cir. 2016) (quoting Chalmers v. City of Los Angeles, 796 F.2d 1205, 1211 (9th Cir. 1986)). "Affidavits of the plaintiffs' attorney and other attorneys regarding prevailing fees in the community, and rate determinations in other cases, particularly those setting a rate for the plaintiffs' attorney, are satisfactory evidence of the prevailing market rate." Beauchamp v. Anaheim Union High Sch. Dist., 816 F.3d 1216, 1224 (9th Cir. 2016) (quoting United Steelworkers of Am. v. Phelps Dodge Corp., 896 F.2d 403, 407 (9th Cir. 1990)).
Plaintiff's counsel have submitted several affidavits regarding their experience, qualifications, prior fee awards in similar cases, and the prevailing fees in the community. (See Magnanimo Decl. ¶¶ 5-12; Declaration of Audrey L. Priolo ("Priolo Decl.") ¶¶ 5-9; Declaration of Lauren A. Dean ("Dean Decl.") ¶¶ 4-8; Declaration of J. Bernard Alexander III ("Alexander Decl.") ¶¶ 3-21); Declaration of V. James DeSimone ("DeSimone Decl.") ¶¶ 1-14 (Docket No. 96-2)). Plaintiff's counsel have also submitted evidence of their rates as previously awarded in state court and arbitration. (See Plaintiff's Compendium of Evidence ("PCE"), Exs. 258-59).
TWC counters that the proposed hourly rates are excessive and suggests that the Court rely on the United States Attorneys' Office Attorney's Fee Matrix (formerly the Laffey Matrix), as adjusted for the location of the litigation. (Opp. at 5). Under [*32]  the Fee Matrix, TWC contends that Magnanimo and Dean are entitled at most to about $545 per hour and Priolo is entitled to about $468 per hour, as adjusted for the Los Angeles market rate.
The Court finds the evidence submitted by Plaintiff's counsel to be a more accurate representation of the prevailing rates in Los Angeles for this sort of litigation. The Court will award Plaintiff's counsel an hourly rate consistent with previous courts' awards. In October 2015, Los Angeles County Superior Court Judge Lindfield awarded Magnanimo a rate of $650 per hour. (Magnanimo Decl. ¶ 11). In that same action, Judge Lindfield awarded Priolo a rate of $550 per hour; Priolo did not act as trial counsel in that action. (Priolo Decl. ¶ 8). Judge Lindfield awarded Dean a rate of $550 per hour. (Dean Decl. ¶ 8). Arbitrators have awarded Magnanimo as much as $750 per hour (Magnanimo Decl. ¶ 12), and Dean as much as $650 per hour (Dean Decl. ¶ 8). Accordingly, the Court finds it appropriate to award Magnanimo and Dean $650 per hour. The Court will award Priolo $600 per hour. The increase from her October 2015 rate accounts for the increased role that Priolo took at trial.

3. Lodestar Calculation
Based [*33]  on the above reasoning, the Court calculates the lodestar as follows:


B. Reasonable Multiplier
Plaintiff also seeks a lodestar multiplier of 2.0. California courts have long recognized "that the contingent and deferred nature of the fee award in a civil rights or other case with statutory attorney fees requires that the fee be adjusted in some manner to reflect the fact that the fair market value of legal services provided on that basis is greater than the equivalent noncontingent hourly rate." Horsford, 132 Cal. App. 4th at 394-95. A contingency fee multiplier is often appropriate because "[a] lawyer who both bears the risk of not being paid and provides legal services is not receiving the fair market value of his [or her] work if [s]he is paid only for the second of these functions. If [s]he is paid no more, competent counsel will be reluctant to accept fee award cases." Id. at 395 (quoting Ketchum, 24 Cal. 4th at 1133).
In deciding whether to apply a multiplier, the Court should consider the following factors: "(1) the novelty and difficulty of the questions involved, (2) the skill [*34]  displayed in presenting them, (3) the extent to which the nature of the litigation precluded other employment by the attorneys, (4) the contingent nature of the fee award." Ketchum, 24 Cal. 4th at 1132. These factors indicate that application of a multiplier is appropriate.
In prosecuting this action, Plaintiff had to contend with TWC's somewhat novel position that terminating Plaintiff and allowing her to reapply once she was able to work full-time again was a reasonable accommodation. Additionally, as discussed above, the extent to which Plaintiff's claims for failure to make a reasonable accommodation and failure to engage in the interactive process are intertwined continues to have no clear answer in California case law. Plaintiff's counsel were reasonably skilled in presenting these questions to the Court and the jury.
In their affidavits, Plaintiff's counsel emphasize the great amount of work that went into prosecuting the case. Counsel claim that preparation for this action caused Magnanimo and Priolo to delay work on other cases and turn away potential cases. (Magnanimo Decl. ¶ 23; Prolo Decl. ¶ 10). Finally, Plaintiff's counsel accepted the action on a contingency basis, and litigated on that basis for [*35]  two years before obtaining a judgment.
TWC contends that a negative multiplier should be applied because Plaintiff fabricated evidence, the request for currently hourly rates negates the justification for applying a contingency enhancement, and TWC prevailed on those claims that actually involved novel arguments. The Court disagrees. TWC provides no evidence proving, for purposes of this motion, that Plaintiff "fabricated phony complaint letters . . . and falsely testified that she sent them to TWC in order to concoct a phony retaliation claim." (Opp. at 9). Without evidence, TWC's argument is purely attorney rhetoric, and the Court will not consider it. Nor did TWC clearly prevail on the question of whether terminating Plaintiff and "allowing" her to reapply at a later date was a reasonable accommodation. (See supra, Section II).
At the hearing, TWC emphasized its argument that Plaintiff should not be awarded a multiplier at all because the Court awarded Plaintiff's counsel their current billing rates. California courts have emphasized that a multiplier may not be appropriate where the trial court has applied current billing rates. See Graham v. DaimlerChrysler Corp., 34 Cal. 4th 553, 583-84, 21 Cal. Rptr. 3d 331, 101 P.3d 140 (2004), as modified (Jan. 12, 2005) (noting that a multiplier [*36]  that "is tantamount to an interest rate . . . may be reduced or eliminated if the lodestar rate is based on the present hourly rate rather than the lesser rate applicable when the services were rendered"). In fact, the Court has not awarded Plaintiff's counsel their current rates: the Court awarded two of Plaintiff's three attorneys the same rates they charged a year ago, in October 2015, for work that began in 2013. Nor is a multiplier solely applicable in this case because of the delay in payment. Even if Plaintiff's counsel were awarded their most current billing rate, a multiplier would still be appropriate to compensate counsel for the risk inherent in litigating the case on a contingency basis and the work which counsel was precluded from taking due to their diligence in pursuing this matter. See Ketchum, 24 Cal. 4th at 1138 ("[A contingency multiplier] is intended to approximate market-level compensation for such services, which typically includes a premium for the risk of nonpayment or delay in payment of attorney fees.").
For the foregoing reasons, the Court finds that a multiplier is appropriate. However, a multiplier of 2.0 would overcompensate Plaintiff's attorneys. Priolo will be awarded her current [*37]  hourly fee, which, as discussed above, accounts for some of the delay in payment. See Graham, 34 Cal. 4th at 584. The hourly rate also takes into account the skill of the attorneys and their prior litigation experience. See Ketchum, 24 Cal. 4th at 1122 ("The factor of extraordinary skill, in particular, appears susceptible to improper double counting; for the most part, the difficulty of a legal question and the quality of representation are already encompassed in the lodestar. A more difficult legal question typically requires more attorney hours, and a more skillful and experienced attorney will command a higher hourly rate."). Nevertheless, Plaintiff's counsel expended a great deal of time on the case and took a risk in litigating difficult issues for two years without the guarantee of any sort of compensation. See id. at 1138 (emphasizing importance of awarding counsel "a premium for the risk of nonpayment" in contingency cases).
Accordingly, to account for all of the Ketchum factors, the Court will apply a 1.3 multiplier. After application of the multiplier, the Court awards attorneys' fees in the amount of $964,938.

C. Non-Statutory Costs
Plaintiff also seeks costs that may be granted within the Court's discretion under 28 U.S.C. § 1920. Plaintiff seeks $1,321.50 [*38]  as reimbursement for computer research fees, see Laborers Health & Welfare Trust v. Redland Insurance Co., 460 F.3d 1253, 1258-59 (9th Cir. 2006); $3,775 in mediation fees, see Gibson v. Bobroff, 49 Cal. App. 4th 1202, 1207-09, 57 Cal. Rptr. 2d 235 (1996); $1,657.71 in Plaintiff's lodging expenses for attendance at mediation and trial, see Thon v. Thompson, 29 Cal. App. 4th 1546, 1549, 35 Cal. Rptr. 2d 346 (1994); $377.10 in parking charges incurred for court appearances and mediation, which Plaintiff contends are reasonably necessary to the conduct of the litigation, see Cal. Code Civ. Proc. § 1033.5(c)(2); $86 in charges related to a state court hearing regarding the status of removal; and $5,850.43 in expenses related to litigation cost financing, which Plaintiff contends was also reasonably necessary to the litigation under Code of Civil Procedure § 1033.5(c)(2). Plaintiff's total request amounts to $13,067.74.
Defendant does not contest Plaintiff's request for award of the above non-statutory costs and the Court finds them reasonable under the governing case law. Accordingly, Plaintiff will be awarded $13,067.74 in non-statutory costs.

D. Expert Fees
Finally, Plaintiff seeks expert witness fees. FEHA expressly authorizes the award of expert witness fees to the prevailing party, within the Court's discretion. Cal. Gov. Code § 12965(b); see also Anthony v. City of L.A., 166 Cal. App. 4th 1011, 1017, 83 Cal. Rptr. 3d 306 (2008) ("FEHA now expressly authorizes the award of expert fees."). Plaintiff seeks fees for five expert witnesses: (1) $10,000 for the services of Dr. Jubin Merati, [*39]  Plaintiff's expert economist; (2) $14,450.50 for the services of Dr. Anthony E. Reading, Plaintiff's psychologist; (3) $20,812.50 for the services of Dr. Stuart L. Silverman, Plaintiff's medical expert; (4) $26,307.85 for the services of Michael Robbins, Plaintiff's human resources expert; and (5) $2,000 incurred in deposing Dr. Avi Ishaaya, who testified at trial on behalf of TWC. In sum, Plaintiff seeks $73,570.85 in expert witness fees.
TWC opposes as unreasonable Plaintiff's request for fees to retain Dr. Silverman and Mr. Robbins, and to depose Dr. Ishaaya. (Opp. at 13). TWC contends that Dr. Silverman's testimony concerned Plaintiff's medical condition during her employment with TWC, which was not necessary for the jury to determine whether TWC failed to engage in the interactive process. However, Plaintiff's disability is an element of her claim for failure to engage in the interactive process. See CACI 2546. Not only that, but establishing Plaintiff's credibility as to the extent of her disability and its effect on her ability to work was likely necessary for the jury to understand the context of Plaintiff's claim. Therefore, the Court finds it reasonable to award costs to retain Dr. Silverman.
Similarly, Plaintiff [*40]  deposed Dr. Ishaaya in an effort to properly prepare to meet TWC's evidence at trial. These depositions costs were reasonable.
However, the Court will not award Plaintiff costs for retaining her human resources expert. Robbins provided little insight into Plaintiff's interactive process claim, and his testimony was likely less useful to the jury than that of TWC's witnesses, all of whom actually worked in TWC's human resources department. Moreover, what it means to engage in the interactive process with an employee is within the everyday experience for jurors who presumably have some experience in the workplace. Robbins' testimony added little extra value considering the nature of a claim for failure to engage in the interactive process.
Accordingly, the Court awards Plaintiff $47,263 in expert witness fees.

IV. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, TWC's Motion is DENIED. Plaintiff's Fee Application is GRANTED. Plaintiff shall recover fees and costs in the total amount of $1,025,268.74.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
Table1 ()
Table1 ()


Table2 ()
Table2 ()


End of Document

