Ramirez v. Aerotek, Inc.
United States District Court for the Western District of Texas, El Paso Division
February 10, 2021, Decided; February 10, 2021, Filed
EP-19-CV-00283-FM

Reporter
2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 153292 *; 2021 WL 3549146
MARIA RAMIREZ, Plaintiff, v. AEROTEK, INC. and SCHNEIDER ELECTRIC USA, INC. d/b/a/ SCHNEIDER ELECTRIC, Defendants.
Subsequent History: Reconsideration granted by Ramirez v. Aerotek, Inc., 2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 153211, 2021 WL 3549113 (W.D. Tex., June 17, 2021)
Motion for new trial denied by, in part, Motion for new trial granted by, in part Ares v. Aerotek, Inc., 2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 23634, 2023 WL 1980484 (W.D. Tex., Feb. 13, 2023)
Motion granted by, Costs and fees proceeding at Ares v. Schneider Elec. USA, Inc., 2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 81175 (W.D. Tex., May 9, 2023)
Motion granted by, in part, Motion denied by, in part, Costs and fees proceeding at Ares v. Aerotek, Inc., 2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 147012 (W.D. Tex., Aug. 22, 2023)
Counsel:  [*1] For Maria Ramirez, Plaintiff: Enrique Chavez, Jr., LEAD ATTORNEY, Michael Robert Anderson, Chavez Law Firm, El Paso, TX USA.
For Aerotek, Inc., Defendant: Dylan A. Farmer, LEAD ATTORNEY, Christine Elaine Reinhard, Schmoyer Reinhard LLP, San Antonio, TX USA.
For Schneider Electric USA, Defendant: Andrew Mark Gould, LEAD ATTORNEY, Wick Phillips Gould & Martin, Dallas, TX USA; Dana Hilzendager, Molly Marie Jones, Wick Phillips Gould & Martin, LLP, Dallas, TX USA.
Judges: FRANK MONTALVO, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: FRANK MONTALVO
Opinion



ORDER ON MOTIONS FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
Before the court are "Defendant Aerotek, Inc's Motion for Summary Judgment" [ECF No. 52], filed by Aerotek, Inc. ("Aerotek"); "Schneider Electric's Motion for Summary Judgment and Supporting Brief" [ECF No. 53], filed by Schneider Electric USA, Inc. d/b/a Schneider Electric ("Schneider Electric"); "Appendix in Support of Defendant Schneider Electric's Motion for Summary Judgment and Supporting Brief" [ECF No. 54]; "Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment Regarding Her Disability Discrimination and Retaliation Claims" [ECF No. 55], filed by Maria Ramirez ("Ramirez"); "Defendant Aerotek Inc.'s Response to Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary [*2]  Judgment Regarding Her Disability Discrimination and Retaliation Claims" [ECF No. 60]; "Schneider Electric's Response to Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment" [ECF No. 61]; "Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment Regarding Her Sexual Harassment, Sex Discrimination, and Retaliation Claims" [ECF No. 65]; "Plaintiff's Response to Defendant Schneider Electric's Evidentiary Objections" [ECF No. 68]; "Plaintiff's Response to Schneider Electric's Motion for Summary Judgment and Supporting Brief" [ECF No. 71]; "Plaintiff's Response to Defendant Aerotek, Inc.'s Motion for Summary Judgment" [ECF No. 72]; "Schneider Electric's Reply in Support of its Objections to Plaintiff's Summary Judgment Evidence" [ECF No. 76]; "Schneider Electric's Response to Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment (Sexual Harassment, Sex Discrimination and Retaliation Claims)" [ECF No. 77]; "Defendant Aerotek Inc.'s Response to Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment Regarding Her Sexual Harassment, Sex Discrimination, and Retaliation Claims" [ECF No. 78]; "Schneider Electric's Reply in Support of Motion for Summary Judgment" [ECF No. 79]; "Defendant Aerotek, Inc.'s Reply in Support [*3]  of its Motion for Summary Judgment" [ECF No. 82]; "Plaintiff's Reply to Defendant Aerotek, Inc.'s Response to Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment Regarding Her Disability Discrimination and Retaliation Claims" [ECF No. 88]; "Plaintiff's Reply to Schneider Electric's Response to Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment" [ECF No. 89]; "Plaintiff's Reply to Defendant Aerotek, Inc.'s Response to Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment Regarding Her Sexual Harassment Sex Discrimination and Retaliation Claims" [ECF No. 90]; and "Plaintiff's Reply to Schneider Electric's Response to Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment (Sexual Harassment, Sex Discrimination and Retaliation Claims)" [ECF No. 91].

I. BACKGROUND
Aerotek is a staffing company that recruits and places employees on behalf of business clients. It hired Ramirez as an at-will employee to work as a Quality Technician in Schneider Electric's El Paso facility in November 2017.1 Schneider Electric is one of Aerotek's clients.2 As a Quality Technician, Ramirez was "responsible for testing switchboards with high-voltage electrical current."3 Specific safety protocols for Ramirez's position included wearing [*4]  special safety gloves and the requirement of "extensive training regarding safety procedures."4 In early 2018, Schneider Electric shift team leader Jesus Estrada ("Estrada") observed Ramirez without her safety gloves during a training.5
On April 6, 2018, another of Ramirez's supervisors observed her without protective equipment while working in an electrical testing booth.6 On April 7, an Aerotek supervisor was directed to terminate Ramirez's assignment.7 On that same day, Ramirez informed two of her supervisors that she felt she had hurt her arm.8 On April 9, Ramirez emailed a formal incident report to Aerotek On-Premises Manager, Esther Flores ("Flores").9 In the report, Ramirez stated that by 2:45 p.m. on April 7, her neck, shoulder, and lower back "were hurting so much".10 Ramirez also stated she reported the injury to the infirmary upon returning to work on April 8.11 After reporting her injury, Ramirez was sent home.12 In her email, Ramirez also informed Flores that she wanted to report sexual harassment and discrimination by several employees.13 Ramirez asserted she was subjected to "crude gestures and foul Language [sic]" because she was the only female in her department.14
In response to Ramirez's email, Flores and Ramirez met about Ramirez's sexual harassment allegations.15 Flores subsequently shared her report of the conversation with Schneider Electric Human Resources ("HR") Manager Ben Diaz ("Diaz"). From April 12 to April 14, Diaz investigated Ramirez's claims by interviewing members of her shift, including her alleged harassers.16 Diaz ultimately recommended that all employees named in Ramirez's allegations participate in sexual harassment training.17 On April 20, Ramirez was informed that her assignment had been terminated.18 On April 23, Ramirez filed a charge of discrimination with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC"), alleging discrimination based on sex, disability, and retaliation.19 Ramirez's EEOC right to sue letter was mailed on July 29, 2019.20 She filed suit in Texas state court, and Defendants' removed to this court.21

II. APPLICABLE LAW

A. Summary Judgment
Summary judgment is proper where the pleadings, discovery, and affidavits demonstrate that there is "no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law."22 A dispute over a material fact is genuine "when [*6]  there is evidence sufficient for a rational trier of fact to find for the non-moving party."23 Substantive law defines which facts are material.24
The party moving for summary judgment bears the initial burden of identifying those portions of the pleadings, discovery, and affidavits demonstrating the absence of a genuine issue of material fact.25 When considering only admissible evidence in the pretrial record,26 the court will "view all facts in the light most favorable to the non-moving party" and draw all factual inferences in the nonmovant's favor.27 If the moving party cannot demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact, summary judgment is inappropriate.28
Once the moving party has met its initial burden, the nonmoving party must go beyond the pleadings and, by its own affidavits or discovery, set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial.29 The nonmoving party's burden is not satisfied with "some metaphysical doubt as to the material facts, by conclusory allegations, by unsubstantiated assertions, or by only a scintilla of evidence."30 The court does not "in the absence of any proof assume that the nonmoving party could or would prove the necessary [*7]  facts."31 When reviewing the parties' submissions, the court does not weigh the evidence or determine the credibility of the witnesses.32 Once the nonmovant has had the opportunity to make this showing, summary judgment will be granted "if no reasonable juror could find for the nonmovant."33

III. DISCUSSION

A. Defendants' Status as Ramirez's Employers
The Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") makes it unlawful for a "covered entity . . . to discriminate against a qualified individual on the basis of disability in regard to . . . the discharge of employees."34 The term "covered entity" includes employers.35 An entity is an employer if it has the right to supervise an employee for infractions and demand she be terminated.36 Defendants' liability in this action hinges on whether they are "covered entities" as defined by the ADA. Therefore, the court must first decide whether Ramirez was employed by Aerotek, Schneider Electric, or both. Schneider Electric argues it is not Ramirez's employer for purposes of her claims against the company. Ramirez argues Aerotek, Inc. and Schneider Electric are joint employers.
In determining whether a business meets the definition of an employer within the meaning of the ADA, the court uses the [*8]  "hybrid economic realities/common law control test."37 Under the common law control component, the court focuses on the employer's rights to: control an employee's conduct, hire and fire the employee, supervise the employee, and set the employee's work schedule.38 The economic realities component focuses "on whether the alleged employer paid the employee's salary, withheld taxes, provided benefits, and set the terms and conditions of employment."39 The right to control is the most important component of this test.40
The Fifth Circuit's reasoning in Burton v. Freescale Semiconductor, Inc. provides helpful guidance.41 The plaintiff in Burton, like Ramirez, was a temporary worker assigned by a staffing agency to work at another company.42 The Burton plaintiff sued both the staffing agency that placed her and the assignment company. Both defendants argued they were not covered entities under the purview of the ADA. The Fifth Circuit ultimately held that the assignment company may be held liable as a joint employer where it demanded the employee's termination based on discriminatory animus and exerted sufficient control over her.43 In arriving at its decision, the Fifth Circuit highlighted [*9]  that defendant-employer, Freescale, "had the right to demand [Plaintiff's] termination from the assignment."44 It supervised the plaintiff.45 Complaints against her and on-the-job corrections were made by Freescale personnel, and, most importantly, Freescale "decided and insisted that [Plaintiff] be fired."46
Similar to the Burton defendants, Aerotek is a staffing agency that employed Ramirez and assigned her to work at Schneider Electric. Schneider Electric controlled Ramirez's conduct by training and disciplining her,47 as well as demanding her reassignment.48 In her deposition, Ramirez testified that she attended orientation when she first started at Schneider Electric and received job-specific training that lasted for four months and was followed by a test.49 Additionally, Manufacturing Supervisor César Hernández reported that Ramirez "forgot to put her gloves [on] twice" and recommended that the company not pursue her hiring, and shortly thereafter HR Manager Ben Diaz requested that Aerotek "[p]lease end [Ramirez's] assignment."50 This demonstrates control. Finally, Ramirez's employment with Aerotek was co-extensive with her assignment to Schneider Electric.51 These facts [*10]  show Ramirez's employment was a concerted effort made possible by both Defendants. These facts establish as a matter of law that Defendants were Ramirez's joint employers within the context of the ADA.

B. Disability Discrimination
The ADA prohibits employers from discriminating against qualified individuals "on the basis of disability in regard to . . . discharge of employees . . . and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment."52 "When a plaintiff can offer only circumstantial evidence to prove a violation of the ADA, this court applies the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework."53 Under this burden-shifting framework, the plaintiff must first make a prima facie showing of discrimination. This showing requires that plaintiff (a) is disabled, has a record of having a disability, or is regarded as disabled; (b) is qualified for her job; (c) was subjected to an adverse employment action due to her disability or the perception of her disability; and (d) was replaced by or treated less favorably than a non-disabled employee.54 If, after a plaintiff makes this showing, the employer "articulate[s] a legitimate non-discriminatory reason for the adverse employment action," [*11]  the trier of fact can consider all evidence presented by the plaintiff to determine whether the adverse employment action was pretextual.55
Ramirez's Complaint asserts "[e]mployers Aerotek and Schneider discriminated, retaliated, and fired Employee Ramirez in violation of . . . the Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended by the Americans with Disabilities Act [sic] Amendments Act."56 This assertion does not make clear whether Ramirez is making claims of disparate treatment, failure-to-accommodate, or both. The Fifth Circuit has held that "[a] failure-to-accommodate claim under the ADA is distinct from a claim of disparate treatment."57 The analysis changes depending on the asserted wrong. Therefore, this court must first determine which claim has been asserted then analyze each in turn.
Ramirez and Defendants filed cross-summary judgment motions. This court will first evaluate Defendants' motions for summary judgment as to Ramirez's disability discrimination claims. Therefore, factual inferences will be viewed in the light most favorable to Ramirez.
a. Disparate Treatment
When determining whether a plaintiff has exhausted a claim, "the scope of an EEOC complaint should be construed liberally."58 "[A] primary purpose of Title VII is to trigger [*12]  the investigatory and conciliatory procedures of the EEOC, in [an] attempt to achieve non-judicial resolution of employment discrimination claims."59 In the interest of balance, the court "engage[s] in fact-intensive analysis of the statement given by the plaintiff in the administrative charge, and look[s] slightly beyond its four corners, to its substance rather than its label."60 Therefore, a claim is properly raised in a judicial complaint when it is within "the scope of the EEOC investigation which can reasonably be expected to grow out of the charge of discrimination."61
Aerotek argues Ramirez did not exhaust her disparate treatment claim by properly raising it during her EEOC investigation. Aerotek argues that since Ramirez "raised only a failure-to-accommodate claim in her underlying charge" and "concluded her charge with boilerplate assertions," only consistent with failure-to-accommodate theory, her charge was not enough to raise "an entirely different theory of disparate treatment."62 Ramirez counters by stating that she "(1) check[ed] the box for disability discrimination, (2) state[ed] Employer Aerotek learned of her disability and need for reasonable accommodation no later than [*13]  April 9, 2018, and (3) terminated [her] employment in discrimination 'because of disability.'"63
Aerotek relies on Hamar v. Ashland, Inc. 64 In Hamar, the Fifth Circuit held the EEOC cannot reasonably be expected to investigate claims that are not asserted.65 In her EEOC charge, Ramirez alleged that "[o]n or about April 07, 2018 I was injured at work and developed a disability. On or about April 09, 2018, per my medical physician [and examination], I requested a reasonable accommodation . . . The respondent failed to engage in the interactive process to discuss a reasonable accommodation. . . ."66 These claims read entirely as failure-to-accommodate claims. Although Ramirez asserts facts that give rise to a failure-to-accommodate as opposed to a disparate treatment claim, Hamar's reasoning is instructive as the two claims and the elements necessary to prove them remain distinct. Neither the facts alleged in Ramirez's charge nor those in the complaint would put investigators on notice of Ramirez's desire to make a disparate treatment claim. Therefore, the court finds Ramirez failed to exhaust her disparate treatment claim.
b. Failure-to-Accommodate
The ADA defines failure-to-accommodate as "not [*14]  making reasonable accommodations to the known physical . . . limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who is an . . . employee," unless their employer can show the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of its business.67 To prevail on a failure-to-accommodate claim, Ramirez must show "(1) [she] is a qualified individual with a disability; (2) the disability and its consequential limitations were known by the covered employer; and (3) the employer failed to make reasonable accommodations for such known limitations."68
Aerotek moves for summary judgment on Ramirez's failure-to-accommodate claim under the ADA by arguing the claim fails because Schneider Electric ended her assignment "for a policy-infraction pre-dating her request for an accommodation."69 Aerotek points to Green v. Medco Health Solutions of Texas to support its argument.70 There, the plaintiff sued her former employer after she was terminated for violating her employer's attendance policy.71 The plaintiff initially requested short term disability benefits, but was denied.72 After two unsuccessful appeals, the plaintiff's attorney sent a letter to her employer requesting accommodations. [*15] 73 She did not receive a response and was fired the next day.74 The plaintiff argued that her employers never engaged in the interactive accommodations process required by the ADA.75 The court held that even though the defendant-employers did not actually process Plaintiff's termination until after her requests for accommodations were made, the defendants were not "obligated to engage in the interactive process instead of terminating [her]."76 The court further elaborated that "forgiveness of prior misconduct otherwise warranting termination is not a reasonable accommodation."77
Ramirez committed her first safety violation on February 18, 2018 and her second on April 6, 2018.78 After her second violation, she was immediately removed from the booth and given new duties.79 On April 7, 2018, Ramirez injured herself while torqueing bolts as discipline for her prior infraction.80 In her deposition, Ramirez stated she alerted a supervisor and requested to be relieved around 2:30 p.m.81 On that same day, Schneider Electric supervisor César Hernández ("Hernández") recommended, via email, that Ramirez's assignment be terminated.82 Hernández's stated reason was that Ramirez forgot to put her gloves on [*16]  twice, causing unsafe conditions.83 In his email, Hernández also mentioned that Ramirez "was feeling overwhelmed due to the fact that she was asked to test all the torque nuts and she argued that it wasn't fair to be assigned this task for two consecutive days."84 On April 8, Ramirez reported her injury at the infirmary, and she was told to return home.85 On April 20, Ramirez's termination was processed by Aerotek, and by virtue Schneider Electric as well. The timeline of events in the present case is substantially similar to those in Green. Ramirez, by asking to be released from duty, requested accommodations for her alleged injury, like the plaintiff in Green.86 Further, Schneider Electric requested Ramirez's contract be terminated due to violations that occurred before her alleged injury occurred.87 Defendants are not required to forgive prior misconduct otherwise warranting termination because an employee requests accommodation.88 Ramirez's documented safety violations were the primary reasons given when she was terminated.89 Therefore, as in Green, Defendants' reasons for Ramirez's termination were legitimate and nondiscriminatory. As Defendants have shown Ramirez's termination was legitimate [*17]  and nondiscriminatory under the ADA, Defendants' motions for summary judgment on Ramirez's disability discrimination claim are granted.

c. Sexual Harassment
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act makes it unlawful "to discriminate against any individual with respect to . . . terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, because of such individual's . . . sex. . . ."90 "When the workplace is permeated with discriminatory intimidation, ridicule, and insult that is sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of the victim's employment and create an abusive working environment, Title VII is violated."91 "Whether an environment is 'hostile' or 'abusive' can be determined only by looking at all the circumstances," including "the frequency of the discriminatory conduct; its severity; whether it is physically threatening or humiliating, or a mere offensive utterance; and whether it unreasonably interferes with an employee's work performance."92 No single factor is required.93
To make out a prima facie case for a sexual harassment based hostile work environment claim, Ramirez must show (1) she is a member of a protected group; (2) she was the [*18]  victim of uninvited sexual harassment; (3) the harassment was based on sex; (4) the harassment affected a "term, condition, or privilege" of employment; and (5) her employer knew or should have known of the harassment and failed to take prompt remedial action.94 Further, "the challenged conduct must be both objectively offensive, meaning that a reasonable person would find it hostile and abusive, and subjectively offensive, meaning that the victim perceived it to be so."95 Finally, "[a]n employer is subject to vicarious liability to a victimized employee for an actionable hostile environment created by a supervisor with immediate . . . authority over the employee."96
If no tangible employment action is taken, the defendant-employer may raise an affirmative defense, which "comprises two necessary elements: (a) that the employer exercised reasonable care to prevent and correct promptly any sexually harassing behavior, and (b) that the plaintiff employee unreasonably failed to take advantage of any preventative or corrective opportunities provided by the employer or to avoid harm otherwise."97
Schneider Electric contends Ramirez's sexual harassment claim fails because it did not fail [*19]  "to take prompt remedial action once she reported the alleged harassment."98 Aerotek argues its response to Ramirez's harassment complaint met its legal obligations because it "began investigating [Ramirez's] complaint the same day she raised it."99 Aerotek further "unequivocally disclaims any mistreatment by managerial or supervisory employee" in response to Ramirez's vicarious liability argument.100 Ramirez additionally argues that the sexual harassment she faced, at least partially at the hands of a supervisor, was sufficiently severe and pervasive to create a hostile work environment. Ramirez and Defendants filed cross motions for summary judgment. The court takes each in turn.
a. Ramirez's Motion for Summary Judgment
As a woman, Ramirez is a member of a protected group within the meaning of Title VII.101 The conduct she alleges is subjectively offensive. In her EEOC charge, Ramirez stated that the male employees "used offensive and unwelcomed sexual language."102 This conduct so disturbed her that she contacted HR in attempt to end it. The alleged misconduct is also objectively offensive as this court finds it would be offensive to a reasonable person. Ramirez's allegations include a claim [*20]  that one employee, James Hoizar ("Hoizar"), told her and other coworkers "that he 'screwed' another woman at work who was 'asking for it', and that the next day she is limping because of all the bouncing and spreading of her legs."103 Ramirez also alleged that Hoizar grabbed his genitals in front of her.104 Ramirez's allegations of harassment include the use of "chupame," "chinga tu madre," "panocha," and other vulgar phrases describing sexual acts directed at women in the workplace.105 Ramirez also makes allegations against her manager, Jesus Estrada ("Estrada"), whom if considered a supervisor within Title VII, would expose Defendants to vicarious liability.106 Ramirez claims Estrada responded to her complaints about the alleged sexual harassment from male employees by telling her "ya dale un beso Mary," or "just give him a kiss already Mary."107 In sum, these facts suggest both subjectively and objectively offensive conduct.
Abusive conduct need only be severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of a victim's employment and create an abusive working environment.108 Ramirez characterizes her allegations as "unrefuted," and, if true, would certainly constitute behavior that altered [*21]  the conditions of her employment. However, Defendants offer contrary factual assertions in their denial of Ramirez's allegations. Schneider Electric provides a declaration from Ramirez's alleged supervisor-harasser denying Ramirez's allegation that he made a statement instructing her to kiss her harasser.109 Similarly, Aerotek provides declarations and testimony of its employees denying engaging in or observing the alleged harassment of Ramirez.110 Aerotek further claims over ten Schneider Electric employees were interviewed by Schneider Electric HR Manager Ben Diaz, but "he was unable to corroborate any of [Ramirez's] allegations."111 Notwithstanding, Diaz saw the need to have all employees named in Ramirez's allegations participate in sexual harassment training.112 This tacit admission—that there was behavior that warranted attendance at sexual harassment training—is contrary to Defendants' position and, itself, creates an issue of material fact about what Defendants are asserting happened.
Additionally, whether an employer's response to discriminatory conduct was sufficient necessarily depends on the particular facts of the case, "such as remedial steps taken and the severity of [*22]  the harassment."113 "Prompt remedial action must be reasonably calculated to end the harassment, therefore, [Defendants] may be held liable despite having taken remedial steps if [Ramirez] can establish that [Defendants'] response was not reasonably calculated to halt the harassment."114 An employee must also utilize the corrective opportunities provided by her employer, as failure to do so could be fatal to an employee's case.115 However, if it becomes "objectively obvious" that an employer has no real intention of addressing harassment, "the harassed employee is not obliged to go through the wasted motion of reporting the harassment."116
Ramirez cannot meet her summary judgment burden under this final prong of the prima facie case. Policies in Aerotek's employee handbook direct employees to report concerns to "your recruiter, customer support representative, the director of branch operations, or the manager of administration at your local Aerotek office."117 According to Aerotek, Ramirez did not utilize this corrective opportunity provided to her until April 9, 2018, "when Ramirez reported her concerns for the first time."118 Further, Schneider Electric states that once it learned of the harassment [*23]  suffered by Ramirez on April 9, 2018, its HR Manager, Diaz, immediately initiated an investigation into Ramirez's complaints by requesting more information, interviewing employees, taking written statements, reviewing video of the work area, and completing an investigation report.119 Taking Defendants' factual assertions as true, Ramirez cannot meet her summary judgment burden as to whether Defendants knew of the alleged harassment or whether they properly responded to her complaints. Therefore, Ramirez cannot prevail on her sexual harassment motion for summary judgment.
b. Defendants' Motions for Summary Judgment
Defendants cannot meet their summary judgment burden as to Ramirez's sexual harassment claim. Ramirez alleges facts that, if true, amount to severe or pervasive harassment, affecting her terms or conditions of employment under Title VII. For example, Ramirez alleges one Aerotek employee touched her arm, waist, and legs; stroked her back; "[swung] his hand to grab [her] crotch;" and told her "to stop wearing loose clothing because he cannot see her body when [she] wears loose clothing."120 Ramirez also alleges a Schneider Electric employee "watche[d] pornography in front of [her] [*24]  and other employees on his phone while at work; called over a female inspector, "watche[d] her bend over and [said] out loud how much he'd like to screw (have sex with) her."121
Additionally, Ramirez asserts Estrada, her supervisor, was aware of and even encouraged the alleged sexual harassment against Ramirez.122 If true, Defendants would be vicariously liable for the harassment faced by Ramirez. In Vance v. Ball State University, the Supreme Court held that a supervisor within the meaning of Title VII is an employee who is "empowered . . . to take tangible employment actions."123 Tangible employment actions include effecting a "significant change in employment status, such as hiring, firing, failing to promote, reassignment with significantly different responsibilities, or a decision causing a significant change in benefits."124 There is a genuine issue of fact as to whether Estrada falls within the definition of supervisor as interpreted by Vance. Ramirez asserts that "it is undisputed that it is Supervisor Estrada who recommends Employee Ramirez' [sic] termination."125 Yet Estrada's status as Ramirez's supervisor and whether he was the cause of her termination are disputed by Defendants. HR [*25]  Manager Diaz submitted a signed declaration asserting that Estrada is "not management personnel and [has] no authority to hire, fire, promote, demote, transfer, or discipline workers."126
Ramirez and Defendants' declarations are mere recitations of the relevant language from the Vance definition of supervisor dressed up without supporting facts or evidence.127 Each party presents evidence of its own, or its representatives', testimony as proof of success on the merits. However, it is not proper for the court to weigh the evidence at the motion for summary judgment stage. That is a job for the jury at trial. It is enough for this court to find that, Defendants' conclusory statements alone, without more and in the face of Ramirez's factual allegations to the contrary, are not enough to resolve a material factual dispute in Defendants' favor.

d. Sex Discrimination
An employer violates Title VII's prohibition of sex discrimination when they fail "the simple test of whether the evidence shows treatment of a person in a manner which but for that person's sex would be different."128 Disparate treatment discrimination on the basis of sex under Title VII is defined as "discharge[ing] any individual [*26]  . . . with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, because of such individual's . . . sex."129 To establish a prima facie case of sex discrimination, Ramirez must show "she (1) belongs to a protected class; (2) was qualified for the position; (3) experienced an adverse employment action; and (4) was similarly situated to other employees who were not members of her protected class and who were treated more favorably."130 The elements underpinning hostile work environment and standard disparate treatment claims are separate and distinct.131 The very nature of hostile work environment claims involves repeated conduct.132 Meanwhile, standard disparate treatment claims are rooted in discrete acts constituting discrimination.133
Schneider Electric argues Ramirez's sex discrimination claim is barred by "her judicial admission that Schneider Electric did not end her assignment because of her gender."134 Aerotek opines, in a footnote, that Ramirez's repeated reference to "sex discrimination" in her motion for summary judgment is "simply shorthand for her sexual harassment claim, rather than any standalone sex-based disparate treatment claim."135 Ramirez, [*27]  despite including the blanket claims that Defendants "discriminated, retaliated against, and fired [her] in violation of . . . Title VII of the Civil Rights Act . . . which protect[s] employees from sex discrimination, sexual harassment, and retaliation," clarified that her only sex discrimination claim is her sexual harassment claim.136 Ramirez argued Schneider Electric "falsely allege[d] [Ramirez's] Motion 'presents no argument regarding' a sex discrimination claim, only a sexual harassment claim."137 Ramirez continued by contending that hostile work environment claims, "as sufficiently severe or pervasive sexual harassment qualif[y] as unlawful sex discrimination."138 The Parties' motions suggest Schneider Electric believed Ramirez to be asserting a standard disparate treatment claim along with her hostile work environment claim. However, Ramirez asserts that is not the case.
Ramirez has conflated hostile work environment discrimination with sex-based disparate treatment discrimination. Therefore, as the two claims are distinct, this court finds no sex-based disparate treatment claim for which a motion for summary judgment need be granted or denied.

e. Retaliation
"Title VII's antiretaliation [*28]  provision must be construed to cover a broad range of employer conduct."139 The statute prohibits discrimination against an employee who, among other things, has "made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in" a proceeding or investigation related to a claim made under the statute.140 To establish a prima facie case of retaliation, Ramirez must show that (1) she participated in a Title VII protected activity, (2) she suffered an adverse employment action by her employer, and (3) a causal connection between the protected activity and adverse action.141 Further, for an employment action to be adverse, it must be materially so, meaning the action "might have dissuaded a reasonable worker from making or supporting a charge of discrimination."142
a. Ramirez's Motions for Summary Judgment
Ramirez's motion for summary judgment for retaliation as to her disability discrimination claim fails. Ramirez did not exhaust her disparate treatment claim, so this court cannot determine the issue. Additionally, this court found that Defendants terminated Ramirez due to Ramirez's multiple safety violations. The safety violations constituted legitimate and non-discriminatory reasons for Ramirez's termination, [*29]  meaning Ramirez cannot show there was a causal connection between her alleged protected activity and an adverse action, i.e. her termination.
Protected activities within Title VII include making a charge or participating in a Title VII investigation.143 Ramirez did both. On April 9, 2018 Ramirez reported sexual harassment to an Aerotek On-Premises Manager, Esther Flores.144 On April 23, 2018, Ramirez filed her charge of discrimination with the EEOC.145 Ramirez also suffered an adverse employment action as she was terminated. However, Ramirez cannot show there is no question of material fact as to the existence of a causal connection between the protected activities she engaged in and her termination. Therefore, her motion for summary judgment as to retaliation claims fails.
b. Defendants' Motions for Summary Judgment
Defendants' motions for summary judgment on Ramirez's retaliation claim succeed for the same reason that Ramirez's motion failed. Defendants can show there is no question of material fact regarding the causal element of Ramirez's claim. This court determined the decision to terminate Ramirez's contract was made on April 7,2018 due to her violations of safety protocols. As there [*30]  are no material issues of fact regarding the prima facie elements of either retaliation claim and Ramirez cannot prove causation as to either claim, summary judgment for Defendants is granted.

IV. CONCLUSION
Accordingly, the court enters the following orders:
1. It is HEREBY ORDERED that "Defendant Aerotek, Inc.'s Motion for Summary Judgment" [ECF No. 52] is GRANTED as to the disability discrimination and retaliation claims and DENIED as to the sexual harassment claim.
2. It is FURTHER ORDERED that "Defendant Schneider Electric's Motion for Summary Judgment and Supporting Brief" [ECF No. 53] is GRANTED as to the disability discrimination and retaliation claims and DENIED as to the sexual harassment claim.
3. It is FURTHER ORDERED that "Plaintiff's Motion for Summary Judgment Regarding Her Disability Discrimination and Retaliation Claims" [ECF No. 55] is DENIED.
4. It is FURTHER ORDERED that "Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment Regarding Her Sexual Harassment, Sex Discrimination, and Retaliation Claims" [ECF No. 65] is DENIED.
SIGNED AND ENTERED this 10th day of February 2021.
/s/ Frank Montalvo
FRANK MONTALVO
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

