Roman-Basora v. Potter
United States District Court for the District of Puerto Rico
November 1, 2010, Decided; November 1, 2010, Filed
CIVIL NO. 08-1096 (DRD)

Reporter
2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 141175 *; 2010 WL 5677118
JOSUE ROMAN-BASORA, Plaintiff, v. POSTMASTER GENERAL UNITED STATES POSTAL SERVICE, JOHN POTTER, Defendant.
Subsequent History: Adopted by, Summary judgment granted by, Dismissed by Roman-Basora v. Postmaster Gen. United States Postal Serv., 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 9282 (D.P.R., Jan. 31, 2011)
Prior History: Roman-Basora v. Potter, 2007 EEOPUB LEXIS 4404 (Oct. 24, 2007)
Counsel:  [*1] For Josue Roman-Basora, Plaintiff: Jesus R. Morales-Cordero, LEAD ATTORNEY, Gonzalez, Castaner & Morales Cordero, CSP, San Juan, PR.
For Postmaster General United States Postal Service, John E. Potter, Defendant: Fidel A. Sevillano-Del-Rio, United States Postal Service, LEAD ATTORNEYS United States Attorneys Office, District of Puerto Rico, San Juan, PR.
Judges: CAMILLE L. VELEZ-RIVE, UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE.
Opinion by: CAMILLE L. VELEZ-RIVE
Opinion



REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION

INTRODUCTION
Plaintiff Josue Roman-Basora (hereinafter "plaintiff Roman-Basora") filed federal claims against defendant John E. Potter, the Postmaster General, for Age Discrimination and Rehabilitation Act. See 29 U.S.C. §621 et seq., 29 U.S.C. §791, et seq.;Complaint. Plaintiff Roman-Basora alleges employment discrimination on the basis of age and disability upon his dismissal from employment during the probationary period.
Defendant filed a motion for summary judgment with corresponding attachments and sworn statement as to uncontested facts. Defendant avers plaintiff Roman-Basora has failed to state a prima facie case of discrimination based on disparate treatment on account of his age. Defendant submits there are no grounds for a cause  [*2] of action since plaintiff's dismissal from employment was a direct result of his poor job performance during the probationary period throughout which plaintiff received unacceptable ratings in work quantity and work methods, being rated as satisfactory in only two categories and unacceptable in four categories and the ratings significantly deteriorated during a sixty-days evaluation period. (Docket Nos. 24).
Insofar as disability discrimination, defendant submits plaintiff Roman-Basora was not an individual with a disability nor has he ever provided the employer any medical documentation to sustain such a request. Even if plaintiff's diabetes condition would require reasonable accommodation, the schedule of carrier reasonably accommodated plaintiff's request for food breaks. Regarding other medical conditions plaintiff had informed at the time of his post-offer medical examination, as to herniated disk and blockage of the carotid artery, the physician notified plaintiff had no physical restrictions and was stable with the use of his prescribed medications, thus failing to meet the standard of an individual with disability. Furthermore, plaintiff could not establish he required accommodation  [*3] or that defendant failed to reasonably accommodate him.
Plaintiff Roman-Basora submitted an opposition and a statement of contested facts in support. Plaintiff Roman-Basora submits in opposition to summary disposition of his age and disability claims, that he was over forty years old, in fact fifty nine, at the time of his employment and, thus, within the protected age group. Plaintiff claims the low ratings in the evaluations of his job performance were a mere pretext to cover up the discriminatory action as to age. Roman-Basora considers he is an individual qualified for the position since he was appointed to the job on a probationary status and he had met all the requirements. Upon his dismissal, the position was left open. Plaintiff Roman-Basora finally submits he was treated differently from other employees in the same position, who were younger than him and similarly situated, that is, those who had obtained the same number of unsatisfactory ratings during their probationary period. He submits he was not rated a third time during the eighty days mark for evaluation of the full ninety days probationary period.
Plaintiff Roman-Basora further claims he is an individual with disability  [*4] because he suffers from diabetes, a blockage of the carotid artery, and partially herniated cervical disc, conditions he disclosed to the physician who conducted his medical review for employment purposes. Upon performance of his duties, he requested the supervisor for a push-mail cart for the two bags of correspondence during his route. This request was denied by the supervisor without complying with regulations and guidelines of the employer. Thus, plaintiff avers there are genuine issues of material fact in controversy that would preclude the defendant's request for summary disposition. (Docket Nos. 37). 1
The above motions were referred to this United States Magistrate Judge for report and recommendation. 2

SUMMARY JUDGMENT  [*5] STANDARD
Summary judgment is appropriate when "the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed.R.Civ.P. 56(c). Pursuant to the language of the rule, the moving party bears the two-fold burden of showing that there is "no genuine issue as to any material facts," and that he is "entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Vega-Rodriguez v. Puerto Rico Tel. Co., 110 F.3d 174, 178 (1st Cir. 1997). After the moving party has satisfied this burden, the onus shifts to the resisting party to show that there still exists "a trial worthy issue as to some material fact." Cortes-Irizarry v. Corporacion Insular, 111 F.3d 184, 187 (1st Cir. 1997). A fact is deemed "material" if it potentially could affect the outcome of the suit. Id. Moreover, there will only be a "genuine" or "trial worthy" issue as to such a "material fact," "if a reasonable fact-finder, examining the evidence and drawing all reasonable inferences helpful to the party resisting summary judgment, could resolve the dispute in that  [*6] party's favor." Id.
At all times during the consideration of a motion for summary judgment, the Court must examine the entire record "in the light most flattering to the non-movant and indulge all reasonable inferences in the party's favor." Maldonado-Denis v. Castillo-Rodriguez, 23 F.3d 576, 581 (1st Cir. 1994). There is "no room for credibility determinations, no room for the measured weighing of conflicting evidence such as the trial process entails, [and] no room for the judge to superimpose his own ideas of probability and likelihood . . . ." Greenburg v. Puerto Rico Mar. Shipping Auth., 835 F.2d 932, 936 (1st Cir. 1987). In fact, "[o]nly if the record, viewed in [this] manner and without regard to credibility determinations, reveals no genuine issue as to any material fact may the court enter summary judgment." Cadle Co. v. Hayes, 116 F.3d 957, 960 (1st Cir. 1997).
Finally, when considering this motion, unsettled issues of motive and intent as to the conduct of any party will normally preclude the Court from granting summary judgment. Mulero-Rodriguez v. Ponte, Inc., 98 F.3d 670, 677 (1st Cir. 1996) (reversing summary judgment and emphasizing that "determinations of motive and  [*7] intent . . . are questions better suited for the jury") (internal quotation marks omitted) (citation omitted); see also Tew v. Chase Manhattan Bank, N.A., 728 F.Supp. 1551, 1555 (S.D.Fla. 1990) ("Certain issues such as fraud, intent, and knowledge lend themselves to trial, rather than summary judgment. These matters can often only be proved by reliance upon circumstantial evidence except in the rare case where there is uncontroverted proof of a 'smoking gun.'"). However, "even in cases where elusive concepts such as motive or intent are at issue, summary judgment may be appropriate if the nonmoving party rests merely upon conclusory allegations, improbable inferences [or] unsupported speculation." Ayala-Gerena v. Bristol Myers-Squibb Co., 95 F.3d 86, 95 (1st Cir. 1996).

LEGAL ANALYSIS
Where, as here, there is no direct evidence of discrimination, plaintiff may prove the case through the burden-shifting framework set forth in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S.Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). See Rivera-Rodriguez v. Frito Lay Snacks Caribbean, 265 F.3d 15, 25 (1st Cir. 2001); Suarez v. Pueblo Int'l, Inc., 229 F.3d 49, 53 (1st Cir. 2000); Feliciano v. El Conquistador, 218 F.3d 1, 5 (1st Cir. 2000).
Under  [*8] this framework, the plaintiff must prove that: (1) he was within the protected class; (2) job performance was sufficient to meet the employer's legitimate job expectations; (3) he experienced an adverse employment action; and (4) the employer continued to need the services of the position plaintiff occupied. See De La Vega v. San Juan Star, Inc., 377 F.3d 111, 117 (1st Cir. 2004); Gonzalez v. El Dia, Inc., 304 F.3d 63, 68 n.5 (1st Cir. 2002).
Once plaintiff has complied with this initial prima facie burden, the defendant must "articulate a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason" for the challenged conduct at which time presumption of discrimination fades and the burden then falls back on plaintiff who must then demonstrate that the proffered reason was a "pretext" and that the decision at issue was instead motivated by discriminatory animus. See Gu v. Boston Police Dept., 312 F.3d 6, 11 (1st Cir. 2002); Gonzalez v. El Dia, Inc., 304 F.3d at 69; Zapata-Matos v. Reckitt & Colman, Inc., 277 F.3d 40, 44-45 (1st Cir. 2002). "At this third step in the burden-shifting analysis, the McDonnell Douglas framework falls by the wayside because the plaintiff's burden of producing evidence to rebut the  [*9] employer's stated reason for its employment action merges with the ultimate burden of persuading the court that he has been the victim of intentional discrimination." Feliciano v. El Conquistador, 218 F.3d at 6.
The required prima-facie-case showing generates a rebuttable presumption that the defendant-employer violated the anti-discriminatory provisions. Whereupon, the burden of production—as distinguished from the burden of proof—shifts to the defendant-employer to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory basis for its adverse employment action. Once this limited burden has been met by the defendant-employer, the presumption which attended the prima facie case vanishes and the plaintiff must adduce sufficient creditable evidence that one of th prohibited factors for discrimination -race, color, religion, sex, national origin and in the instant case, age- was a motivating factor in the challenged employment action. The plaintiff-employee may meet the burden of proof by showing that the employer's proffered reason for the challenged employment action was pretextual, from which the fact finder in turn may, but need not, infer the alleged discriminatory animus. Gonzalez v. El Dia, 304 F.3d at 68-69.  [*10] "Upon the emergence of such an explanation, it falls to the plaintiff to show both that the employer's proffered reasons is a sham, and that discriminatory animus sparked its actions." Cruz-Ramos v. Puerto Rico Sun Oil Co., 202 F.3d 381, 384 (1st Cir. 2000).
Still, defendant's "burden is one of production, not persuasion" Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Products Inc, 530 U.S. 133, 142, 120 S.Ct. 2097, 147 L. Ed. 2d 105 (2000), and "[a]t all times, the plaintiff bears the 'ultimate burden of persuading the trier of fact that the defendant intentionally discriminated against the plaintiff.'" Gu v. Boston Police Dept., 312 F.3d at 11.
In a summary judgment context the court must determine "whether plaintiff has produced sufficient evidence that he was discriminated against due to [age] to raise a genuine issue of material fact." Zapata-Matos v. Reckitt & Colman, Inc., 277 F.3d at 45; Rivas Rosado v. Radio Shack, Inc., 312 F.3d 532, 534 (1st Cir. 2002). Thus, summary judgment will be denied if once the court has reviewed the evidence submitted by the parties in the light most favorable to the plaintiff [non-movant] it finds there is sufficient evidence from which a trier of fact could conclude that the reasons  [*11] adduced for the charged conduct are pretextual and that the true motive was discriminatory. Santiago-Ramos v. Centennial, 217 F.3d 46, 57 (1st Cir. 2000); Rodriguez-Cuervos v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 181 F.3d 15, 20 (1st Cir. 1999).

A. Plaintiff's Prima Facie Case of Age Discrimination.
Defendant submits summary disposition is appropriate in this case for plaintiff's failure to establish a prima facie case of discrimination as to age beyond mere speculations and conjectures. Additionally, it is defendant's contention plaintiff has been unable to demonstrate that the reasons indicated by the employer for his termination constituted a mere pretext for discrimination. (Deft's Sum. Judg. memo pp. 3-5: Docket No. 26).
Plaintiff has been able to establish at least three elements of the prima facie case, that is; he is within the protected class, being at least over forty years of age; he was terminated from employment; and the position remained open since the employer continued to have the need for the duties of the position. Defendant's main contention is that plaintiff Roman-Basora cannot demonstrate he performed the work satisfactorily nor that similarly situated employees were treated differently.  [*12] (Deft's memorandum pp. 5-8).

1. Defendant's Uncontested Facts.
Defendant submits as uncontested that:
1. Plaintiff Roman-Basora was a probationary Part-Time Flexible ("PTF") City Carrier assigned to Tour 2 at the 65th Infantry Station, San Juan, Puerto Rico. Deft's Uncontested ¶1; Declaration of Eriberto Cedeño 3/23/2010 ("Cedeño Decl."), Attachment 1, Exhibit A).
2. Plaintiff began employment at the United States Postal Service on April 17, 2004. Deft's Uncontested ¶2; Exhibit A.
3. An applicant selected for career appointment to a bargaining unit position must serve a probationary period of 90 calendar days. Deft's Uncontested ¶3; Cedeño Decl., Attachment 1, Exhibit B.
4. On May 15, 2004, while plaintiff Roman-Basora was delivering his mail route during a very heavy rain, he walked up the driveway of a house and threw the mail inside. As plaintiff walked back down the driveway, he slid in the pouring rain coming down the inclined driveway. Deft's Uncontested ¶4; Attachment 2: Roman-Basora's depo. pp. 29, 33- 35.
5. Roman-Basora stood up, picked up his scanner, which had fallen on the ground, and continued his route. When he reached the corner and tried to scan his route, he realized that  [*13] his scanner did not work. Plaintiff Roman-Basora called the post office to report that his scanner was not working. Id. at 37. Roman-Basora spoke with Ms. Magda Cabezas, Supervisor of Customer Services at the 65th Infantry Station, and told Ms. Cabezas that he slid and his scanner was not working. Ms. Cabezas told Plaintiff to stay there and wait. Id. at 38-39. Deft's Uncontested ¶5.
6. Mr. Ruben Ramirez, City Letter Carrier Q2 at the 65th Infantry Station, arrived and asked plaintiff Roman-Basora what had occurred. He asked plaintiff to show him the house where the accident took place. Mr. Ramirez took photographs of the location, returned plaintiff Roman-Basora to the corner where he continued with his route. Id. at 45; Deft'S Uncontested ¶6.
7. The subsequent investigation concluded that the accident occurred because plaintiff Roman-Basora failed to proceed with caution when departing along the slippery tiled driveway. Deft'S Uncontested ¶7; Cedeño Decl., Attachment 1, Exhibit C.
8. On July 6, 2004, Roman-Basora suffered a second accident. Plaintiff Roman-Basora was delivering his mail without incident when he became faint. Suddenly he lost consciousness and hit his face on the sidewalk.  [*14] Deft's Uncontested ¶8; Attachment 2, Roman-Basora's depo., p. 48; Cedeño Decl., Attachment 1, Exhibit D.
9. Plaintiff Roman-Basora became conscious again, got up, and called to the people in the house to help him. He told the people that he needed something sweet. They gave him water, juice, a pop-tart, and candy and someone cleaned his injuries. Attach. 2, Roman-Basora's depo. pp. 49-50; Cedeño Decl., Attachment 1, Exhibits D & E. Roman-Basora declined offers by those helping him to call someone and chose to continue his route. Cedeño Decl., Attachment 1, Exhibit E; Deft's Uncontested ¶9.
10. Standard Operating Procedure ("SOP") at the Postal Service requires an employee to immediately report an accident to a supervisor so that the supervisor can conduct a timely investigation. Deft's Uncontested ¶10; Cedeño Decl., Attachment 1, Exhibits F & G.
11. Plaintiff Roman-Basora waited between two and four hours to call the station after the accident. Plaintiff Roman-Basora has testified that he delayed calling Ms. Cabezas about the accident because he was afraid of losing his job if he reported it to her, even though he knew that accidents had to be reported immediately. Attachment 2: Roman-Basora  [*15] depo., p. 52. When Roman-Basora did call Supervisor Cabezas, he initially said that he would need additional time to complete his route because his glasses were damaged. Upon questioning by Supervisor Cabezas, Roman-Basora told her about the accident. She went to plaintiff Roman-Basora's location on the route and she observed that Roman-Basora's face and shirt were bloodied and one of his eyes was swollen. Deft's Uncontested ¶11; Cedeño Decl., Attachment 1, Exhibit F.
12. Section 584.51, "Performance Evaluation Intervals," states that evaluations of the employee's performance must occur after 30 and 60 days. Deft's Uncontested ¶12; Cedeño Decl., Attachment 1, Exhibit B.
13. There are six categories in which a probationary employee is rated: work quantity; work quality; dependability; work relations; work methods; and personal conduct. The scores, from highest to lowest, are outstanding, satisfactory, and unacceptable. There is a fourth category for "not observed". Deft's Uncontested ¶13; Cedeño Decl., Attachment 1, Exhibit H.
14. Plaintiff Roman-Basora's 30-day performance evaluation was completed on May 17, 2004. Roman-Basora's work was rated "Satisfactory" in four of the six scored  [*16] categories and "Unacceptable" in the other two. Plaintiff Roman-Basora received unacceptable ratings in work quantity and work methods. Id.; Deft's Uncontested ¶14.
15. In or about June 1, 2004 and June 15, 2004, Supervisor Juan Carlos Olivo accompanied Roman-Basora on his route to observe his work and evaluate him. Plaintiff Roman-Basora had difficulty following the sequence of the letters he held in his hand and admitted he kept notes because he had trouble retaining information and orders he received. Deft's Uncontested ¶15; Cedeño Decl., Attachment 1, Exhibit F.
16. On June 26, 2004, plaintiff Roman-Basora's 60-day evaluation was completed. Roman-Basora received a rating of "Satisfactory" in only two categories. He was rated "Unacceptable" in four categories: work quantity, work quality, dependability, and work methods. Deft's Uncontested ¶16; Cedeño Decl., Attachment 1, Exhibit H.
17. On July 10, 2004, plaintiff Roman-Basora acknowledged receipt of a Letter of Separation from the Postal Service dated July, 9, 2004. The reasons stated for plaintiff's separation were his probationary evaluation ratings of unsatisfactory in his work quantity in the first and second rating periods, unsatisfactory  [*17] work quality and dependability in the second rating period, and unsatisfactory work methods in the first and second rating periods. The Letter of Separation also cited Roman-Basora's two accidents within a period of two months, which demonstrated his failure to conduct his work in a safe manner, as reasons for his separation. Deft's Uncontested ¶17; Cedeño Decl., Attachment 1, Exhibit J.
18. Plaintiff Roman-Basora alleged discrimination based on age and disability. Complaint, First and Second Causes of Action. Deft's Uncontested ¶18; Complaint, Docket No. 1.
19. Plaintiff's date of birth is July 9, 1944. Deft's Uncontested ¶19; Cedeño Decl., Attachment 1, Exhibit A.
20. Three other PTF Carriers began their employment at the 65th Infantry Station on the same date as Roman-Basora. Deft's Uncontested ¶26; Cedeño Decl., Attachment 1, Exhibit O.
21. PTF Josue Guzman's date of birth is August 14, 1976. PTF Angel Rodriguez's date of birth is June 7, 1970, and Luis Robles's date of birth is July 12, 1958. Id.; Deft's Uncontested ¶ 27.
22. PTF Guzman received two ratings of Outstanding and four of Satisfactory on his 30-day and 60-day evaluations. Deft's Uncontested ¶28; Cedeño Decl., Attachment  [*18] 1, Exhibit P.
23. PTF Rodriguez received five ratings of Satisfactory and one Unacceptable on his 30-day evaluation. He received all Satisfactory ratings on his 60-day evaluation. Deft's Uncontested ¶29; Cedeño Decl., Attachment 1, Exhibit Q.
24. PTF Robles received three ratings of Satisfactory and three Unacceptable ratings on his 30-day evaluation. He received two Satisfactory ratings and four Unacceptable ratings on his 60-day evaluation. Deft's Uncontested ¶30; Cedeño Decl., Attachment 1, Exhibit R.
25. Of the three other PTF Carriers who began their employment on the same date as plaintiff Roman-Basora, only PTF Guzman was involved in an accident during his probationary period. Deft's Uncontested ¶31; Cedeño Decl., Attachment 1, Exhibit S.
Pursuant to above uncontested facts, defendant submits that as to age discrimination claims plaintiff Roman-Basora failed to establish he was qualified to perform the PTF Carrier position. His 30-day evaluation rated him "Satisfactory" in four of six scored categories and "Unacceptable" in two other, having unacceptable ratings in work quantity and work methods. His ratings significantly deteriorated on the 60-day evaluation, receiving a rating  [*19] of "Satisfactory" in only two categories. He was rated "Unacceptable" in four categories, to wit; work quantity, work quality, dependability, and work methods.
Defendant further submits plaintiff Roman-Basora lacks evidence that "but" for his age, he would not have been separated from employment during his probationary period. The letter of separation, in addition to his rating deficiency, made reference to two accidents during a two-month period, showing a failure to conduct his work in a safe manner.
As to the disability discrimination claim, which will be discussed below, defendant avers plaintiff Roman-Basora failed to meet the burden to establish such a claim since even as to his only factual statement in regards to a verbal request to be provided with a mail-push cart, if it were to be considered an accommodation, he has not first established being an individual with a disability nor had he provided any medical evidence to sustain such a request.

2. Plaintiff's Uncontested Facts.
Plaintiff Roman-Basora's opposition to summary disposition submits a counter-statement of uncontested issues which are considered to have established, in his opinion, the existence of a controversy of genuine  [*20] issues of material facts that precludes summary disposition. However, plaintiff Roman-Basora admits, for the most part, defendant's uncontested facts with some clarifications. Plaintiff denies the manner in which the two accidents were described but does not negate these events took place as indicated. Insofar as failure to notify the same, plaintiff Roman-Basora states the procedures require any accident be reported in a timely manner and as such, he should not be blamed for any delay in making a notification of an accident in which he had lost consciousness.
Insofar as the evaluations of his performance, plaintiff Roman-Basora submits he should have received an evaluation at the end of an 80-day period according to the guideline but he was dismissed without the third evaluation being conducted.
Regarding disability, plaintiff Roman-Basora contests defendant's statement regarding lack of disability. However, plaintiff Roman-Basora also admits defendant lacked any evidence as to the state of plaintiff's health condition at the time he made the request for reasonable accommodation, which is rather consonant with defendant's submission. Plaintiffs Uncontested ¶20.
As to the adequate performance,  [*21] plaintiff Roman-Basora's opposition states it cannot be assessed in isolation to the performance of other similarly situated, who were younger individuals. Plaintiff argues that, other individuals performing equally or worst than him, were not terminated from employment. Plaintiffs Memorandum, Docket No. 38.
Plaintiff Roman-Basora submits another individual while on probation, Mr. Luis Robles, a younger individual, had obtained similar ratings than he had but was still retained in employment. Plaintiffs Uncontested ¶¶16, 30. Defendant had already submitted as uncontested that Mr. Robles had received three ratings of "Satisfactory" and three of "Unacceptable" during the 30-day evaluation. Thereafter Mr. Robles received two "Satisfactory" ratings and four "Unacceptable" ratings on the 60-day evaluation. Plaintiffs Uncontested ¶53; Deft's Uncontested ¶30. Mr. Robles had not been involved in any accident during his probationary period. Deft's Uncontested ¶31.
Defendant has also submitted that insofar as Mr. Robles, the ratings obtained had thereafter improved significantly and he had received only one "Unacceptable" rating out of a total of six categories on the last probationary period.  [*22] Eriberto Cedeño's declaration, Exhibit R. As such, Mr. Robles is not to be considered as similarly situated to plaintiff Roman-Basora as to the performance ratings nor as to the accidents suffered, which defendant submits Roman-Basora also failed to report to his supervisors promptly.
Plaintiff Roman-Basora makes reference to comments of his supervisor, Ms. Magda Cabazas, as the individual who assigned him the routes to deliver mail correspondence. Still, plaintiff admits that Ms. Cabazas did not sign the probationary evaluation, although she may have discussed same with the acting supervisor Mr. Ruben Ramirez. Plaintiff's Uncontested ¶21.
Plaintiff Roman-Basora is juxtaposing the fact that among the other three individuals hired with probationary periods due, he was the oldest one and the only one who was dismissed, attaching the label of a discriminatory reason behind said action. Plaintiff's Uncontested ¶23. Still, there is no contested issues of facts in regard to the relevant parts of the performance evaluations nor as to the events regarding the two separate incidents endured by plaintiff while in the performance of his work during a two month period.
Even if the fact that the reasons  [*23] proffered by the employer would have been discredited by plaintiff Roman-Basora through the opposition, which in the present case has not been as to any relevant issue, this would not automatically mandate a finding of discrimination. The ultimate question is not whether the explanation was false, but whether discrimination was the cause of the conduct at issue. Nonetheless, disbelief of the reason may, along with the prima facie case, on appropriate facts, permit the trier of fact to conclude the employer had discriminated." Zapata-Matos v. Reckitt & Colman, Inc., 277 F.3d 40, 45 (1st Cir. 2002); Reeves, 530 U.S. at 147-48, 120 S.Ct. 2097. See Ronda-Perez v. Banco Bilbao Vizcaya, 404 F.3d 42, 44 (1st Cir. 2005) ("[t]he question to be resolved is whether the defendant's explanation of its conduct, together with any other evidence, could reasonably be seen by a jury not only to be false but to suggest an age-driven animus."). See also Candelario Ramos v. Baxter Healthcare Corp. of P.R., 360 F.3d 53, 56 (1st Cir. 2004).
There is no evidence proffered in this case to support plaintiff's contention that defendant's conduct was motivated by an age-driven animus. Plaintiff's contentions to  [*24] this effect are conclusory and unsupported. The reason for plaintiff's termination of employment was not his age but a legitimate business reason, namely, his performance evaluations and two separate incidents he endured while in the performance of his work during his probationary period which are uncontested. 3
Thus, this Magistrate Judge is of the opinion, that insofar as the age discrimination claim, in the absence of any genuine issue of material fact in controversy, defendant's request for summary disposition should be GRANTED.

B. Plaintiff's Disability Claim.
Plaintiff Roman-Basora has also raised a claim for disability discrimination, which defendant submits he has also failed to meet the prima facie burden for not being considered a person with disability and, thus, summary judgment is appropriate.

1. Defendant's Uncontested Facts as to the Disability Claim:
1. Roman-Basora's Postal Service medical records, which contain information provided by plaintiff Roman-Basora and his treating physician at the time  [*25] of employment application for the position of PTF City Carrier, disclosed that he had diabetes mellitus type 2, a herniated disk, and a 20% blockage of the right carotid artery. At all times relevant to this complaint, his diabetes was under control with diet and exercise. Deft's Uncontested ¶20.
2. The blockage of Roman-Basora's carotid artery was being treated with medications; Plavix, Neurontin, and Lexapro. His treating physician certified on April 13, 2004, that his condition was stable and he was using his treatment as prescribed. The physician concluded that Roman-Basora had no physical restrictions. Deft's Uncontested ¶21; Cedeño Decl., Attachment 1, Exhibit L.
3. Plaintiff Roman-Basora was provided with the Standard Position Description of a City Carrier and the Functional Requirements of the job. In response to the question, "Do you have any medical disorder or physical impairment, which could interfere in any way with the full performance of duties of the position for which you are applying?" he responded with an "X" next to the word "No" and signed his name. Plaintiff failed to list a single restriction of any kind next to the functional requirements. Deft's Uncontested ¶22;  [*26] Cedeño Decl., Attachment 1, Exhibit M.
4. An Agency doctor who examined Roman-Basora found that he had "No Medical Limitation or Restriction: New hire is medically qualified to perform the functions of the position." Deft's Uncontested ¶23; Cedeño Decl., Attachment 1, Exhibit K.
5. Plaintiff Roman-Basora stated in his EEO affidavit that he informed Supervisor Cabazas that due to his diabetes, he required 10 minute food breaks mid-morning and mid-afternoon and a lunch break. Deft's Uncontested ¶24; Cedeño Decl., Attachment 1, Exhibit N.
6. Plaintiff asked for the use of a mail push-cart on his route because he stated that he regularly carried two mail bags of correspondence. Deft's Uncontested ¶25; Exhibit N.
In opposition to above request for summary disposition of the disability claim, plaintiff Roman-Basora states that defendant's uncontested statements are true, but qualifies some of the narrative description. Plaintiff Roman-Basora avers defendant lacked any evidence as to the state of his health condition at the date he made the request for reasonable accommodation. Plaintiff's Uncontested ¶20. The disclosure to Dr. Luis Echevarria, a physician chosen by defendant, related to plaintiffs  [*27] physical condition at the time he was hired. Plaintiff's Uncontested ¶22-23. Roman-Basora requested the use of a mail-push cart not only because he regularly carried two bags of correspondence but also because of his back condition of herniated disc. Plaintiff's Uncontested ¶¶25, 34, Cabeza's depo. p. 89, Exhibit 4.
In addition, Roman-Basora submits Ms. Magda Cabazas, his supervisor who assigned the routes to be worked the majority of times, signed the termination letter on July 9, 2004. Plaintiff's Uncontested ¶¶19-20, 31. Ms. Cabazas did not sign plaintiff Roman-Basora's probationary evaluation form. Plaintiff's Uncontested ¶21. 4 Ms. Cabazas denied plaintiff Roman-Basora the use of a mail push-cart stating that when she was a young carrier she used to carry two mail bags at the same time. Plaintiff's Uncontested ¶25; Roman-Basora's EEO affidavit, Exhibit 1.
Plaintiff Roman-Basora reiterated at a meeting the request of a mail push-cart due to the conditions of his back. Ms. Cabazas responded he did not need it citing to cost concerns and her own experience as a letter carrier when she was young. Ms. Cabazas made statement as to" "Is this what Dr. Echevarria is sending me?" and "I am going to talk to Dr. Echevarria about this." Plaintiff's Uncontested ¶26; Letters to EEO Investigator Paul Spector, Exhibits 6-7.
Mr. Cruz, a casual letter carrier, had been assigned a mail push-cart for the route because he suffered from some leg problem. Plaintiff's Uncontested ¶26; Roman-Basora's affidavit to EEO, Exhibit 1. Ms. Cabazas admitted that a carrier may request and get a push-cart as part of reasonable accommodation. Deft's Uncontested ¶34; Cabazas' depo., p. 89, Exhibit 4. Ms. Cabazas made a request to obtain medical information of Roman-Basora to "see if there was anything from the doctor or in his papers that would tell me—because I didn't have anything written that he had- that I had to do any reasonable accommodations  [*29] for him." Plaintiff's Uncontested ¶38, Cabazas' depo. pp. 95-96, Exhibit 4.
Plaintiff Roman-Basora also told Ms. Cabazas he needed food breaks due to his diabetes. Plaintiff's Uncontested ¶40; Cabazas' depo. p. 97. Ms. Cabazas instructed plaintiff Roman-Basora to discontinue the practice of taking notes while working, which plaintiff had indicated to need in particular to remember routes because of memory lapses for his partial obstruction of the carotid arteries. Plaintiff's Uncontested ¶41-43. Ms. Cabazas required plaintiff Roman-Basora to deliver the correspondence in a short period of time causing plaintiff not to dare to take any breaks during his shifts although he was entitled to do same. Plaintiff's Uncontested ¶50; Roman-Basora's EEO affidavit, Exhibit 1.
The central question in any employment-discrimination case is whether the employer would have taken the same action had the employee been of a different . . . [race, color] and everything else had remained the same. See Dominguez Cruz v. Suttle Caribe, Inc., 202 F.3d 424, 430-31 (1st Cir. 2000) (citing Carson v. Bethlehem Steel Corp., 82 F.3d 157, 158 (7th Cir. 1996)). Where a plaintiff in a discrimination case makes out a prima  [*30] facie case and the issue becomes whether the employer's stated nondiscriminatory reason is a pretext for discrimination, courts must be 'particularly cautious' about granting the employer's summary judgment. Hodgens v. General Dynamics Corp., 144 F.3d 151, 167 (1st Cir. 1998). Doubts about the fairness of an employer's decision or an employer's misjudging of an employee's qualifications, while not necessarily dispositive of employer's motive, may be probative of whether the employer's reasons are pretexts for discrimination. Id.
While a satisfactory evidentiary explanation by the employer for its actions destroys the legally mandatory inference of discrimination arising from the employee's prima facie case, the evidence and inferences that properly can be drawn from the evidence presented during the employee's prima facie case may be considered in determining whether the employer's explanation is pretextual. St. Mary's Honor Center v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 511, 113 S.Ct. 2742, 125 L. Ed. 2d 407 (1993). 5 Additionally, temporal proximity between an employee's protected activity and an adverse employment action can create an inference of causation, but to draw such an inference, there must be proof that  [*31] the decisionmaker knew of the employee's protected conduct when he/she decided to take the adverse employment action. Pomales v. Celulares Telefonica, Inc., 447 F.3d 79 (1st Cir. 2006).
Insofar as plaintiff Roman-Basora's disability claim, the provisions and interpretation of the Americans with Disabilities Act (hereafter "ADA") proscribes discrimination against a qualified individual with a disability because of the disability of such individual. Plaintiff Roman-Basora's claim is under the Rehabilitation Act, but ADA and the Rehabilitation Act has been interpreted by the Court of Appeals for the First Circuit in a similar fashion for which the legal discussion hereunder are consonant. See Bercovitch v. Baldwin School, Inc., 133 F.3d 141, 154 (1st Cir. 1998); see also Calero-Cerezo v. U.S. Dept. of Justice, 355 F.3d 6 (1st Cir. 2004)  [*32] (the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act prohibit discrimination against an otherwise qualified individual based on disability; the Rehabilitation Act, the precursor to the ADA, applies to federal agencies, contractors, and recipients of federal assistance, while ADA applies to private employers with over 15 employees and state and local government).
The protection extends to all employment practices such as job application procedures, hiring, advancement, firing, compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment. See Sutton v. United Air Lines, Inc., 527 U.S. 471, 119 S.Ct. 2139, 144 L. Ed. 2d 450 (1999). The provision also requires an employer to make reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual.
Under the ADA, as would be under the Rehabilitation Act, a "disability" is a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such individual; a record of such an impairment; or being regarded as having such an impairment. Protection is granted only to individuals who meet one or more of the above mentioned definitions. Sutton, 527 U.S. at 471; Albertsons, Inc. v. Kirkingburg, 527 U.S. 555, 119 S. Ct. 2162, 144 L. Ed. 2d 518 (1999);  [*33] Bragdon v. Abbott, 524 U.S. 624, 118 S. Ct. 2196, 141 L. Ed. 2d 540 (1998).
In the absence of direct evidence of discrimination, courts apply the burden shifting framework initially in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S.Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). The framework was also extended to claims of disability discrimination arising under the ADA. Higgins v. New Balance Ath. Shoe, Inc., 194 F.3d 252 (1st Cir. 1999); Dichner v. Liberty Travel, 141 F.3d 24, 29-30 (1st Cir. 1998).
The McDonnell Douglas framework initially requires the plaintiff to establish a prima facie case of disability discrimination. To establish a prima facie case of discrimination, a plaintiff must prove: 1) he/she was "disabled" within the meaning of the statute; 2) he/she was able to perform the essential functions of her job and qualified for the position, with or without reasonable accommodation; 3) he/she was discharged or adversely affected, in whole or in part, because of her disability; and 4) that a non-disabled person replaced her. See Phelps v. Optima Health Inc., 251 F.3d 21 (1st Cir. 2001).
Once plaintiff establishes the elements of the prima facie case, the burden of production, not of persuasion, shifts to the employer to  [*34] articulate some legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse employment action. When the defendant satisfies its burden of production, the plaintiff must prove by a preponderance of the evidence the defendant's proffered reasons were not the true reasons, but merely a pretext for discrimination. Texas Dep't of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253, 256, 101 S.Ct. 1089, 67 L. Ed. 2d 207 (1981). The ultimate burden of persuading the trier of fact that the defendant intentionally discriminated against the plaintiff remains at all times with the plaintiff. Id.
The statute defines a "qualified individual with a disability" as an individual with a "disability" who, with or without a reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the job. The cornerstone of the definition, and the sine qua non requirement for protection, is whether the individual has a "disability" as therein defined. The statute lists three alternative definitions of "disability," of which a claimant must, at least, satisfy one: (a) a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of a person's major life activities; (b) a record of having such impairment; or (c) if the individual is  [*35] being regarded as having such impairment; Sutton, 527 U.S. at 471; Albertsons, 527 U.S. at 555; Bragdon, 524 U.S. at 624.
Common to the three definitions of disability is the requirement that the physical or mental impairment must "substantially limit one or more of the person's major life activities." See Lessard v. Osram Sylvania Inc., 175 F.3d 193, 199 (1st Cir. 1999).
The EEOC regulations define the term "substantially limits" as the (1) inability to perform a major life activity, or (2) a severe restriction on the ability to perform a major life activity as compared to the general population. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(1). Three factors to consider in determining whether a person's impairment substantially limits a life activity are: (1) the nature and severity of the impairment, (2) how long it will last or is expected to last, and (3) its permanent or long-term impact, or expected impact. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(2); Guzman Rosario v. United Parcel Servs., Inc., 397 F.3d 6 (1st Cir. 2005); Wright v. COMPUSA, Inc., 352 F.3d 472, 475 (1st Cir. 2003).
A "major life activity", as the term is used, stands for the basic activities that the average person can perform with little or no  [*36] difficulty. The EEOC has stated that "major life activities" include, but are not limited to, taking care of oneself, walking, seeing, speaking, hearing, breathing, learning and working. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(i). See also, Bragdon, 524 U.S. at 624.
Defendant herein has submitted plaintiff Roman-Basora is not considered an individual with disability within the above parameters. Neither has plaintiff Roman-Basora submitted what is the disabling condition he was subject to and which the employer was required to accommodate. In fact, the medical evidence available at the time was to the effect that plaintiff Roman-Basora had no limitation for the performance of the job he had been recruited to perform. Plaintiff Roman-Basora even acknowledged defendant had no medical evidence as to any medical disorder or physical impairment, which could interfere in any way with the full performance of duties. All that plaintiff Roman-Basora had reported was the existence of some medical conditions, including diabetes, controlled with medication, disc herniation, that did not preclude him from walking, standing or exert himself, and blocking of his carotid arteries, for which he was taking medication.
The  [*37] provisions of the statute requires those "claiming the Act's protection ... to prove a disability by offering evidence that the extent of the limitation [caused by their impairment] in terms of their own experience ... is substantial." Albertsons, 527 U.S. at 567 (holding that monocular vision is not invariably a disability, but must be analyzed on an individual basis, taking into account the individual's ability to compensate for the impairment). That the Act defines "disability" "with respect to an individual," 42 U.S.C. § 12102(2) (as to ADA), makes clear that Congress intended the existence of a disability to be determined in such a case-by-case manner. See Sutton, 527 U.S. at 483; Albertsons, 527 U.S. at 566; cf. Bragdon v. Abbott, 524 U.S. at 641-642, 118 S.Ct. 2196 (relying on unchallenged testimony that the respondent's HIV infection controlled her decision not to have a child, and declining to consider whether HIV infection is a per se disability under the ADA); 29 CFR pt. 1630, App. § 1630.2(j) (2001) ("The determination of whether an individual has a disability is not necessarily based on the name or diagnosis of the impairment the person has, but rather on the effect  [*38] of that impairment on the life of the individual"); ibid. ("The determination of whether an individual is substantially limited in a major life activity must be made on a case-by-case basis"). An individualized assessment of the effect of an impairment is particularly necessary when the impairment is one whose symptoms vary widely from person to person. See Toyota Motor Mfg., Kentucky, Inc. v. Williams, 534 U.S. 184, 198-199, 122 S. Ct. 681, 692, 151 L. Ed. 2d 615 (2002) (indicating it is insufficient for individuals attempting to prove disability status to merely submit evidence of a medical diagnosis of an impairment).
Pursuant to above discussed, this Magistrate Judge finds, that plaintiff Roman-Basora was not a disabled person under interpretation afforded to ADA and/or the Rehabilitation Act for those in federal agencies such as the U.S. Postal Service. Not being considered an individual with a disability, plaintiff cannot benefit from the provisions of said statute.
Furthermore, this Magistrate Judge succinctly states that, had it been required to also discuss in the alternative that plaintiff Roman-Basora is to be considered a person with disability, he still has failed to show denial of reasonable  [*39] accommodation upon his verbal request to Ms. Cabazas.
Plaintiff Roman-Basora's claims fail to discuss the disability aspect of his claims, but rather are limited to a claim of denial of reasonable accommodation on the basis of a verbal request which was initially addressed to Ms. Cabazas to provide him with a push-mail cart. Insofar as his diabetes, the contention is belied by plaintiff's own statement as to knowledge that he was entitled to food breaks but failed to take same. Plaintiff had no history of having an impairment, but to the contrary, the evidence was to the effect that he was able and not limited by his medical history. To have a record of such an impairment, a plaintiff must have a history of, classified as having, an impairment that substantially limited a major life activity. See 29 C.F.R. §1630.2(k). The recorded impairment must be one that substantially limited a major life activity. See Id; Santiago Clemente v. Executive Airlines, Inc., 213 F. 3d 25, 33 (1st Cir. 2000).
An employer must be aware of an employee's disability and refuse to provide a requested reasonable accommodation for a violation of the ADA or Rehabilitation Act to ensue. It is a plaintiff's duty  [*40] to produce specific facts which, reasonably viewed, tend logically to undercut the defendant's position to defeat a request for summary disposition. Calero-Cerezo v. U.S. Dept. of Justice, 355 F.3d at 23-24. 6
The claim that defendant denied plaintiff Roman-Basora's request of reasonable accommodation may only be examined as to the push-cart event, since the food breaks for the diabetic condition fall from merit upon plaintiff's own averments he knew being entitled to these breaks but failed to take the same. Plaintiff Roman-Basora argues defendant failed to engage in an interactive process as required. However, an employer's duty to enter into an interactive process typically must be triggered by a sufficient request for accommodation. Reed v. LePage Bakeries, Inc., 244 F.3d 254, 262 n.11 (1st Cir. 2001).
Plaintiff Roman-Basora does not argue the employer refused to engage in the interactive process, solely that she failed to initiate same. An interactive process requires a great deal of communication  [*41] between the employee and the employer. See Garcia-Ayala v. Lederle Parenterals, Inc., 212 F.3d 638, 648, n.12. Once an accommodation is requested, the responsibility for fashioning a reasonable accommodation is shared between the employee and the employer. 29 C.F.R. §1630.9 App. (1995). The full weight of the interactive process cannot be placed solely on the employer, as plaintiff Roman-Basora has discussed. In fact, the use of the term "may" in regulation providing that it may be necessary for the employer to initiate informal, interactive process with employee, instead of the word "shall" suggest that Congress and the ensuing regulations when enacting these provisions, while it could have imposed affirmative obligation upon the employer to engage in such process in all cases, chose not to. See Jacques v. Clean-Up Group, Inc., 96 F.3d 506, 513-514 (1st Cir. 1996). See also 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3). 7
Plaintiff Roman-Basora refers to comments by Ms. Cabazas that she would need to verify the medical information of plaintiff, in reference to Dr. Echevarria, as to plaintiff's request for a mail push-cart. When an applicant requests reasonable accommodation, an employer may request documentation from an appropriate professional (e.g. a doctor, rehabilitation counselor, etc.) stating that applicant has a disability. Grenier v. Cyanamid Plastics, Inc., 70 F.3d 667, 674 (1st Cir. 1995) (examining medical examinations and medical requests of applicant's medical condition at the pre-offer stage); see Equal Employment Opportunity Comm'n, Enforcement Guidance: Pre-Employment Disability-Related Questions and Medical Examinations (Oct. 10, 1995) (reprinted in EEOC Compl.Man. (CCH) 6903, at 5371) at IV.B.6.b.
Evidently plaintiff Roman-Basora did not indicate having taken any action thereafter to provide for a medical reference as to his condition or to seek further request for the mail push-cart, although he further states knowing  [*43] that someone else, whose condition and age are not discussed, had obtained the push-cart due to some condition of his legs. A failure to accommodate claim in violation of disability provisions cannot rest on such reduced participation by plaintiff, who first did not establish he was disabled within Act or that he was able to perform essential functions of his job with or without the claimed reasonable accommodation, within the expectations of the employer nor the need of the accommodation. Before addressing the merits of the accommodation request, the employer needs to determine if the individual's medical condition meets the ADA definition of disability, a prerequisite for the individual to be entitled to a reasonable accommodation), available at http://www.eeoc.gov/policy/docs/accommodation.html#requesting.See Estades-Negroni v. Associates Corp. of North America, 377 F.3d 58, 64 (1st Cir. 2004). 8
Finally, a failure to engage  [*44] in the interactive process is of no issue if the record forecloses a finding that plaintiff could perform the duties of the job, with or without reasonable accommodation. As such, plaintiff Roman-Basora's claim as to defendant not having engaged in reasonable accommodation puts the cart well before the horse- when a plaintiff could not establish he could perform the duties of his job. See Kvorjak v. Maine, 259 F.3d 48, 52-53 (1st Cir. 2001); Soto-Ocasio v. Federal Exp. Corp., 150 F.3d 14, 19 (1st Cir. 1998). 9
Pursuant to the above discussed, insofar as to the disability discrimination claim, in the absence of any genuine issue of material fact in controversy, defendant's request for summary disposition should be GRANTED.

CONCLUSION
In  [*45] view of the foregoing, it is recommended that defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment (Docket No. 24) be GRANTED and plaintiff's complaint be DISMISSED.
IT IS SO RECOMMENDED.
The parties are to file objections to this report and recommendation as ordered by the Presiding Judge, that is, that although there is a term of "fourteen (14) days after being served with copy thereof", Fed.R.Civ.P. 72(b), 28 U.S.C. §636(b)(1), Local Rule 72(a), the Court has reduced to five (5) business days said term in the instant case. See Docket No. 41, order of Referral.
San Juan, Puerto Rico, this 1st day of November of 2010.
/s/ CAMILLE L. VELEZ-RIVE
CAMILLE L. VELEZ-RIVE
UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE


End of Document

