Ross v. Huhtamaki, Inc.
United States District Court for the District of Kansas
August 9, 2021, Decided; August 9, 2021, Filed
Case No. 2:20-cv-02208-HLT

Reporter
2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 255649 *
TRAVIS D. ROSS, Plaintiff, v. HUHTAMAKI, INC., Defendants.
Subsequent History: Costs and fees proceeding at, Motion granted by, in part Ross v. Huhtamaki, Inc., 2022 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 68658 (D. Kan., Apr. 13, 2022)
Counsel:  [*1] For Travis D. Ross, Plaintiff: Henry W. Tanner, Jr., LEAD ATTORNEY, The Law Firm of Henry Tanner, LLC, Kansas City, MO; Dione C. Greene, DCG Law Firm, Kansas City, MO.
For Huhtamaki, Inc., Defendant: Ashley E. Dillon, Sara E. Welch, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Stinson, LLP - Walnut, Kansas City, MO.
Judges: HOLLY L. TEETER, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: HOLLY L. TEETER
Opinion



ORDER
This is a disability discrimination, failure to accommodate, and retaliation case. Plaintiff Travis Ross alleges various claims under Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), as amended by the ADA Amendments Act of 2008 ("ADAAA"), and Kansas common law against Defendant Huhtamaki, Inc. Defendant moves for summary judgment on all counts. Doc. 33. Because there are disputed issues of material facts from which a reasonable jury could return a verdict for Plaintiff, the Court denies the motion.

I. BACKGROUND1
Defendant is a consumer and specialty packaging company that operates a manufacturing facility in De Soto, Kansas. Plaintiff began working for Defendant in January 2000. Plaintiff worked in the warehouse as either a "Warehouse Clerk" or a N6 Shipping and Receiving Clerk. In 2017 and 2018, Chris Schuler was the Warehouse Supervisor. Plaintiff reported to Schuler. Schuler reported to Kurt Foster (the Plant [*2]  Controller), and Foster reported to John Stockton (the Plant Manager). Kendra Yoder was the Human Resources and Safety Manager.
Plaintiff injured his back in September 2017 and took Family and Medical Leave Act ("FMLA") leave from September 7, 2017 through October 3, 2017. He received short-term disability benefits from September 14, 2017 through October 3, 2017. He returned to work at the same position in October 2017. Several months later, in June 2018, he took FMLA leave due to back pain. He exhausted his FMLA leave on July 30, 2018. He received short-term disability benefits from June 4, 2018 through October 3, 2018.
Plaintiff had back surgery in October 2018. Defendant permitted Plaintiff to take additional leave beyond his FMLA leave. On October 2, 2018, Aetna (Defendant's third-party administrator) sent Plaintiff a letter telling him that he had applied for and had been approved for long-term disability benefits and long-term disability leave. The letter also stated:
Your disability commencement date is 06/04/2018 . . . You will remain an active employee for the period of time you are disabled at a maximum of 12 months from the state date of your disability. Upon the event of reaching [*3]  12 months of leave, your employment status will be evaluated and could potentially be terminated, should you not be able to return to work with a reasonable accommodation.
Doc. 34-11. Plaintiff began receiving long-term disability benefits on October 2, 2018.
An employee whose claim has been approved under Defendant's Long Term Disability Plan will remain as an inactive employee and will be provided continued coverage in some of the benefit plans for a period of time which starts on the original date of the disability and continues for 12 months, or less than 12 months if the employee becomes eligible for Medicare coverage. If the employee cannot return to work with a reasonable accommodation at the end of the 12-month period, the employee will be terminated or retired.
Plaintiff called Yoder in November 2018 to tell her he wanted to file a claim for workers' compensation benefits. Schuler was also present for this call. A few days later, Plaintiff called Yoder and told her that he wanted to withdraw his workers' compensation claim because "after much prayer . . . [he] thought that [he] would be able to return to work." In a follow-up email to Yoder, Plaintiff wrote:
I made the decision [*4]  to file the claim because my doctor suggested that I do so, with that and the pain that I was experiencing left me with the thought I might not be able to return back to 100 percent. I see now through prayer and time I can be back to [m]y normally [sic] mobility and hope to return soon.
While Plaintiff was on long-term disability leave, his job duties were primarily delegated to three warehouse employees. The warehouse also underwent a restructuring that resulted in the elimination of just one hourly position—Plaintiff's position. The parties vigorously dispute the impetus, timing, and outcome of the restructuring. Plaintiff does not believe that Defendant actually restructured the warehouse. But there are a few areas of agreement. Namely, the parties seem to agree that Schuler previously had supervisor and purchasing responsibilities. His duties were split into two positions—a Buyer position and a Warehouse Supervisor position. Schuler took the Buyer position. And, after interviewing, Matt Schurig filled the Warehouse Supervisor position.
On December 11, 2018, Yoder called Plaintiff. She told him that Defendant was restructuring positions in the warehouse and that Schuler would be moving [*5]  into the Buyer position and Schurig would be moving into the Warehouse Supervisor position. Yoder did not discuss with Plaintiff reassigning him to another position. Even though Defendant had eliminated Plaintiff's position, Plaintiff continued to be Defendant's employee.
Plaintiff met with his surgeon in January 2019. His surgeon released him to return to work on February 8, 2019, with a 30-pound lifting restriction. Plaintiff showed up at Defendant on February 8, 2019. He ran into Yoder and Foster. Plaintiff told Yoder that he was ready to work. Yoder and Foster explained to Plaintiff that Defendant had eliminated a headcount as part of the warehouse restructuring and that Plaintiff's job had been eliminated at that time. Yoder informed Plaintiff that he was welcome to apply for any open position. Plaintiff's employment was terminated that day.

II. STANDARD
Summary judgment is appropriate if there is "no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). The moving party bears the initial burden of establishing the absence of a genuine issue of fact. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). The burden then shifts to the nonmovant to demonstrate that genuine issues remain [*6]  for trial. May v. Segovia, 929 F.3d 1223, 1234 (10th Cir. 2019).

III. ANALYSIS
Plaintiff claims Defendant discriminated against him because of his actual or perceived disability of chronic back pain, failed to accommodate his alleged disability, and retaliated against him for requesting reasonable accommodations in violation of the ADAAA. Plaintiff also claims that Defendant retaliated against him in violation of Kansas common law for seeking workers' compensation benefits. Defendant moves for summary judgment on all counts.

A. Count I — ADAAA Discrimination.
In Count I, Plaintiff claims Defendant discriminated against him in violation of the ADAAA because of his actual or perceived disability of chronic back pain by eliminating his position and terminating his employment. The Court analyzes this claim under the burden-shifting framework established in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 802-04, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). The first step requires the plaintiff to establish a prima facie claim. A plaintiff establishes a prima facie claim of ADAAA discrimination by showing that he: (1) is a disabled person as defined by the ADAAA; (2) is qualified to perform the essential functions of the job held or desired with or without reasonable accommodation; and (3) suffered discrimination by an employer or prospective [*7]  employer because of that disability. Neri v. Bd. of Educ. For Albuquerque Pub. Sch., 860 Fed. Appx. 556, 2021 WL 2409988, at *3 (10th Cir. 2021). Second, if the plaintiff establishes a prima facie case, the burden shifts to the employer to articulate a "legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason" for the adverse employment action against the plaintiff. See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802. Third, if the employer does, the burden shifts back to the plaintiff to show the explanation is a pretext for discrimination.
Defendant splits this claim into two theories and attempts to analyze each separately. Defendant initially argues that it did not discriminate against Plaintiff in December 2018 when it eliminated his position because Plaintiff was not a qualified individual when his position was eliminated. Defendant argues that Plaintiff was not qualified because he was on long-term disability leave, had not been released to return to work, and had given no indication of when he might return to work or what his limitation might be if he did return. Defendant next argues that it did not discriminate against Plaintiff in February 2019 when it terminated his employment because there were no positions available at that time.
But the Court's understanding is that Plaintiff is asserting a single discrimination claim that encapsulates all [*8]  events between June 2018 and February 2019. Highly summarized, Plaintiff alleges that Schuler was frustrated that Plaintiff took time off for his back injury. Schuler and Yoder were in a romantic relationship and worked together to eliminate Plaintiff's position under the guise of a warehouse reorganization while Plaintiff was on leave. They did not tell Plaintiff the details of the reorganization, did not make efforts to include Plaintiff in the reorganization, did not attempt to find any reasonable accommodations for Plaintiff, and did not consider Plaintiff for the newly-available supervisor position despite Plaintiff's previous experience. When Plaintiff returned to work in February 2019, Yoder and Foster told Plaintiff there were simply no positions available for him and terminated his employment.2
Analyzing this single theory of the claim, the Court turns to the first step of the McDonnell Douglas analysis. Defendant's only challenge at this step is that Plaintiff was not qualified to perform the essential functions of his job with or without a reasonable accommodation. Thus, the Court must consider whether Plaintiff's impairment prevented him from performing the essential functions of his job. [*9]  And, if not, whether he might have nevertheless been able to perform those functions if the employer provided him a reasonable accommodation. Hawkins v. Schwan's Home Serv., Inc., 778 F.3d 877, 883-84 (10th Cir. 2015). Plaintiff bears the burden of showing that he could perform or there was a reasonable accommodation that would have enabled him to perform the essential functions of his job "at the time he was terminated or soon thereafter." Aubrey v. Koppes, 975 F.3d 995, 1006 (10th Cir. 2020) (emphasis added). Plaintiff has come forward with evidence from which a reasonably jury could conclude that he was a qualified individual.3 Plaintiff has presented evidence that he was qualified to perform the essential functions of his job in February 2019 when he was cleared to return with a 30-pound lifting restriction.
Shifting to the second step of McDonnell Douglas, Defendant has come forward with legitimate nondiscriminatory reasons for eliminating Plaintiff's position and terminating his employment. But, shifting to the third step of McDonnell Douglas, Plaintiff has come forward with evidence from which a reasonable jury could conclude the reasons are pretextual. Very simply, Plaintiff has mustered evidence that his supervisor was frustrated that Plaintiff was on disability leave and referred to it as a summer vacation. While Plaintiff was on leave, [*10]  Defendant restructured the warehouse to remove his position and did not consider Plaintiff for the open Warehouse Supervisor position even though other employees thought he might get it. The timeline of the restructuring is very unclear, but Yoder did not tell Plaintiff about the restructuring or the open position until Schurig was hired. And Plaintiff has come forward with evidence from which a jury could conclude that he was qualified for the Warehouse Supervisor position. Because there are genuine disputes of material fact, a jury will have to resolve this claim.

B. Count II — Failure to Accommodate.
In Count II, Plaintiff claims that Defendant failed to accommodate his disability by failing to engage in the interactive process while Plaintiff was on long-term disability leave and when he asked to return to work with lifting restrictions. Doc. 32 at 17. The Court also analyzes this claim under the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework. A plaintiff establishes a prima facie failure-to-accommodate claim by showing: (1) he was disabled; (2) he was otherwise qualified; (3) he requested a plausibly reasonable accommodation; and (4) the employer refused to accommodate his disability. Aubrey, 975 F.3d at 1005. Defendant splits [*11]  this claim into three theories and attempts to analyze each separately (e.g., the events that occurred in November 2018, in December 2018, and in February 2019), but the Court again understands Plaintiff to assert a single overarching claim encapsulating all events between June 2018 and February 2019.
Defendant makes a variety of arguments including the following: Plaintiff's communications cannot reasonably be interpreted to be requests for an accommodation, Plaintiff cannot establish he was qualified when he made the purported requests, Plaintiff cannot show that there were jobs available for Plaintiff to fill, and Defendant did in fact provide Plaintiff with a reasonable accommodation. Defendant additionally argues that it had a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason and Plaintiff cannot show pretext.
The Court initially finds that a reasonable jury could conclude that Plaintiff made a request for accommodation. Although not a model of clarity, Plaintiff contacted Yoder in November and December and expressed his hope to return to work soon. A jury could conclude these communications were a request for accommodation. Once Plaintiff made these requests, it triggered Defendant's duty to [*12]  engage with him in good faith in an interactive process to determine his limitations and considers whether accommodations he requested or others that might come to light during the process would enable him to return to work. Id. at 1007. Plaintiff has come forward with evidence from which a reasonable jury could conclude that Defendant did not engage in this process. Again, Plaintiff has come forward with evidence that Schuler and Yoder did not seem interested in Plaintiff returning to work and that Yoder made no effort to discover Plaintiff's limitations at any time, when he might return to work, or explore whether there were any accommodations that would allow him to return to work. Plaintiff's evidence suggests that Schuler and Yoder were content to not engage with Plaintiff. He has also mustered evidenced that he was qualified to perform his job or the Warehouse Supervisor job with a reasonable accommodation (e.g., the lifting restriction). Thus, Plaintiff has satisfied the first step.
The second and third steps generally track the analysis for Plaintiff's first claim. Namely, Defendant has come forward with a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason. But Plaintiff has evidence from which a jury [*13]  could find pretext including the comments about his injury and leave, the relationship between Schuler and Yoder, the lack of information given to him about the restructuring, the failure to tell him about the Warehouse Supervisor position or consider him for it, and his treatment upon his return in February 2019. Once again, a jury must resolve this claim.

C. Count III — ADAAA Retaliation.
In Count III, Plaintiff claims Defendant violated the ADAAA by retaliating against him for requesting reasonable accommodations for his alleged disability by eliminating his position and terminating his employment. The Court again uses the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework. A plaintiff establishes a prima facie retaliation claim by showing that: (1) he engaged in activity protected under the ADAAA, which includes requesting an accommodation; (2) the employer took action against him that an objectively reasonable employee would have found adverse; and (3) a causal connection between the protected conduct and the employer's adverse action.
The arguments for this claim generally mirror arguments for the other claims, and they fail for similar reasons. Defendant argues that Plaintiff cannot establish a prima [*14]  facie case of retaliation because his statements in November and December 2018 cannot be reasonably construed to be requests for an accommodation, i.e., Plaintiff did not engage in protected activity. A request for short-term or long-term leave to recuperate from an injury is adequate and protected if it reasonably indicates that the employee wants assistance for their disability. See Mestas v. Town of Evansville, Wyo., 785 F. App'x 153, 157 (10th Cir. 2019). But, as explained above, Plaintiff musters evidence that he engaged in protected activity by requesting long-term disability leave in October 2018. Plaintiff then emailed Yoder in November and stated that, "through prayer and time I can be back to [m]y normally [sic] mobility and hope to return soon." And, in December, Plaintiff told Yoder that he did not know when he could get back but that he wanted to return to work. These conversations with Yoder can reasonably be interpreted as requests for a reasonable accommodation in the form of continuing long-term disability leave. And Plaintiff engaged in protected activity when he presented a 30-pound lifting restriction in February 2019. Accordingly, there are sufficient facts by which a reasonable jury could conclude that Plaintiff engaged in activity [*15]  protected under the ADAAA.
Defendant also argues that Plaintiff cannot establish a causal connection between his alleged protected activity and the decision to eliminate a headcount in the warehouse. Defendant argues that Foster began considering a restructuring of the warehouse in or around August 2018, months before Plaintiff made his requests for accommodation. But the timeline of the reorganization of the warehouse is hotly contested. There are sufficient facts for a reasonable jury to find that the ultimate decision to eliminate Plaintiff's position was not made until after Plaintiff's communications with Yoder. Additionally, a reasonable jury could find a causal connection between Plaintiff's request to return to work with a 30-pound lifting restriction and his termination mere hours later. Accordingly, genuine disputes of material fact preclude summary judgment on Plaintiff's prima facie case.
Defendant offers the reasons for the second step of the McDonnell Douglas framework. And Plaintiff relies on the same evidence to show pretext. Because there are genuine disputes of material fact from which a jury could find in Plaintiff's favor, a jury will have to resolve this claim.

D. Count IV — Kansas [*16]  Common Law Retaliation.
In Count IV, Plaintiff claims Defendant retaliated against him in violation of Kansas common law after he sought workers' compensation benefits. Kansas federal courts apply the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting analysis in workers' compensation retaliation cases. Anderson v. Par Elec. Contractors, Inc., 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 94177, 2018 WL 2683780, at *2 (D. Kan. 2018). A plaintiff establishes a prima facie claim of retaliatory discharge under Kansas law by showing that: (1) he filed a claim for workers' compensation benefits or sustained an injury for which he might assert a future claim for such benefits; (2) his employer had knowledge of such injury or claim; (3) his employer discharged him; and (4) a causal connection exists between his protected activity or injury and his discharge. Id.
Defendant argues that Plaintiff cannot establish that there is a causal connection between the decision to eliminate Plaintiff's job in the warehouse restructuring and his request to file a workers' compensation claim and that Plaintiff cannot demonstrate pretext.4 But Plaintiff has presented evidence that Defendant's conduct was retaliatory. After being notified that Plaintiff wished to pursue a workers' compensation claim, Yoder immediately began an investigation. She involved Schuler, with whom [*17]  she was romantically involved even though Schuler was not supposed to be involved in workers' compensation matters. On a phone call with Plaintiff, Schuler said to Plaintiff: "why would you want to do that!" And Yoder began interrogating Plaintiff regarding their investigation. And while Defendant argues that Yoder and Schuler were not involved in the warehouse reorganization, there is evidence to suggest that Yoder and Foster agreed to eliminate Plaintiff in December 2018, just one month after Plaintiff informed Yoder he wished to file a workers' compensation claim. Based on these facts, a reasonable jury could conclude that a causal connection exists between Plaintiff's protected activity and his discharge. And, despite Defendant's explanation, a reasonable jury could find pretext for the same reasons discussed above.5

IV. CONCLUSION
Plaintiff has shown that genuine issues remain for trial on all four claims.
THE COURT THEREFORE ORDERS that Defendant's motion for summary judgment (Doc. 33) is DENIED.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
Dated: August 9, 2021
/s/ Holly L. Teeter
HOLLY L. TEETER
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

