Salgado v. Bluecross Blue Shield of Tenn., Inc.
United States District Court for the Eastern District of Tennessee
August 9, 2021, Filed
No.: 1:19-cv-263-TAV-CHS

Reporter
2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 250553 *; 2021 WL 6496749
PATRICIA L SALGADO, Plaintiff, v. BLUECROSS BLUE SHIELD OF TENNESSEE, INC., and VOLUNTEER STATE HEALTH PLAN, INC., Defendants.
Prior History: Salgado v. Bluecross Blue Shield of Tenn., 2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 250558 (E.D. Tenn., Aug. 9, 2021)
Counsel:  [*1] For Patricia L Salgado, Plaintiff: Robert Ethan Hargraves, LEAD ATTORNEY, Massey & Associates, PC, Chattanooga, TN.
For BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee, Inc., Volunteer State Health Plan, Inc, Defendants: Kierstin Jodway, Waller Lansden, Nashville, TN; John E.B. Gerth, Waller, Lansden, Dortch & Davis, LLP (Nashville), Nashville, TN.
Judges: Thomas A. Varlan, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: Thomas A. Varlan
Opinion



MEMORANDUM OPINION AND ORDER
This matter is before the Court on defendants' motion for summary judgment [Doc. 17]. Plaintiff has responded [Doc. 20], and defendants have replied [Doc. 27]. This matter is now ripe for the Court's review. See E.D. Tenn. L.R. 7.1(a). For the reasons explained below, defendants' motion for summary judgment [Doc. 17] is GRANTED in part and DENIED in part.

I. Background

A. Procedural History
Plaintiff initially filed the instant action in the Hamilton County Chancery Court, alleging disability discrimination and retaliatory discharge under the Tennessee Disability Act ("TDA"), T.C.A. § 8-50-103, et seq., and the Tennessee Human Rights Act ("THRA"), T.C.A. § 4-21-101, et seq. [Doc. 1-1, pp. 3-8]. Plaintiff later amended her complaint to add claims under the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 1210, et seq. [Doc. 1-1, pp. 62-68]. Thereafter, defendants removed the action to this Court on the ground of federal question jurisdiction [Doc. 1].

B. Summary Judgment Evidence [*2] 
The evidence submitted establishes that plaintiff was employed by Volunteer State Health Plan ("VSHP"), working on the BlueCare and BlueCare Plus products [Doc. 17-1, p. 2]. VSHP is a separately managed subsidiary of BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee ("BCBST") [Doc. 17-2, p. 1; Doc. 24-1, pp. 85, 112]. VSHP has its own officers and directors, and manages its books and records separately from BCBST [Doc. 17-2, p. 1]. According to Chris Levan, the BlueCare manager of training, education, audit and systems, and VSHP employee, VSHP hires its own workers and employs them directly, and VSHP employees are not BCBST employees [Id.]. VSHP has an administrative services agreement with BCBST, under which VSHP purchases certain support services from BCBST, including human resources ("HR") support [Id. at 2; Doc. 24-1, p. 112]. In his deposition, Levan stated that VSHP retains the responsibility and authority for employee-related decisions, including hiring, promotion, discipline, and termination, but in her deposition, Cindy Bankson, a VSHP Operations Supervisor, stated that BCBST's HR department handles hiring, firing, and discipline of VSHP employees [Doc. 17-2, p. 2; Doc. 17-3, p. 1; Doc. 24-1, [*3]  p. 112]. VSHP's primary offices are located on BCBST's Chattanooga campus [Doc. 17-3, p. 1].
Brandon Estrada, a BCBST HR employee, stated that, because all of BCBST's subsidiaries were "umbrellaed" under BCBST, he considered all employees BCBST employees [Doc. 24-1, p. 97]. Dawn Burnett,1 plaintiff's former supervisor, stated that employees say they work for BCBST, and have t-shirts that say "BlueCross," but they are actually employees of VSHP [Doc. 24-2, p. 4]. Despite the fact that VSHP was listed as her employer on tax-related documents, plaintiff's former coworker Melinda Brant believed that she worked for BCBST and had never heard of VSHP [Id. at 23-24]. When plaintiff began working at the BCBST campus, her e-mail address was Patti_Salgado@vshp.com, but was later changed to Patti_Salgado@bcbst.com [Doc. 24-1, p. 65]. Brant also stated that her e-mail address was associated with BCBST, not VSHP, and she understood that the code of conduct and related polices that applied to her were BCBST policies that BCBST could enforce, up to and including termination [Doc. 24-2, pp. 27].
Plaintiff worked as a customer service representative for VSHP from approximately 2008 to 2013 and was promoted [*4]  to quality examiner in 2013 or 2014 [Doc. 17-1, pp. 3, 7]. As a customer service representative, she worked in the Gateway building on the BCBST campus in Chattanooga [Id. at 6]. Plaintiff was an hourly, "non-exempt" employee, and she was allowed two paid 15-minute breaks each day [Id. at p. 10; Doc. 17-3, p. 2].
In August 2015, plaintiff was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis ("MS") [Doc. 17-1, p. 12]. One of her symptoms was mobility issues [Id. at 13]. In 2015, she began using a cane to walk at work [Id.]. By October 2015, she began using a wheelchair at work [Id. at 14]. From October to December 2015, plaintiff's husband was dropping her off in the employee parking garage of one of the buildings on the BCBST campus in Chattanooga [Doc. 24-1, pp. 20-21]. Several other employees were also dropped off in the employee parking garage [Id. at p. 21].
In December 2015, plaintiff had back surgery, which caused further problems with her MS, and she began experiencing severe problems with her legs [Doc. 17-1, p. 14]. Plaintiff's doctor provided her with a return to work notice which allowed her to return to work on June 13, 2016 [Id. at 16, 45]. The note recommended a phased return to work [*5]  for a few hours a day, progressively increasing [Id. at 22, 45]. In 2016, including through June 13, 2016, plaintiff was using a manual wheelchair all of the time and was only able to walk during therapy sessions with a walker [Id. at 18].
Before returning from short-term disability, she requested to work from home for a short time, at her doctor's suggestion [Doc. 24-1, pp. 56-57]. Plaintiff states that this request was denied [Id. at 56]. Plaintiff was told that BlueCare quality experts were required to be in the office [Id. at 57]. Brant stated that, before plaintiff's MS diagnosis, she knew plaintiff to work from home on some days [Doc. 24-2, p. 18]. Brant stated that she was aware of non-disabled employees who were allowed to work from home, specifically, all of the supervisors worked from home on occasion [Id. at 19-20]. Brant stated that she felt plaintiff was treated different because of her disability [Id. at 20].
Estrada oversaw the accommodations requests for BCBST and its subsidiaries [Doc. 24-1, pp. 86-87]. Estrada stated that remote work was an option for medical accommodations [Id. at p. 92]. He stated that he gave plaintiff the option to work remotely and plaintiff declined [*6]  [Id. at 93-94]. This offer was for plaintiff to become a full-time telecommuter as a medical accommodation [Id. at 95]. He stated that the company could have made adjustments for plaintiff to telecommute in her quality expert position, and plaintiff would not have had to take a demotion or a different job [Id.]. Estrada specifically made a determination that working from home would be a reasonable accommodation for plaintiff [Id. at 100]. However, Bankson stated that she recalled plaintiff asking to work from home, and the company denied that request because her position was "not a telecommuting position" [Id. at 115-16]. Specifically, Bankson stated that HR told her that plaintiff, in her position as a quality manager, would not be eligible for telecommuting [Id. at 116].
In June 2016, when she returned from short-term disability, plaintiff was working in the Cameron Hill building on the BCBST Chattanooga campus [Id. at 24]. At that time, a procedure was in place for her husband to drop her off at the roundabout in front of the Cameron Hill building, and security would meet her there [Id. at 24-25]. Approximately two months later, she was told that she had to be dropped off in a parking [*7]  lot, not the roundabout [Id. at 27]. Plaintiff stated that she was the only person with a disability that was required to be dropped off in the parking lot location [Id. at 28-29].
At Cameron Hill, there was a handicap restroom that was large enough to accommodate plaintiff's wheelchair [Id. at 38-39]. However, the restrooms in the Gateway building were too small, and plaintiff could not get her wheelchair turned back around to get back in it [Id.]. Burnett talked to Estrada about this issue and he told plaintiff that if she had a problem getting out of the restroom, she should call security [Id. at 39]. However, she was later told that she could not call security for any issues in the restroom [Id. at 37-38, 73]. Instead, she was told that there was a larger restroom on the second floor of the Gateway building that she should utilize, but to access that restroom she would have to go halfway around the building, open a set of double doors, use a lift to get to the second floor, open a gate, open another door, and then go through the cafeteria [Id. at 40]. At that time, she was at the Gateway building on occasion for various training sessions [Id.] Plaintiff also stated that, after her [*8]  return in June 2016, there were occasions when her work team would have events where they left the office for lunch, and would be gone for two hours, but only 30 minutes would be counted as a lunch break, and the other hour and a half would be paid as part of a team event [Id. at 58]. However, on two occasions, she was not permitted to go to these events because the handicap accessible van was not working or no one had looked into getting the van for the event, and plaintiff would therefore be forced to stay and work during those times [Id.].
In 2017, plaintiff returned to working under Bankson in customer service [Doc. 17-1, p. 8]. Bankson stated, prior to her disability, although working with a different group of people on the team, plaintiff had no trouble fitting in, but, after returning from short-term disability, plaintiff was no longer fitting in with the team [Doc. 24-1, pp. 125-26].
On February 2, 2017, Bankson e-mailed plaintiff to discuss handling breaks that exceeded the allowed 15-minute paid breaks, asking plaintiff to inform her of any break time exceeding 15 minutes, and allowing plaintiff to use paid time off or "flex the time" and make it up during business hours [Doc. [*9]  17-1, pp. 26, 48; Doc. 17-3, pp. 2-3]. Plaintiff stated that this was an acceptable way to allow her the time she needed for breaks and make sure she was compensated accurately for productive time [Doc. 17-1, p. 27]. Plaintiff had no issue with this accommodation and considered it to be reasonable [Id.]. Plaintiff understood that if she took a restroom break longer than 15 minutes, she needed to e-mail Bankson so that the time punches would accurately reflect her actual work time [Id.]. On February 6, 2017, plaintiff followed this practice and informed Bankson that she had taken a longer break and could make up the time that evening or use paid time off [Id. at 49].
At some point in 2017, plaintiff obtained a motorized wheelchair [Id. at 21]. On May 3, 2017, plaintiff e-mailed Estrada asking that her desk be raised to accommodate her new motorized wheelchair [Id. at 30]. Estrada responded approving the accommodation and asking for plaintiff's cubicle number [Id. at 30-31]. However, plaintiff stated it took close to two weeks for the desk to be raised [Id. at 31-32].
On May 12, 2017, plaintiff was coaching another employee, Craig Gregory, at his workstation [Id. at 33]. At some point, [*10]  she took a break to go to the restroom and ended up being gone for an extended period of time, approximately 50 minutes [Id.]. Plaintiff stated that she had to wait for the handicap restroom, as it was in use [Id. at 34]. Plaintiff also stated that this was the first time that she had been in the Gateway building since getting her motorized wheelchair, and, when she left the restroom, several people approached her to talk about her new wheelchair [Id. at 34-35]. Plaintiff stated that she did not think to let Bankson know about the break, because she took no more than 15 minutes in the restroom, and then got caught up in chatting on the way back, and was not trying to falsify anything [Doc. 24-1, p. 48]. Plaintiff stated that she did not realize she had been gone for 50 minutes, and she believed that she only needed to notify Bankson of restroom breaks that exceeded 15 minutes [Id. at 50]. Plaintiff emphasized that it was not uncommon for employees to stop to have personal conversations and noted that Bankson once had a personal conversation at plaintiff's desk that lasted "probably over an hour" [Id. at 50-51]. Bankson admitted in her deposition that it was not against the rules for [*11]  employees to have personal conversations or to engage in occasional "chit-chat" [Id. at 127-28]. Bankson stated that whether a personal conversation exceeding the 15-minute break time was a violation of policy would depend on the situation, noting that such time could be deemed "building team dynamics and team relationships" [Id. at 128].
Bankson learned about plaintiff's extended break and, upon investigation, discovered that plaintiff had not accounted for it on her coaching spreadsheet or her timesheet [Doc. 17-3, p. 3]. Bankson discussed the issue with plaintiff, who admitted the inaccuracies and stated that, while she clocked out at her regular time, she continued to work afterwards "off the clock" [Id.].
VSHP considers it important to maintain accurate time and pay records for its hourly, non-exempt employees for business reasons and compliance reasons, and there are specific policies in place governing timekeeping [Doc. 17-3, p. 2]. Specifically, because plaintiff was allowed to "flex" her time, Bankson believed that inaccuracies in the records of her unpaid breaks would make it impossible to confirm how much time plaintiff could "flex" in a work week to maintain 40 hours of work [*12]  [Id.]. Plaintiff acknowledged that it could potentially create a problem not to have time records that accurately reflect her actual hours worked [Doc. 17-1, p. 35]. Plaintiff also acknowledged that on May 12, 2017, because she took a break and then clocked out, but continued to coach Craig after clocking out, her punches for that day were not correct and did not accurately reflect her working time [Id.].
On May 17, 2017, Bankson sent a memorandum to Levan recommending that plaintiff be terminated for falsification of time [Doc. 17-1, p. 50; Doc. 17-2, pp. 1-2; Doc. 17-3, p. 3]. Bankson stated that on May 12, 2017, plaintiff took a break from 2:55 to 3:45 p.m., did not notify Bankson of the extended break, and submitted her time showing she worked during that time frame [Doc. 17-1, p. 50]. Bankson stated that, in discussing the issue with plaintiff, she stated that she clocked out at 4:45 p.m. but continued to coach an employee until 5:00 p.m., which Bankson stated constituted working off the clock, another violation [Id.]. Levan signed off on plaintiff's termination [Id.; Doc. 17-2, p. 2].
From June 2016 until her termination in May 2017, there was never a point that plaintiff was unable [*13]  to perform the essential functions of her job due to a lack of sufficient accommodation, and according to her, she was able to perform the essential functions of her job during that period [Doc. 17-1, p. 40]. Upon plaintiff's termination, the BlueCare team redistributed her work among other team members [Doc. 17-3, p. 3; Doc. 24-1, p. 135]. Another quality examiner was hired to join the BlueCare team on August 14, 2017 [Id.]. Bankson was not aware of the new quality examiner having any disability [Doc. 24-1, p. 135].
Over the years of working on BlueCare, plaintiff never saw BCBST or VSHP propose time limits on any other employees' restroom breaks [Doc. 17-1, p. 41; Doc. 24-1, p. 66]. Prior to her MS diagnosis, no one at BCBST or VSHP had ever imposed time limits on her restroom breaks or mandated that she use her allotted 15-minute break time to use the restroom [Doc. 24-1, pp. 65-66]. Bankson testified that hourly employees at the company are not required to take restroom breaks within their 15-minute breaks or lunch break [Id. at 114]. Instead, the policy at the company was that if an employee needed to use the restroom, they could use the restroom, regardless of whether it was within [*14]  one of their break times [Id.]. Brant stated that she could take her restroom breaks whenever she wanted, they were not timed, and she was not required to use any allotted break time for restroom breaks [Doc. 24-2, p. 21]. Brant stated that she was never told that she had to deduct time in the restroom from her 15-minute breaks, and if she had used her 15-minute breaks for the day, she was still permitted to go to the restroom [Id. at 21-22]. Estrada also stated that the majority of employees were allowed to use the restroom outside of their two 15-minute breaks, the primary exception being call center employees who would have to notify someone if they were leaving for an unscheduled break [Doc. 24-1, p. 91].
According to plaintiff, Melissa Mitchell was another employee who worked at the BCBST office and was suspended for three days for falsifying time [Doc. 17-1, p. 41]. Plaintiff stated that she learned this information from Burnett, who specifically described Mitchell's offense as "falsified time" [Id. at 41-42]. As far as plaintiff was aware, Mitchell did not have any disability at the time of her suspension [Id. at 42]. Burnett stated that, in late 2015, VSHP conducted an audit [*15]  of member calls and Mitchell was "on call" to answer member calls but a number of calls went unanswered during that time [Doc. 17-4, pp. 1-2]. Specifically, from October 1, 2015 to October 12, 2015, 51 calls were received and only 3 were answered [Id. at 4]. Because she was being paid to be "on call," Mitchell was expected to actually take calls that came in [Doc. 24-2, p. 11]. Mitchell was disciplined for this conduct, specifically, she was suspended for three days without pay [Doc. 17-4, pp. 2, 4]. Burnett stated that this behavior could be considered falsification of time [Doc. 24-2, p. 11].
In February 2018, Bankson submitted a memorandum recommending that an employee named Jerri Frost be terminated for falsifying work time [Doc. 17-2, p. 2; Doc. 17-3, p. 3]. Specifically, Frost allegedly falsified her time on 20 occasions, and, when asked about the discrepancies, she could not explain [Doc. 17-3, p. 43; Doc. 24-1, p. 136]. The company ultimately discovered that Frost would take actions such as placing her stapler on her laptop so that it would indicate she was active when she was not and clocking in from home before commuting to the office [Doc. 24-1, p. 138]. Frost did not attempt [*16]  to make up any time that she had "falsified" [Id. at 140-41]. Levan also approved the recommendation to terminate Frost, and neither Levan nor Bankson were aware of Frost having any disability [Doc. 17-2, p. 2; Doc. 17-3, p. 3].
As to her claim for retaliation, when asked in her deposition about her allegation that her termination was partly retaliatory, plaintiff responded "I wouldn't say so much retaliatory. I would say that based on me being disabled that they feared or were worried about my — how my job performance would be or that I wouldn't be able to do as much as I was doing beforehand" [Doc. 17-1, p. 38]. Plaintiff stated that she did not believe anyone at BCBST or VSHP were upset with her for requesting any accommodations [Id. at 39]. She had no reason to believe that anyone was upset or frustrated with her requesting accommodations [Id.].

II. Standard of Review
Rule 56(a) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure provides that "[t]he court shall grant summary judgment if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." In ruling on a motion for summary judgment, the court must draw all reasonable inferences in favor of the nonmoving party. McLean v. 988011 Ontario Ltd., 224 F.3d 797, 800 (6th Cir. 2000) [*17] . As such, the moving party has the burden of conclusively showing the lack of any genuine issue of material fact. Smith v. Hudson, 600 F.2d 60, 63 (6th Cir. 1979). To successfully oppose a motion for summary judgment, "[t]he non-moving party . . . must present sufficient evidence from which a jury could reasonably find for him." Jones v. Muskegon Cnty., 625 F.3d 935, 940 (6th Cir. 2010) (citing Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 447 U.S. 242, 252 (1986)).

III. Analysis
As an initial matter, the Court notes that defendants have argued that plaintiff cannot assert a failure to accommodate claim under state law [Doc. 18, p. 13]. However, plaintiff affirmatively states in her response that she does not assert a claim under the TDA for failure to accommodate [Doc. 24, p. 14]. Accordingly, the Court will not address this issue and construes plaintiff's amended complaint as not containing a TDA claim for failure to accommodate.

A. BCBST Liability
Defendants first argue that plaintiff's claims are only assertable against her employer, VSHP, and are not assertable against BCBST, as it was never her employer [Doc. 18, p. 10]. Defendants argue that VSHP and BCBST are not "joint employers," noting that VSHP employees interviewed and hired plaintiff, promoted her, assigned and supervised her day-to-day activities, and had the authority to fire her [Id. at 12].2
Plaintiff responds that a reasonable jury could find that BCBST and VSHP were her joint employers [Doc. 24, p. 13]. Plaintiff notes that (1) Estrada was an employee of BCBST and [*18]  had authority to give her instructions regarding her work, including telling her to "refrain from working"; (2) the memorandum from Bankson regarding plaintiff's termination was prepared on BCBST letterhead; (3) the "employer's e-mail address" listed on her separation notice was "HR_Service@bcbst.com"; (4) her employee e-mail was "Salgado@bcbst.com"; (5) numerous coworkers all believed that they worked for BCBST; (6) the BCBST Code of Conduct applied to VSHP employees and BCBST had the ability to enforce those policies by discipline up to and including termination; and (7) VSHP's HR functions were handled by BCBST's HR department, including the process of hiring, firing, and discipline of employees [Id. at 13-14].
Defendants reply that plaintiff omits material facts, including that she was hired, supervised, counseled, and ultimately terminated by VSHP employees, she received her work assignments and ongoing feedback from Bankson, her VSHP supervisor, and the decision to terminate her was made by Bankson, subject to the approval of Levan, who was also a VSHP employee [Doc. 27, pp. 2-3]. Defendants contend that plaintiff offers no evidence that BCBST managed her day-to-day activities [*19]  or otherwise directed her work, and a defendant who merely provides HR services is not a joint employer [Id. at 3]. Defendants argue that the authority to make employment-related decisions is what controls and here that authority undisputedly lies with VSHP [Id. at 4].
To hold a defendant liable under the ADA, a plaintiff must show that the defendant was his or her "employer" within the meaning of the ADA. Berry v. Univ. Sch. of Nashville, No. 3:19-cv-830, 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 105906, 2020 WL 3268732, at *3 (M.D. Tenn. June 17, 2020). The Sixth Circuit has recognized several doctrines by which a defendant that does not directly employ a plaintiff may still be deemed an "employer" under the ADA. Swallows v. Barnes & Noble Book Stores, Inc., 128 F.3d 990, 993 (6th Cir. 1997). One such approach is looking at whether the two companies are acting as "joint employers" of the employee. Id. "The basis of the [joint employer] finding is simply that one employer while contracting in good faith with an otherwise independent company, has retained for itself sufficient control of the terms and conditions of employment of the employees who are employed by the other employer." Id. at 993 n.4 (quoting NLRB v. Browning-Ferris Ind. of Penn., Inc., 691 F.2d 1117, 1123 (3d Cir. 1982)).
Thus, in determining whether a defendant is a joint employer under the ADA, courts consider whether that defendant has control over another company's employees sufficient [*20]  to show that the two companies are acting as a joint employer of those employees. Berry, 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 105906, 2020 WL 3268732, at *4 (citing Swallows, 128 F.3d at 993 n.4). "Factors to consider include authority to hire, fire and discipline employees, promulgation of work rules and conditions of employment, issuance of work assignments and instructions, and supervision of employees' day-to-day activities." Id. (quoting Russell v. Bronson Heating & Cooling, 345 F. Supp. 2d 761, 771 (E.D. Mich. 2004)) (internal quotation marks omitted).
In support of her claim that BCBST was her joint employer with VSHP, plaintiff points to the fact that VSHP's HR functions were handled by BCBST's HR department [Doc. 24, p. 14]. However, a "defendant who merely provides human resources services is not a joint employer[.]" Adams v. Valega's Prof. Home Cleaning, Inc., No. 1:12CV0644, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 157550, 2012 WL 5386028, at *11 (N.D. Ohio, Nov. 2, 2012) (addressing whether a defendant was a joint employer for purposes of a claim under the Family Medical Leave Act). As to Estrada's authority to instruct plaintiff to "refrain from working," the Court finds that plaintiff mischaracterizes this evidence. The only evidence that Estrada had any control over plaintiff's work activities, including telling her to "refrain from working," arose in the context of his HR functions, namely, in providing plaintiff with a reasonable accommodation during the course of emergency drills [Doc. 17-1, p. 47]. Because the only evidence [*21]  that Estrada had any control over plaintiff's work arose in the HR context, the Court finds that this is insufficient to establish that BCBST and VSHP were joint employers of plaintiff.
Next, as to plaintiff's claims regarding the use of BCBST letterhead for her termination and BCBST e-mail addresses, the Court does not find that such labels necessarily indicate that BCBST and VSHP were plaintiff's joint employers. Plaintiff admits that her e-mail address had previously indicated affiliation with VHSP but was at some point changed to indicate an affiliation with BCBST [Doc. 24-1, p. 65]. A use of consistent e-mail addresses throughout a company and its subsidiary, particularly with customer service related positions, could simply indicate the desire to ease communication with customers, rather than implying any authority over the e-mail user's employment. Likewise, the use of BCBST letterhead throughout both BCBST and its subsidiary, VSHP, does not implicate any BCBST authority over plaintiff's employment.
Further, to the extent that plaintiff points to other coworkers who believed that they worked for BCBST, rather than VSHP, the Court does not find the misunderstanding of employees [*22]  to be a relevant factor in determining whether BCBST had sufficient control over VSHP employees such that it should be deemed a joint employer for purposes of this litigation.
However, the Court notes that plaintiff points to the fact that the BCBST Code of Conduct applied to VSHP employees, and BCBST had the ability to enforce those policies by discipline up to and including termination. Because this claim essentially amounts to both "authority to . . . fire and discipline employees" and "promulgation of work rules," the Court finds that, if supported by evidence, this allegation may lead to the conclusion that BCBST and VSHP were plaintiff's joint employers. The Court notes that Levan, a VSHP manager, stated that VSHP retains the responsibility and authority for hiring, promotion, discipline, and termination of its employees [Doc. 17-2, p. 2]. Moreover, the particular facts of this case support Levan's statement, as the decision to terminate plaintiff was made by VSHP employees Bankson and Levan [Doc. 17-1, p. 50]. Nonetheless, other evidence indicates that BCBST did have significant authority over VSHP employees. Plaintiff's former coworker, Brant, stated that she understood that [*23]  BCBST could enforce its Code of Conduct up to and including termination as to both BCBST and VSHP employees [Doc. 24-2, p. 27]. And, particularly compelling, the Court notes Bankson's own testimony that BCBST's HR department handled the hiring, firing, and discipline of VSHP employees at the Chattanooga office [Doc. 24-1, p. 112].
In light of this conflicting evidence about BCBST's authority to promulgate work rules for VSHP employees and discipline VSHP employees, including potentially terminating VSHP employees, the Court finds a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether BCBST and VSHP were plaintiff's joint employers. Accordingly, BCBST's motion for summary judgment on this ground is DENIED.

B. Discriminatory Discharge Claim
The TDA prohibits private employers from discriminating against employees "based solely upon any physical, mental or visual disability of the applicant, unless such disability to some degree prevents the applicant from performing the duties required by the employment sought or impairs the performance of the work involved." Tenn. Code Ann. § 8-50-103(b). "A claim brought under the THA [Tennessee Handicap Act, now known as the TDA] is analyzed under the same principles as those utilized [*24]  for the Americans with Disabilities Act." Cardenas—Meade v. Pfizer, Inc., 510 F. App'x 367, 369 n. 2 (6th Cir. 2013) (quoting Sasser v. Quebecor Printing (USA) Corp., 159 S.W.3d 579, 584 (Tenn. Ct. App. 2004)).
"[A] plaintiff may attempt to establish unlawful discrimination by introducing direct evidence of discrimination . . . or by introducing indirect evidence of discrimination to shift the burden of production to the employer to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for making the adverse employment decision." Monette v. Elec. Data Sys. Corp., 90 F.3d 1173, 1178 (6th Cir. 1996) (citations omitted), abrogated on other grounds by Lewis v. Humboldt Acquisition Corp., 681 F.3d 312, 315-16 (6th Cir. 2012) (en banc).
"Direct evidence is evidence that proves the existence of a fact without requiring any inferences." Rowan v. Lockheed Martin Energy Sys., Inc., 360 F.3d 544, 548 (6th Cir. 2004) (citations omitted). In the absence of direct evidence of discrimination, courts analyze ADA discrimination claims following the burden shifting approach of McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). Under the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework, plaintiff must first set out a prima facie case of discrimination. Williams v. Union Underwear Co., Inc., 614 F. App'x 249, 253 (6th Cir. 2015). After plaintiff establishes a prima facie case of discrimination, the burden then shifts to the employer "to articulate some legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason" for the employment action. Id. at 253-54. If defendant does so, then the burden returns to plaintiff to prove that the stated reason is a pretext for disability discrimination. Id.
Here, the parties appear to agree that plaintiff's claims of disability discrimination are based [*25]  on indirect evidence. Therefore, the Court will apply the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework in analyzing whether a genuine issue of material fact exists as to plaintiff's disability discrimination claims.

1. Prima Facie Case
Under the ADA, to make out a prima facie case for discriminatory discharge, Plaintiff must demonstrate that: (1) she was disabled; (2) she was otherwise qualified for the position with or without a reasonable accommodation; (3) she suffered an adverse employment decision; (4) her employer knew or had reason to know of her disability; and (5) she was replaced or similarly situated, non-protected employees were treated more favorably. Equal Emp. Opportunity Comm'n v. Dolgencorp, LLC, 196 F. Supp. 3d 783, 809 (E.D. Tenn. 2016) (citing Hopkins v. Elec. Data Sys. Corp., 196 F.3d 655 (6th Cir. 1999)). Furthermore, the plaintiff's disability must be a "but for" cause of the adverse employment action. Tennial v. United Parcel Serv., 840 F.3d 292, 306 (6th Cir. 2016) (citing Lewis, 681 F.3d at 318 (en banc)).
Defendants contend that plaintiff cannot establish a prima facie case because she was not immediately replaced or treated differently than a similarly situated comparator [Doc. 18, p. 15]. Defendants contend that, after plaintiff's termination, her work duties were redistributed to other employees, which is legally insufficient to establish the fifth element of the prima facie case [Id.]. Defendants also contend [*26]  that VSHP did not hire a new quality examiner until three months later, and this passage of time undermines the "replacement" prong of the fifth element [Id.]. Defendants acknowledge that plaintiff attempts to identify Mitchell as a similarly-situated comparator, but argue that Mitchell was disciplined by a different supervisor and her improper conduct was failure to answer calls, not falsifying her work time [Id. at 16]. Instead, defendants contend that Frost is a more appropriate comparator, and she, like plaintiff, was terminated for her conduct [Id. at 17].
Plaintiff notes that defendants only contest the fifth element of her prima facie case, [Doc. 24, p. 15]. She argues that three to four months after her termination, defendants hired another quality examiner who did not have a disclosed disability [Id.]. She also argues that another employee, Mitchell, had only been suspended after falsifying time, and had not disclosed any disability to BCBST at the time of her suspension [Id. at 16]. Mitchell also had previously used more than her allotted 15-minute break time and was never disciplined as a result, which is more favorable treatment than plaintiff received [Id.]. Plaintiff disputes [*27]  defendants' assertion that Frost is a more comparable employee, stating that defendants gloss over distinguishing facts [Id. at 17].
Defendants reply that plaintiff does not challenge the fact that following her termination her job duties were redistributed among other current VSHP employees [Doc. 27, p. 5]. As to the "similarly situated" prong of the fifth element, under Sixth Circuit law the comparator must be similar in all relevant respects, including dealing with the same supervisor [Id. at 6]. Mitchell, however, had a different supervisor, and her discipline was approved by a different manager [Id. at 7]. On the other hand, Frost was terminated by the same supervisor and manager combination for the same offense, falsifying time, and thus, is a direct comparison [Id.].
The only element of the prima facie case that is contested here is the fifth element—which can be shown either through a showing that plaintiff was replaced or similarly situated non-protected employees were treated more favorably. Plaintiff contends that there is a genuine issue of material fact as to both of these potential means of establishing the fifth element, while defendants contend that there is no genuine [*28]  issue of material fact as to either potential means of establishing the element.
"A person is not replaced when another employee is assigned to perform the plaintiff's duties in addition to other duties, or when the work is redistributed among other existing employees already performing related work." Daily v. Accubuilt, Inc., 944 F. Supp. 2d 571, 578 (N.D. Ohio 2013) (quoting Balding-Margolis v. Cleveland Arcade, 352 F. App'x 35, 41 (6th Cir. 2009)). The undisputed evidence shows that, after her termination in May 2017, plaintiff's work was redistributed among members of the BlueCare team for a period of time [Doc. 17-3, p. 3; Doc. 24-1, p. 135]. However, in August 2017, a new quality examiner was hired to join the BlueCare team [Id.]. Bankson testified that she did not consider the new employee to be a "replacement" for plaintiff, because, each time an employee is lost, a new business case must be made to justify if posting another position is needed [Doc. 24-1, p. 135]. To Bankson's knowledge, the quality examiner hired in August 2017 did not have a disclosed disability [Id.].
Viewing this evidence in plaintiff's favor, the Court finds that a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether defendants replaced plaintiff with an individual without a disclosed disability. Although the evidence indicates that plaintiff's [*29]  duties were redistributed between May and August of 2017, defendants cite no case law indicating redistribution of work for a short period of time, until a new employee is hired, precludes a plaintiff from showing that she was ultimately replaced. Accordingly, the Court finds that a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether plaintiff was replaced, and therefore, a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether plaintiff can establish a prima facie claim of discriminatory discharge.
Because plaintiff need only establish the fifth element of the prima facie claim of discriminatory discharge by showing either that she was replaced or that a similarly-situated comparator was treated differently, and because the Court has determined that a genuine issue of material fact exists as to whether plaintiff has established that she was replaced, the Court declines to address the parties' arguments as to whether plaintiff has established the fifth element through a showing of a similarly-situated comparator.

2. Legitimate, Non-discriminatory Reason
As plaintiff has raised a question of fact as to a prima facie showing of discrimination, the burden shifts to defendants to offer a legitimate, [*30]  nondiscriminatory reason for plaintiff's termination. McDonnell Douglas Corp., 411 U.S. at 802-04; Williams, 614 F. App'x at 253-54 (citing Talley v. Family Dollar Stores of Ohio, Inc., 542 F.3d 1099, 1105 (6th Cir. 2008)). Defendants' burden is "one of production, not persuasion; it 'can involve no credibility assessment.'" Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 142, 120 S. Ct. 2097, 147 L. Ed. 2d 105 (2000) (quoting St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 509, 113 S. Ct. 2742, 125 L. Ed. 2d 407 (1993)).
Defendants contend that they have identified a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for their decision to terminate plaintiff's employment, namely, her admitted falsification of her reported work time [Doc. 18, pp. 17-18]. Plaintiff assumes, for argument, that defendants have produced a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for her termination [Doc. 24, p. 17]. The Court accordingly will assume that defendants have presented a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for plaintiff's termination, and the burden will shift back to plaintiff to show that defendants' stated reason is pretextual.

3. Pretext
At the pretext stage, plaintiff must prove that defendant's proffered reason is "merely a pretext for illegal discrimination." Kocsis v. Multi-Care Mgmt., Inc., 97 F.3d 876, 883 (6th Cir. 1996). Plaintiff may do so by showing that the proffered reason: (1) had no basis in fact; (2) did not actually motivate the adverse employment action; or (3) was insufficient to motivate that action. Manzer v. Diamond Shamrock Chems. Co., 29 F.3d 1078, 1084 (6th Cir. 1994), overruled on other grounds by, Geiger v. Tower Auto., 579 F.3d 614 (6th Cir. 2009). The Sixth Circuit has retreated from formulaic application [*31]  of these categories and stresses that they serve only as a tool to assist in the court in addressing the ultimate inquiry: "did the employer fire the employee for the stated reason or not?" Chen v. Dow Chem. Co., 580 F.3d 394, 400 n.4 (6th Cir. 2009). The ultimate inquiry is whether discrimination is a "but-for" cause of plaintiff's termination.
See Lewis, 681 F.3d at 321.
Defendants argue that there is no evidence that the reason for plaintiff's termination was not based in fact or that plaintiff's falsification of her work time either did not motivate her termination or was an insufficient reason to warrant termination [Doc. 18, p. 19]. Defendants contend that plaintiff cannot point to a non-disabled individual who engaged in similar misconduct but was treated more favorably and the only actual comparator, Frost, was also terminated [Id.]. Furthermore, defendants contend that there is no evidence to suggest that Bankson was not actually motivated by plaintiff's improper conduct in recommending termination or that falsifying time was insufficient to warrant termination [Id.].
Plaintiff responds that she was treated differently after the onset of her disability [Doc. 24, p. 18]. She notes that, prior to her diagnosis, Bankson believed she "fit in fine," but after her [*32]  diagnosis, felt plaintiff was not "fitting in" on the team [Id.]. Plaintiff also argues that, after her disability, she was subjected to stricter requirements than non-disabled employees, such as the requirement that she use the restroom during her 15-minute breaks and report longer restroom breaks to her supervisor [Id. at 19]. She further contends that she was treated less favorably than at least one other similarly situated employee with regard to her termination, pointing to Mitchell [Id.].
Defendants dispute plaintiff's contention that she was subjected to stricter requirements after her MS diagnosis, arguing that the record demonstrates that she was held to the same standards as other employees, with the exception of multiple favorable accommodations [Doc. 27, p. 9]. Further, defendants contend that plaintiff and Mitchell were not similarly situated as a result of having different supervisors and engaging in different misconduct [Id.].
Plaintiff does not appear to argue that defendants' reason for her termination was not based in fact. Indeed, plaintiff appears to concede that she was away from her desk for an extended period while on the clock and then worked after clocking out—actions [*33]  that defendants ultimately deemed a falsification of time [Doc. 17-1, pp. 33-35, 50]. Instead, plaintiff's pretext arguments appear to rely on the theories that her falsification infraction was not the actual motivation for her termination and did not warrant termination.
As to whether her falsification infraction warranted termination, plaintiff points to a comparator, Mitchell, who she alleges committed a similar infraction and was not terminated, but instead, was suspended for several days [Doc. 17-1, pp. 41-42]. To establish pretext based on a comparator, a plaintiff "must provide 'evidence that other employees, particularly employees outside the protected class, were not disciplined even though they engaged in substantially identical conduct to that which [defendant] contends motivated its discipline of [plaintiff].'" Miles v. South Cent. Hum. Re. Agency, Inc., 946 F.3d 883, 893 (6th Cir. 2020) (quoting Chattman v. Toho Tenax Am., Inc., 686 F.3d 339, 349 (6th Cir. 2012)).
The Sixth Circuit has noted that, at the prima facie stage, it has held that "the individuals with whom the plaintiff seeks to compare his/her treatment must have dealt with the same supervisor, have been subject to the same standards and have engaged in the same conduct without such differentiating or mitigating circumstances that would distinguish their [*34]  conduct or the employer's treatment of them for it." Id. (quoting Mitchell v. Toledo Hosp., 964. F.2d 577, 583 (6th Cir. 1992)). Nevertheless, the Sixth Circuit stated that failure to satisfy these requirements does not automatically destroy comparator status and a plaintiff need not show an exact correlation between themselves and the comparator. Id. However, plaintiff must show that she is similar to the proposed comparator "in all relevant respects." Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). The Sixth Circuit noted that there "is some tension between this liberalized standard at the prima facie [stage] . . . and the pretext stage, which requires 'substantially identical conduct,'" and concluded that, although the relevant factors should not be applied formulaically, a closer correlation is required for the comparators' conduct at the pretext stage. Id. at 893-94.
Here, the Court finds no genuine issue of material fact as to whether plaintiff has set forth a comparator that meets the requirements at the pretext stage. Even at the more lenient prima facie stage, the Sixth Circuit has emphasized that a comparator should have the same supervisor. See Mitchell, 964. F.2d at 583. However, it is undisputed here that Mitchell's direct supervisor was Burnett at the time of her offense, while [*35]  plaintiff's direct supervisor was Bankson [Doc. 17-1, p. 8; Doc. 17-4, pp. 2, 4; Doc. 24-2, p. 11]. Moreover, while the Court notes that there is some dispute as to whether Mitchell's offense is properly categorized as "falsification of time," the undisputed facts show that Mitchell's conduct was substantially different from plaintiff's conduct. Mitchell failed to answer numerous calls while being "on-call" due to a personal family situation [Doc. 17-4; Doc. 24-2, p. 11]. Plaintiff, by contrast, submitted inaccurate time sheets when she indicated that she had worked during a time that she was away from her desk both using the restroom and socializing with co-workers and then continued working after clocking out [Doc. 17-1, p. 50]. The Court finds that, at the more stringent pretext stage, plaintiff has not shown that Mitchell engaged in "substantially identical conduct," and therefore, the Court finds that plaintiff may not rely on a comparison to Mitchell to support her pretext argument.
The Court notes that plaintiff's comparator argument appears to be her only pretext argument addressing whether defendants' stated reason for her termination was sufficient to motivation termination. [*36]  Because the Court has found that plaintiff has not identified a substantially identical comparator, the only remaining argument is whether defendants' stated reason actually motivated the termination.
"As inquiries regarding what actually motivated an employer's decision are very fact intensive, such issues will generally be difficult to determine at the summary judgment stage and thus will typically require sending the case to the jury." White v. Baxter Healthcare Corp., 533 F.3d 381, 402 (6th Cir. 2008) (internal quotation marks and alterations omitted). Plaintiff points to Bankson's statements that, before her MS diagnosis, plaintiff was "fitting in" on the team, but after her diagnosis, she no longer "fit in" [Doc. 24-1, pp. 125-26] and her different treatment with regard to restroom breaks after her MS diagnosis [Doc. 17-1, p. 41; Doc. 24-1, pp. 65-66].
With regard to whether plaintiff can establish pretext, defendants simply argue that there is "no evidence to suggest Bankson was not actually motivated by Salgado's improper conduct in recommending termination" [Doc. 18, p. 19]. However, defendants fail to address the impact of Bankson's statements that plaintiff no longer "fit in" on the team after her MS diagnosis. The Court finds that a reasonable [*37]  jury could infer from Bankson's statements that her recommendation that plaintiff be terminated was actually motivated by plaintiff's disability.
Further, as to plaintiff's argument that she was treated differently after her MS diagnosis, defendants argue that the record demonstrates that plaintiff was merely held to the same standard as other employees, with the exception of multiple favorable accommodations [Doc. 27, p. 9]. However, the Court finds a genuine issue of material fact as to whether plaintiff was treated the same as other employees with regard to restroom breaks. There is some evidence indicating that other employees were not required to use their two 15-minute breaks for restroom breaks, and were permitted to take a restroom break anytime they needed, regardless of whether they had any unused break time remaining [Doc. 17-1, p. 41; Doc. 24-1, pp. 65-66, 114; Doc. 24-2, pp. 21-22]. The Court also finds that a reasonable jury could potentially infer from this evidence that defendants' decision to terminate plaintiff was actually motivated by plaintiff's disability.
Thus, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to plaintiff, the Court finds that genuine issues of [*38]  material fact exist as to whether plaintiff can establish her claim of discriminatory discharge under the ADA and TDA, and therefore, defendants' motion for summary judgment will be DENIED on this claim.

C. Retaliation Claim
Defendants first contend that, in her deposition, plaintiff effectively abandoned or fatally disproved her retaliation claim, when she stated that no one at BCBST ever appeared upset or frustrated with her for requesting accommodations [Doc. 18, p. 20]. Defendants also argue that plaintiff's retaliation claim fails for the same reason as her disability discrimination claim—that there is no evidence that defendants' reason for terminating her employment was pretextual, and thus, no evidence that her termination was causally related to her requests for accommodation [Doc. 18, pp. 20-21].
Plaintiff denies that she has abandoned her claim of retaliation and argues that her deposition statement alone does not foreclose the possibility of defendants having retaliated against her, as she is not required to prove as an element of her prima facie case of retaliation that a defendant became "upset" [Doc. 24, pp. 19-20]. Plaintiff contends that she engaged in a protected activity [*39]  when she openly requested accommodations and she suffered an adverse employment action when she was terminated, so the only issue is whether there is sufficient evidence from which a jury could find a causal connection between the protected activity and the adverse employment action [Doc. 24, p. 20]. Plaintiff points out that some of her accommodation requests were entered by Estrada on May 3 or May 10 of 2017, but were not completed until May 18, 2017, the same day as her termination, which is credible evidence from which the Court may deduce a causal connection [Id. at 21].
Defendants reply that plaintiff relies exclusively on temporal proximity between the alleged accommodation requests and her termination to establish the causation element of her prima facie case of retaliation, which is insufficient to establish this element [Doc. 27, p. 10]. Defendants acknowledge that plaintiff requested accommodations within weeks of her termination, but contend that plaintiff has presented no evidence that Bankson was even aware of the accommodation requests [Id. at 11].
Where, as here, a plaintiff does not claim to have any direct evidence of retaliation, her claims for ADA retaliation are [*40]  analyzed using the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework. Rorrer v. City of Stow, 743 F.3d 1025, 1046 (6th Cir. 2014). Plaintiff first must establish a prima facie case of retaliation, which requires a showing that: (1) she engaged in activity protected under the ADA; (2) the employer knew of that activity; (3) the employer took an adverse action against plaintiff; and (4) there was a causal connection between the protected activity and the adverse action. Id. The only element of the prima facie case that defendants appear to dispute is whether plaintiff can show that there was a causal connection between plaintiff's request for accommodations and her termination.
As an initial point, defendants contend that plaintiff abandoned or fatally disproved her retaliation claim when she testified at her deposition that she had no reason to believe that anyone at BCBST was "upset" or "frustrated" with her for requesting accommodations [Doc. 17-1, pp. 38-39]. While this testimony may indicate that plaintiff herself lacks any personal knowledge about any retaliatory intent behind her termination, it does not rise to the level of abandonment or fatal disproval of her retaliation claim. Plaintiff is not required to prove that her employer was "upset" or "frustrated" [*41]  with her for engaging in protected activity, and it is plausible that an employer could act with retaliatory intent without necessarily expressing any feelings of displeasure towards plaintiff. If plaintiff can provide evidence from other sources than her own personal knowledge that there was a causal connection between her accommodation requests and her termination, then plaintiff can establish a prima facie case of ADA retaliation, despite her deposition testimony.
"In order to establish causation, a plaintiff must demonstrate that, 'but for' the protected activity, the employer would not have taken the adverse employment action." Eyster v. Metro. Nashville Airport Auth., 479 F. Supp. 3d 706, 719 (M.D. Tenn. 2020). When "an adverse employment action occurs very close in time after an employer learns of a protected activity, such temporal proximity . . . is significant enough to constitute evidence of a causal connection[.]" George v. Youngstown State Univ., 966 F.3d 446, 460 (6th Cir. 2020) (addressing a Title VII retaliation claim). However, temporal proximity alone is generally insufficient to establish a causal connection, and instead, "must be coupled with other indicia of retaliatory conduct." Eyster, 479 F. Supp. 3d at 719-20.
Ultimately, the only evidence plaintiff identifies to support a causal connection between her accommodations requests and her termination [*42]  is the temporal proximity of such events. Specifically, plaintiff notes that request were entered on May 3, 2017 and May 10, 2017, but were not completed until May 18, 2017, the same day as her termination [Doc. 24, p. 21]. However, the Court notes that temporal proximity alone is insufficient to establish a causal connection for purposes of a prima facie case of ADA retaliation. See Eyster, 479 F. Supp. 3d at 719-20. Moreover, the Court notes that plaintiff requested several other accommodations before May 2017, which were either granted or rejected by defendants, and for which plaintiff suffered no adverse consequences [Doc. 17-1, pp. 24-27, 40, 93-94]. Ultimately, absent some additional evidence of retaliatory motive, the temporal proximity between the completion of plaintiff's accommodation requests and her termination is insufficient to establish a causal connection between the two events. Because plaintiff has not presented such additional evidence of retaliatory motive, the Court finds that there is no genuine issue of material fact as to whether plaintiff can establish a prima facie case of ADA retaliation, and accordingly, defendants' motion for summary judgment will be GRANTED as to this claim. Plaintiff's [*43]  ADA and TDA retaliation claims are therefore DISMISSED.

D. ADA Accommodation Claim
Finally, defendants argue that plaintiff's ADA accommodation claim fails as a matter of law [Doc. 18, p. 21]. Defendants contend that the ADA only requires an employer to provide necessary accommodations, not an employee's preferred accommodations, and plaintiff's concession that there was never a point that she could not perform the essential functions of her job confirms that she was provided all necessary accommodations [Id. at 22-23].
Plaintiff responds that defendants violated the ADA by failing to accommodate her and failing to engage in the interactive process [Doc. 24, p. 21]. She notes that she requested multiple accommodations, including, around June or July of 2016, requesting the ability to telecommute, which BCBST held out as an option for medical accommodations, but her request was denied [Id. at 22]. However, plaintiff notes that, prior to her diagnosis she had been allowed to telecommute and other, non-disabled employees were allowed to telecommute [Id.].
Defendants reply that any failure to accommodate claim based on plaintiff's request in June or July of 2016 to telecommute is now time-barred [*44]  [Doc. 27, pp. 12-13].
"Under the ADA, a claimant who wishes to bring a lawsuit claiming a violation of the ADA must file a charge of discrimination with the [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC")] within 300 days of the alleged discrimination." Parry v. Mohawk Motors of Mich., Inc., 236 F.3d 299, 309 (6th Cir. 2000). In her response brief, plaintiff contends that she requested telecommuting as a medical accommodation in June or July of 2016 [Doc. 24, p. 22]. Assuming that plaintiff made her request to telecommute at the late end of this time period, on July 31, 2016, the 300-day time frame for filing an EEOC claim based on the denial of that request expired on May 27, 2017. The record, however, reflects that plaintiff did not file her charge of discrimination with the EEOC until November 9, 2017 [Doc. 28-2], several months after the 300-day time period has expired, as it relates to her telecommuting accommodation request. Because, based on her response brief, her denied request to telecommute is the sole basis for her failure to accommodate claim, and because that claim is time-barred, defendants' motion for summary judgment is GRANTED as to this claim and plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim is DISMISSED.

IV. Conclusion
For the reasons set [*45]  forth above, defendants' motion for summary judgment [Doc. 17] is GRANTED in part and DENIED in part. Plaintiff's claims of retaliation and failure to accommodate are DISMISSED. This case will proceed only as to plaintiff's claim of discriminatory discharge against both BCBST and VSHP.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
/s/ Thomas A. Varlan
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

