Sanders v. Union Pac. R.R. Co.
United States District Court for the District of Nebraska
October 7, 2021, Decided; October 7, 2021, Filed
4:20CV3023

Reporter
2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 199434 *; 2021 WL 4783629
ALLAN SANDERS, Plaintiff, vs. UNION PACIFIC RAILROAD CO., Defendant.
Prior History: Sanders v. Union Pac. R.R. Co., 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 65968, 2020 WL 1812505 (D. Neb., Apr. 9, 2020)
Counsel:  [*1] For Allan Sanders, Plaintiff: Colin R. Reeves, APOLLO LAW FIRM - NEW YORK, Brooklyn, NY; Nicholas D. Thompson, CASEY JONES LAW FIRM, Appleton, WI; Eleanor E. Frisch, APOLLO LAW FIRM, Minneapolis, MN; Adam W. Hansen, APOLLO LAW FIRM, Minneapolis, MN; Corey L. Stull, ATWOOD HOLSTEN LAW FIRM, Lincoln, NE.
For Union Pacific Railroad Co., Defendant: Scott P. Moore, BAIRD HOLM LAW FIRM, Omaha, NE; Susan K. Tvrdy, BAIRD HOLM LAW FIRM, Omaha, NE.
Judges: Joseph F. Bataillon, Senior United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Joseph F. Bataillon
Opinion



MEMORANDUM AND ORDER
This matter is before the court on defendant Union Pacific Railroad Company's ("U.P." or "the Railroad") motion for summary judgment, Filing No. 38. Plaintiff Allan Sanders alleges that U.P. violated the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq., as amended by the ADA Amendments Act of 2008 ("ADAAA"), Pub. L. No. 110-325, 122 Stat. 3553 (2008), when it imposed work restrictions that prevent him from returning to his job after a fitness-for-duty assessment. He asserts claims for disability discrimination, failure to accommodate, and impermissible medical examination under 42 U.S.C. § 12112(d)(1) and (4). U.P. denies the plaintiff's allegations and asserts affirmative defenses of business necessity and direct threat. It contends the plaintiff's medical condition posed a significant risk to his or to others' [*2]  health and/or safety and the risk could not have been eliminated or reduced by a reasonable accommodation.
In its motion for summary judgment, U.P. first argues that Sanders's disability claim fails as a matter of law because the undisputed facts show that the plaintiff cannot establish a prima facie case, in that he cannot not show he is disabled, regarded as disabled, or qualified, nor can he show Union Pacific's medical restrictions were a pretext for discrimination. It argues that it had a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason—concern for safety—for its actions. U.P. further argues that Sanders's failure to accommodate claim fails because he never requested an accommodation. Also, U.P. argues that Sanders ostensibly presents a disparate impact claim, which fails because Sanders cannot identify any facially neutral employment policy that caused a disparate impact. U.P. next challenges the plaintiff's impermissible medical examination claim, contending that the medical exam was justified because it was job-related and constitutes a business necessity. Finally, it contends the evidence shows that Sander's risk of an adverse cardiac event posed a direct threat to the workplace given that [*3]  he had to perform dangerous tasks like inspecting and repairing rail cars.
I. FACTS
The following facts are gleaned from the parties' respective statements of undisputed fact and from the record.1 See Filing No. 39, defendant's brief at 3-15; Filing No. 41, plaintiff's response at 2-25; Filing No. 42, defendant's reply brief at 2-10. The parties agree that Sanders began working for Union Pacific on May 1, 1979. Sanders held various positions before becoming a foreman general in the car department in Parsons, Kansas, which is the last position he held at Union Pacific. Sanders was assigned a specific territory in Kansas and Oklahoma that required travel. As a foreman general, Sanders was on call twenty-four hours per day, seven days a week and he would have to respond to emergency calls by himself in the event a train broke down. Sanders states that the essential functions of his job do not include climbing, making more than de minimis repairs, and/or carrying knuckles.2 Sanders supervised Carmen, but disputes that as general foreman, he had to perform Carman duties. Sanders sometimes worked outdoors and he acknowledges that Kansas and Oklahoma have severe weather conditions in both summer [*4]  and winter.
In June 2018, Sanders was treated at an emergency room for what he later learned was a bleeding ulcer. Sanders underwent surgery to repair the bleeding ulcer. While at the hospital, he suffered a cardiac arrest and had to be resuscitated. He was also diagnosed with acute kidney failure and chronic kidney disease at that time.
Sanders informed Union Pacific of his hospitalization, and requested a medical leave of absence ("medical leave"), pursuant to his union contract. U.P. granted Sanders medical leave from June 26, 2018, to July 31, 2018. In a letter dated June 22, 2021, Union Pacific informed Sanders that he would need to complete a fitness-for-duty review and provide medical records prior to returning to work. U.P. asked Sanders to provide copies of the operation/surgery/procedure report; the physician's dictated hospital discharge summary; the emergency room records; diagnostic study reports; physician clinic notes; return to work release; and a list of any limitations/restrictions and their duration.
The Railroad later extended his medical leave and again requested that Sanders provide medical records. Sanders then submitted a letter from his surgeon, Dr. Charles Ro, [*5]  stating Sanders could return to work on August 27, 2018 with no restrictions, and a letter from the office of his nephrologist, Dr. Nadine Aboul-Madg, stating he could return to "normal work" on September 3, 2018. Neither medical provider addressed Sanders's cardiac functions.
On September 11, 2018, Sanders submitted additional medical records to U.P. and on September 20, 2018, U.P. requested that Sanders supply information as to his current condition with level of function, anticipated return-to-work date, work restrictions or requirements with expiration dates, and prescription medication by October 11, 2018.
On October 25, 2018, Sanders provided additional medical records to U.P. The Railroad then learned that Sanders had several serious medical conditions. Specifically, those were gastrointestinal bleeding, cardiac arrest, respiratory failure, prolonged periods of hypotension, kidney damage, chronic pain treated with opiates, and possible alcohol abuse.3 At about the same time, Sanders requested continuing compensation from the Railroad Retirement Board ("RBB") while he was on medical leave. U.P. forwarded the request to the Board, explaining that Sanders had to undergo a medical [*6]  review before Union Pacific could clear him to return to work and stating that his estimated return to work date was March 1, 2019.
U.P. sent further correspondence to Sanders requesting office notes or clinic notes from his nephrologist, gastroenterologist, and cardiologist (including a maximal Bruce Protocol EET and new echocardiogram),4 and requested that the providers also address narcotic therapy in connection with his fitness for duty before he could return to work. Sanders's medical leave was extended to November 30, 2018.
Sanders underwent a Bruce protocol stress test echocardiogram in December 2018. He exercised for 4 minutes and 8 seconds and he achieved only 4.6 METS. Though Sanders claims that he stopped the Bruce protocol because of his knees, his medical records indicate that he stopped the test because of "fatigue." The record shows Sanders's cardiologist, Dr. William Nicholas, M.D., testified that the notation that the test was stopped due to "fatigue" means the test was not stopped because of Sanders's heart. Dr. Nicholas stated,
Q. [S]he put "fatigue" instead of "my knees hurt"?
A. [T]he most important thing of saying he stopped fatigued was that [the technician] thought [*7]  he was fatigued and that he didn't stop because of chest pain . . . . So, once she says "fatigued," . . . that's her clue that says this didn't look cardiac to her.
Filing No. 41-11, Ex. J, Dr. Nicholas Dep. at 26. Also, the record shows that Sanders provided U.P. with evidence that he was on beta blockers, which limits a person's ability cause examinees to exercise and raise his or her heart rate and causes examinees to score artificially low on the Bruce protocol, to the point the test is useless for determining aerobic capacity. Id. at 21-22; see Filing No. 41-8, Ex. G, Dr. Trangle Dep. at 99-103, 115-16.
The results from a chemical stress test, which Sanders took because his knees prevented him from completing the Bruce protocol, show that Sanders's heart is fine. Filing No. 41-11, Ex. J, Dr. Nicholas Dep. at 27, 30-32; Filing No. 41-2, Ex. A, Deposition of Allen Sanders ("Sanders Dep.") at 84. Sanders's cardiologist stated, "[T]he test results show t]hat [Sanders] had a good heart muscle and he did not have a large amount of ischemia . . . . without prominent scar ischemia. And so, overall, he passed the test." Filing No. 41-11, Dr. Nicholas Dep. at 31-32. The treating cardiologist [*8]  also testified that at the time he examined Sanders, he was fit to return to work as of September 3, 2018. Id. at 32. He found no cardiac condition that would have prevented Sanders from working. Id. at 37. Sanders's primary-care physician also wrote that Sanders's heart was fine In a February 26, 2019 letter to U.P. Filing No. 41-15, Ex. N, Letter from Dr. Jimmy Buller.
Neither Sanders's cardiologist, Dr. Nicholas, nor his primary care physician, Dr. Buller, placed cardiac restrictions on Sanders for returning to work. Filing No. 41-11, Ex. J, Dr. Nicholas Dep. at 32; Filing No. 41-12, Ex. K, Dr. Buller Dep. at 29. Dr. Buller testified that Sanders had coded and was close to expiring because he had a pretty significant bleeding ulcer that required 9 units of blood. Filing No. 41-12, Ex. K, Dr. Buller Dep. at 17. Sanders's temporary renal failure "was also secondary to that bleed and the anemia, which resolved once that resolved." Id. at 18. He also testified it was Sanders's knees that likely prevented him from completing then Bruce protocol. Id. at 30.
On February 18, 2019, Union Pacific sent a letter to Sanders extending his medical leave through April 1, 2019, and requesting copies [*9]  of his cardiologist's office notes, a cardiac stress test measured in METS to demonstrate aerobic capacity, with normal aerobic activity defined as at least 10 Metabolic Equivalents ("METS"), a recent echocardiogram, and detailed clinical evaluations regarding his spinal conditions, all of which was needed to complete the fitness-for-duty review.
On February 26, 2019, Dr. Buller sent correspondence to U.P. stating that Sanders could return to work on February 26, 2019 with two restrictions due to musculoskeletal problems: no running (brisk walk not a problem) and not lifting anything greater than 50 pounds. Filing No. 41-15, Ex. N, Letter at 1.5 In his letter to Union Pacific, Dr. Buller wrote "[Sanders's] cardiovascular history is positive for essential hypertension which is controlled with low dose medications. His most recent thallium stress test was normal with an ejection fraction of 57%." Id. Dr. Buller testified this "means [Sanders] doesn't . . . have coronary artery disease and his . . . heartbeat is contracting within normal ranges." Filing No. 41-12, Dr. Buller Dep. at 27-28. On March 26, 2019, Union Pacific sent another letter to Sanders extending his medical leave through [*10]  April 30, 2019 and again requested a copy of his maximal Bruce protocol exercise tolerance test.
Following U.P.'s standard procedure, Dr. John Charbonneau, Union Pacific's Assistant Medical Director, oversaw Sanders's fitness-for-duty review. He reviewed Sanders's medical records and found the most problematic thing was Sanders's "very low aerobic fitness level, his very low capacity level" which would mean he would be "in the sedentary light category of work." Filing No. 41-5, Ex. D, Deposition of John Charbonneau, M.D. ("Dr. Charbonneau Dep.") at 5, 12. Dr. Charbonneau's concern was based on a notation that Sanders's treadmill test was stopped due to "fatigue." The parties agree that Sanders eventually addressed and resolved all of U.P.'s health concerns except Dr. Charbonneau's concern about his aerobic capacity. The parties further agree that the only issue preventing his return to work was Sanders' unsatisfactory Bruce protocol results. Id.
Dr. Charbonneau determined that, taking into consideration the need for heavy lifting with walking, use of heavy tools, and environmental conditions, Sanders did not have the aerobic fitness to sustain the level of work required by his job. [*11]  Id. at 16. He referred to "a risk of a precipitous cardiovascular event" in connection with Sanders's demonstrated fatigue. Id. In April 2019, Dr. Charbonneau completed the fitness for duty review and released Sanders to work with the following restrictions: "Not to perform work involving more than light physical exertion (as defined by US Dept. of Labor), not to lift over 10 pounds frequently or 20 pounds occasionally. Most appropriate for office jobs or similar work only. Not to perform prolonged work in conditions of high heat and humidity, or excessive cold." Filing No. 41-14, Ex. M, U.P Medical Comments History at 1. Dr. Charbonneau told Sanders that his "primary concern" was "the fact that [Sanders] had a cardiac arrest and that the most recent exercise tolerance testing results showed that his aerobic capacity [was] inadequate for his job activities." Id.
Dr. John Holland, U.P.'s Chief Medical Officer at the time, approved the medical restrictions issued to Sanders. Neither Dr. Charbonneau nor Dr. Holland consulted a cardiologist. The record shows that although Dr. Charbonneau made the initial decision, Dr. Holland made the ultimate decision. Filing No. 41-5, Index of Evid., [*12]  Ex. D, Dr. Charbonneau Dep. at 30; Filing No. 41-6, Ex. E, Deposition of John Holland, M.D. ("Dr. Holland Dep.") at 5.
U.P.'s Health and Medical Department sent Sanders's medical restrictions to General Superintendent Daniel Torres. Torres determined that Sanders could not perform the essential functions of his job with those medical restrictions and that he could not be reasonably accommodated. Sanders contends he did not request an accommodation because Union Pacific told him the restrictions could not be accommodated. Torres neither worked with Sanders nor talked to Sanders about Sanders's job. Filing No. 41-4, Ex. C, Deposition of Daniel Torres at 16, 21. Torres later realized that Sanders was no longer under his supervision, but was supervised by Kelli Dunn. Ms. Dunn then signed Sanders's medical restriction form and Sanders was informed of these medical restrictions on April 15, 2019.
In opposition to the defendant's motion, Sanders proffers the testimony and opinion of independent medical expert Dr. Kevin Trangle, a board-certified environmental medicine, internal medicine, and occupational medicine physician. Filing No. 41-13, Ex. L, Expert Report of Kevin L. Trangle, M.D. ("Dr. [*13]  Trangle Rep't"); Filing No. 41-8, Ex. G, Dr. Trangle Dep. After reviewing Sanders's medical records, Dr. Trangle testified that "[t]here's no evidence that [Sanders] had a cardiac condition of any sort." Id. at 63. He explained as follows:
Q. [Y]ou've stated . . . that there was no valid reason for Dr. Holland or his staff to have questioned Mr. Sanders' cardiac function or exercise capacity or for requesting a stress test be done. Correct?
A. Correct . . . . It's not necessary . . . . [I]n fact, it is less necessary to Mr. Sanders than the general population of employees at Union Pacific . . . . [H]e underwent more or less a cardiac stress test when he was in the hospital and became such hypovolemic loss of blood volume because of his big GI bleed. He had no cardiac ischemia. He had no cardiac muscle problems. He had no cardiac arrhythmia. In fact, he did very well with his cardiac. If anything, he showed that his heart was in better condition than anybody else at his age with his underlying issues could expect to be. So, no, there is no reason to even do a cardiac stress test.
Filing No. 41-8, Dr. Trangle Dep. at 81-82; see also id. at 41-42 (stating "I mean, the guy went through a [*14]  point that he was -- he almost had his heart stop with the loss of his—of his blood volume, being monitored in the ICU the entire time, having no cardiac ischemia, having no evidence of any cardiac insufficiency.") Dr. Trangle further testified that "[t]he fact that he had to be, quote, 'resuscitated,' unquote, is because of his massive blood loss. It has nothing to do with his heart. His heart, in fact, did extremely well." Id. at 64. He testified that
there was no indication for him having to go through a Bruce protocol. I mean, as I said, there are a number and probably thousands of people that are in the same if not worse situation in terms of risk factors as Mr. Sanders that are not asked to do stress tests.
Filing No. 41-8, Ex. G, Dr. Trangle Dep. at 105.
In his report, Dr. Trangle noted that Dr. Charbonneau predicated his opinion solely on the results of the cardiac stress test that Sanders had completed. Filing No. 41-13, Dr. Trangle Rep't at 12. He testified that the Railroad should not have relied on Sanders's stress test because "you cannot measure fitness for duty while you're talking beta blockers. It's written in every protocol, in every guideline, and any doctor that knows [*15]  anything about medicine knows that." Filing No. 41-8, Ex. G, Dr. Trangle Dep. at 100. Dr. Trangle also opines that the restrictions U.P. ultimately placed on Sanders were unreasonable, stating "[t]here clearly is no basis in medical science for such a decision with these unnecessary restrictions." Filing No. 41-13, Dr. Trangle Rep't at 29.
Sanders contends that he is disabled, that he has a record of being disabled, and that he may have been regarded as disabled. Filing No. 41-18, Ex. Q, Suppl. Interrog. Answers at No. 12.
II. LAW
"Summary judgment is proper 'if the pleadings, the discovery and disclosure materials on file, and any affidavits show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.'" Torgerson v. City of Rochester, 643 F.3d 1031, 1042 (8th Cir. 2011) (en banc) (quoting Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(2)). The court views facts in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party, and makes no determinations of credibility; nor does it weigh the evidence or draw inferences, as those functions belong to the jury. Cottrell v. Am. Family Mut. Ins. Co., S.I., 930 F.3d 969, 971-72 (8th Cir. 2019). A party opposing a properly supported motion for summary judgment may not rest on the allegations contained in the pleadings, "but must set forth specific facts showing there is a genuine issue [*16]  for trial." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986).
The record must indicate an absence of a genuine issue of material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Northport Health Servs. of Ark., LLC v. Posey, 930 F.3d 1027, 1030 (8th Cir. 2019). Facts that, if altered, affect the outcome of a lawsuit under applicable substantive law, are material. Cottrell, 930 F.3d at 972. A material fact dispute is "genuine" if each party has supplied some evidence that is sufficient for a reasonable jury to return a verdict for the nonmoving party. Id. If "reasonable minds could differ as to the import of the evidence," summary judgment should not be granted. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 250. "[C]redibility determinations, the weighing of evidence, and the drawing of legitimate inferences from the facts are jury functions." Id. at 255.
The ADA prohibits covered employers from "discriminat[ing] against a qualified individual on the basis of disability" with respect to the terms and conditions of employment. 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). The ADA also "prohibits employers from discriminating against employees 'regarded as having . . . an impairment.'" Parker v. Crete Carrier Corp., 839 F.3d 717, 724 (8th Cir. 2016) (quoting 42 U.S.C. §§ 12102(1)(C), 12112(a)). An individual is disabled under § 12102(1)(C)'s "regarded as" prong "if the individual is subjected to a prohibited action [e.g., firing, demotion] because of an actual or perceived physical or mental impairment, whether or not that [*17]  impairment substantially limits, or is perceived to substantially limit, a major life activity." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(l)(1).
An ADA plaintiff may survive a defendant's summary judgment motion in one of two ways—by presenting either direct or inferential evidence of discrimination. Libel v. Adventure Lands of Am., Inc., 482 F.3d 1028, 1034 (8th Cir. 2007). "'[D]irect evidence is evidence showing a specific link between the alleged discriminatory animus and the challenged decision, sufficient to support a finding by a reasonable fact finder that an illegitimate criterion actually motivated the adverse employment action.'" Id. (quoting Griffith v. City of Des Moines, 387 F.3d 733, 736 (8th Cir. 2004) (internal quotation omitted); see Brown v. City of Jacksonville, 711 F.3d 883, 888 (8th Cir. 2013). In order to obtain relief under the ADA in a case where a defendant admittedly made the decision because of the disability, a plaintiff must show: (1) he or she is a 'qualified individual' under the ADA, (2) he or she suffered discrimination as the term is defined by the ADA, and (3) the discrimination was based on disability as defined by the ADA. Brown v. City of Jacksonville, 711 F.3d 883, 888 (8th Cir. 2013); see 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a).
Without direct evidence of disability discrimination, a plaintiff's claim falls under the burden-shifting analysis set forth in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). Oehmke v. Medtronic, Inc., 844 F.3d 748, 755 (8th Cir. 2016). Under that paradigm, the plaintiff first has the burden of establishing a prima facie case: (1) that the plaintiff was disabled, or regarded [*18]  as disabled, within the meaning of the ADA; (2) that the plaintiff was qualified to perform the essential functions of the job; and (3) there is a causal connection between an adverse employment action and the disability. Id. If the plaintiff fails to establish any element of his prima facie case, summary judgment is proper. Kellogg v. Union Pac. R. Co., 233 F.3d 1083, 1086 (8th Cir. 2000); see Parker v. Crete Carrier Corp., 839 F.3d 717, 724 (8th Cir. 2016)(involving "regarded as" claims). If the plaintiff succeeds in establishing a prima facie case, the burden shifts to the employer to proffer a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse action. Parker, 839 F.3d at 724. If the employer makes such a proffer, the burden shifts back to the plaintiff to show that the employer's stated reason is a pretext. Id.
The ADA defines "qualified individual" as "an individual who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds or desires." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). Essential functions are the "fundamental job duties of the employment position." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(1). To the extent that an employer challenges an ADA plaintiff's claim that he can perform the job's essential functions, the burden of production is on the employer to come forward with evidence of those essential functions. See EEOC v. Wal-Mart, 477 F.3d 561, 568 (8th Cir. 2007). "'Whether [*19]  a function is essential is a question of fact, not law.'" Mlsna v. Union Pac. R.R. Co., 975 F.3d 629, 634 (7th Cir. 2020)(quoting Tonyan v. Dunham's Athleisure Corp., 966 F.3d 681, 687 (7th Cir. 2020); see also Cripe v. City of San Jose, 261 F.3d 877, 888 n.12 (9th Cir. 2001) ("A highly fact-specific inquiry is necessary to determine what a particular job's essential functions are."). Although courts "usually do not 'second-guess the employer's judgment in describing the essential requirements for the job'' that "deference is not unqualified." Mlsna, 975 F.3d at 634 (quoting DePaoli v. Abbott Labs., 140 F.3d 668, 674 (7th Cir. 1998)).
Discrimination also includes the use of "qualification standards, employment tests, or other selection criteria that screen out or tend to screen out an individual with a disability." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(6). Qualification standards include "medical, safety and other requirements established by [an employer] as requirements . . . to be eligible for the position held or desired." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(q). Such a qualification standard may include a requirement that an individual does not pose a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals in the workplace. Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Echazabal, 536 U.S. 73, 86 (2002), 122 S. Ct. 2045, 153 L. Ed. 2d 82; see 42 U.S.C. § 12111(3); 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(r).
There is a two-step analysis under this provision. Cripe, 261 F.3d at 886. The first step requires an examination of whether the defendant's qualification standards screen out or tend to screen out disabled individuals. Id. At this first step, there is an affirmative defense available to defendants—they may rely on qualification [*20]  standards that "include a requirement that an individual shall not pose a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals in the workplace." Id. (quoting Echazabal, 336 F.3d at 1027). The second step requires an examination of whether the defendant's qualification standard falls within the business necessity exception. Id.
An employer bears the burden of proof on the ADA direct threat defense as it is considered an affirmative defense.6 EEOC v. Wal—Mart, 477 F.3d at 571 (noting that summary judgment in favor of an employer may be appropriate on an ADA claim if an employer can satisfy its burden to show that an employee presents a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals in the workplace). To establish the direct threat defense, "[t]he Supreme Court requires an individualized analysis that relies on the 'best current medical or other objective evidence' in order to 'protect disabled individuals from discrimination based on prejudice, stereotypes, or unfounded fear.'" Id. (quoting Nunes v. Wal—Mart Stores, Inc., 164 F.3d 1243, 1248 (9th Cir. 1999)). The defense "must be 'based on a reasonable medical judgment that relies on the most current medical knowledge and/or the best available objective evidence,' and upon an expressly 'individualized assessment of the individual's present ability [*21]  to safely perform the essential functions of the job,' reached after considering, among other things, the imminence of the risk and the severity of the harm portended." Echazabal, 536 U.S. at 86 (quoting 29 CFR § 1630.2(r) (2001)). The assessment considers specific factors that include: (1) the duration of the risk, (2) the nature and severity of the potential harm, (3) the likelihood that the potential harm will occur, and (4) the imminence of the potential harm. EEOC v. Wal-Mart, 477 F.3d at 571.
The ADA requires an interactive process between the employer and the employee—a cooperative dialogue to identify the precise limitations resulting from the disability and "explore the existence and feasibility of reasonable accommodations." See Barnett v. U.S. Air, Inc., 228 F.3d 1105, 1114-1116 (9th Cir. 2000).
III. DISCUSSION
The court first rejects U.P.'s argument that Sanders's action is barred because he cannot prove he is disabled under the ADA. The Railroad's arguments appear to be based on caselaw that predates the ADAAA's intentionally more liberal definition of "disability." See Smothers v. Solvay Chem., Inc., 740 F.3d 530, 545 n.16 (10th Cir. 2014) ("The [ADAAA] created a broader definition of disability to protect more individuals, by, inter alia, expanding what is considered a major life activity and directing courts to interpret 'substantial limitation' broadly in favor of [*22]  coverage). Sanders has presented evidence from which a jury could conclude that Sanders is disabled, has a record of disability, and/or was regarded as disabled.
Sanders has presented evidence from which a reasonable jury could find that U.P imposed restrictions on Sanders because of a perceived disability, as that term is defined in the 2008 amendments to the ADA. Sanders's evidence is enough for a reasonable jury to conclude that Union Pacific regarded him as disabled and adopted restrictions that were based on Sanders's performance on a stress test. There are genuine issues with respect to the importance and or reliability of that stress test.
U.P.'s argument that Sanders has not presented a prima facie case is also misplaced. The record shows there is direct evidence of discrimination because the defendant admittedly made the decision based on Sanders's perceived heart condition and therefore the McDonnell-Douglas burden shifting paradigm is not applicable. Even if it were, the question of whether Sanders can perform his job safely, so as to be qualified for the position is not part of a plaintiff's prima facie case, but goes to whether the Railroad can prevail on its direct threat [*23]  defense. Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to Sanders, the Railroad has not sustained its burden to show as a matter of law that the restrictions it imposed on Sanders were required so that he did not pose a threat to his own safety or the safety of others.
U.P. was clearly aware of the incident that resulted in Sanders's hospitalization. The record contains evidence from which a jury could conclude that U.P. imposed restrictions because Sanders had suffered a cardiac arrest and it regarded Sanders's weak heart and low level of aerobic conditioning as a risk to himself or others and would prevent him from performing the essential functions of his job. U.P.'s Health and Medical Department imposed restrictions explicitly on account of Sanders's supposed heart problems and the potential for a precipitous cardiovascular event. There are genuine issues of fact on whether or why Sanders "failed" the test. The necessity for the test and the impact of the results are also matters of dispute. There are also issues of fact as to the essential functions of the general foreman position and whether Sanders could perform them, notwithstanding his level of conditioning. Summary judgment [*24]  is therefore inappropriate on Sanders's disability discrimination claim.
There are also questions of fact on whether the criteria that U.P. uses or the manner it conducts its fitness-for-duty evaluations are reasonable. U.P. has not shown it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law on its affirmative "direct threat" defense. An individualized assessment is required to establish that defense as a matter of law. At this stage of the litigation, U.P. has not shown that Sanders posed a significant, present threat to safety. There is a material dispute on whether such an individualized assessment was performed and whether it was based on objective medical evidence related to the plaintiff's condition and abilities. There are also issues of fact with respect to whether U.P.'s medical department's fitness for duty determination was reasonable in the face of contrary medical evidence. Medical experts have differing opinions on that issue. The court finds that there is a triable issue of fact regarding whether Union Pacific conducted a sufficiently individualized assessment of Sanders's ability to perform the essential functions of his previous position. It is not the court's function on summary [*25]  judgment to resolve conflicting expert testimony.
There is evidence that Sanders's heart was fine and that the cardiac and renal incidents that occurred during his hospitalization were the result of the bleeding ulcer and did not present chronic heart problems. Viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to Sanders, the court concludes that a reasonable jury could conclude that Union Pacific did not consider the "best available objective evidence" or meaningfully engage in an "individualized assessment" of whether Sanders could perform the essential duties of his job safely—and that, as a result, Union Pacific's direct threat determination was not objectively reasonable.
Whether analyzed with reference the plaintiff's prima facie case or with reference to whether U.P. has sustained its burden to show direct threat as an affirmative defense, the result is the same—there are genuine disputes of material fact and the defendant has not shown it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
The court finds there is also a triable issue of fact on the reasonable accommodation issue. The plaintiff essentially contends it would have been futile to ask for accommodations when the Railroad had [*26]  told him no accommodations were possible. There is evidence that suggests that U.P. did not engage in any interactive process. Union Pacific has not met the burden of establishing as a matter of law that the plaintiff has no reasonable accommodation claim. The issue requires further factual development. Depending on the evidence as to the job's essential functions, the plaintiff's limitations, and the information conveyed to the plaintiff, a reasonable finder of fact could conclude the plaintiff has a claim for denial of a reasonable accommodation. Accordingly,
IT IS ORDERED that:
1. The defendant's motion for summary judgment (Filing No. 38) is denied.
Dated this 7th day of October 2021.
BY THE COURT:
/s/ Joseph F. Bataillon
Senior United States District Judge


End of Document

