Scott v. Cmty. Mem. Health Sys.
United States District Court for the Central District of California
February 27, 2015, Decided; February 27, 2015, Filed
CASE NO. CV 14-02433 MMM (MRWx)

Reporter
2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 200159 *
MARTIN SCOTT, an individual, Plaintiff, vs. COMMUNITY MEMORIAL HEALTH SYSTEM, a California Corporation; and DOES 1 through 100, inclusive, Defendants.
Counsel:  [*1] For COMMUNITY MEMORIAL HEALTH SYSTEM, a California Corporation, Defendant: Carla J Feldman, Sitthikit Chariyasatit, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Arent Fox LLP, Los Angeles, CA.
For Martin Scott, an individual, Plaintiff: Kimberly K Offenbacher, LEAD ATTORNEY, DK Law Group; David M Karen, S Tomiyo Stoner, LEAD ATTORNEYS, DK Law Group, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Judges: MARGARET M. MORROW, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: MARGARET M. MORROW
Opinion


ORDER GRANTING IN PART AND DENYING IN PART DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT AND DENYING PLAINTIFF'S REQUEST FOR THE ENTRY OF SUMMARY JUDGMENT SUA SPONTE
On February 18, 2014, plaintiff Martin Scott filed this action against Community Memorial Health System ("CMHS") and various fictitious defendants in Ventura Superior Court.1 CMHS timely removed the action to this court on March 28, 2014, invoking the court's federal question jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1331.2
On January 16, 2015, CMHS filed a motion for summary judgment on all claims alleged in Scott's complaint.3 On February 2, 2015, Scott filed opposition to CMHS's motion.4 In his opposition, Scott asked that the court sua sponte enter summary judgment in his favor on all claims.5

I. FACTUAL BACKGROUND6

A. The Parties and the Hospital's Interpreter [*2]  Services
Community Memorial Health System ("CMHS") is a not-for-profit organization that operates Community Memorial Hospital (the "Hospital") in Ventura, California.7 CMHS is a public accommodation as defined in the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") and is a recipient of federal funds as that term is used in the Rehabilitation Act.8 It is also a health care provider as defined in California Health and Safety Code § 56.10 and a general acute care hospital as defined in California Health and Safety Code § 1259.9 The Hospital provides services to various communities in Ventura County, California.10
Martin Scott is deaf and is unable to communicate effectively in spoken English.11 As a result, he is a person with a disability as that term is defined in the ADA, California's Unruh Civil Rights Act, California Civil Code § 52 et seq., and the Rehabilitation Act.12 Scott communicates primarily through American Sign Language ("ASL").13 Although Scott uses ASL as his primary means of communication, he can read and write basic English easily.14
During the relevant period, the Hospital had a policy that required it to provide interpreter services in any area of the Hospital where they were required twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, in order to assist physicians and staff communicate effectively with persons having language and/or communication barriers, like Scott.15 The portions [*3]  of CMHS's policies and procedures regarding Language Assistance and Interpretive Services that refer to interpreters cite California Health and Safety Code § 1259.16
If a live interpreter is not immediately available to assist a hearing-impaired patient, video remote interpreting ("VRI") is used to provide interpretive services.17 The VRI system utilizes internet and video technology to provide sign language interpretation through a laptop computer located on a lightweight, mobile cart.18

B. Scott's Prior Visits to the Hospital
The Hospital is one of two hospitals located within five square miles of Scott's home.19 Scott has not been a patient at the other hospital near his home and does not know how other hospitals accommodate hearing-impaired patients.20 Beginning in 2000, Scott visited the Hospital on multiple occasions for various treatments.21 During each of these prior visits, Scott did not have any problems with the accommodations provided for his deafness or with his healthcare and treatment.22 Prior to 2013, each time that Scott made a request for a live interpreter prior to his arrival at the Hospital, the request was accommodated and he received the services of a live interpreter.23 The only time Scott ever used [*4]  VRI was in the Hospital's emergency room.24

C. Scott's February 20, 2013, Visit to the Emergency Room
On February 20, 2013, Scott was transported by ambulance to the Hospital's emergency room, and arrived at approximately 1:00 a.m.25 Although Scott knew he could be transported to several nearby hospitals, he specifically asked to be taken to the Hospital.26 Scott preferred to be treated there because it was quite close to his home and because he had been previously treated there, and his medical records were on file.27 This was an important consideration from Scott's perspective, because he is allergic to Penicillin and unable readily to communicate his pertinent medical history to healthcare providers because of his inability to communicate in spoken English.28
Scott's wife, Virginia, came with him to the emergency room on February 20.29 Virginia is hard of hearing, but is able to communicate in spoken English.30 When the couple arrived, Virginia communicated with his nurses and doctors.31 Scott asked Virginia to request a live ASL interpreter; he did not specifically request a certified interpreter.32
Beyond requesting a live interpreter and an accessible nurse call button, [*5]  Scott did not seek other forms of accommodation, although he asserts he would have accepted other auxiliary aids had they been provided.33 After Scott requested an ASL interpreter, CMHS promptly provided a VRI system.34 It took more than forty-five minutes to set up the VRI system for Scott's use, however.35 While the VRI was being set up, Scott communicated with his doctors through written notes.36 Scott did not indicate that he had difficulty understanding the doctor's written notes or assert that there was any miscommunication due to use of the notes.37 He did, however, repeatedly request a live interpreter.38
Scott asserts that the VRI system did not allow him to communicate effectively with his doctors. He contends the VRI screen was too small because it was not set to full screen and the camera was positioned too low on his body for the interpreter to be see each of his signs completely.39 This was because Scott was comfortable only in the supine position.40 Had Scott asked that the camera be repositioned or that the screen size be expanded to full screen, Hospital staff had the ability to adjust the VRI.41
Although Scott repeatedly expressed concern about his ability to communicate and asserts [*6]  that use of the VRI system on February 20 caused missed communications - specifically missed words - he does not assert that any missed communications led to medical mistakes during his treatment at the Hospital.42

D. Scott's In-Patient Stay at the Hospital
After his February 20, 2013, emergency room visit, Scott remained in in-patient care at the Hospital for approximately a week and a half.43 During this period, the Hospital provided a live interpreter for Scott, and he had no complaints concerning the interpreter services provided.44 A live interpreter was available to Scott a minimum of two hours each day.45 Although Scott had no complaints concerning the live interpreter services he received during his February 2013 hospitalization, he did, on at least one occasion, have difficulty understanding the doctor's explanation of his diagnosis as communicated by a live interpreter.46
CMHS uses a nurse call button, which includes an intercom system, in each of its patient rooms.47 Because Scott cannot communicate vocally, he could not make use of the intercom. [*7] 48 He asserts that during his stay, when he pushed the call button on his bed, nurses spoke to him through the intercom despite the fact that he had been identified as deaf.49 He observed nursing staff walk by his room without stopping after he pressed the call button,50 and contends the nurses did not check on him as often as they should have because he did not respond to their verbal inquiries through the intercom.51
At no time during his stay at the Hospital did Scott inform the live interpreters who assisted him that he was having issues with the VRI or the nurses call button.52 Using a live interpreter, however, Scott did tell a social worker that he had issues with the VRI system and the nurses call button.53 He also requested live interpreters on multiple occasions and told CMHS staff that he was unable to communicate effectively.54
Although provided live interpreters during his stay, Scott had interactions with CMHS personnel in which no auxiliary aid was provided. Specifically, he asserts he was not provided an auxiliary aid while undergoing imaging procedures and waiting for transport after those procedures concluded.55 Scott also had his IV removed and [*8]  replaced several times without being given appropriate auxiliary aids so that he could to communicate with Hospital personnel.56 CMHS asserts that, on each of these occasions, Scott did not request an auxiliary aid, nor indicate that he had questions for his doctor or other CMHS staff.57
Scott asserts that during his February 2013 hospitalization, he was given informed consent paperwork in English, which he was unable to understand, and that he was not offered the assistance of an interpreter to translate the documents into sign language.58 He states that, because he did not have access to a certified interpreter to explain the informed consent paperwork, he was not aware he had the option to refuse treatment.59 CMHS counters that Scott did not request an accommodation and further disputes that it is required to provide an interpreter to explain medical concepts to Scott.60
Finally, while he was receiving a sigmoidoscopy, Scott was shown an informational video about the procedure but did not have the aural information communicated to him in any way.61 In preparation for the procedure, Scott was able to ask questions of his doctors through written notes; he asserts, however, that he was confused [*9]  by the written responses he received from his doctors.62
Scott contends that, due to the lack of appropriate accommodations provided by CMHS, he did not know why he was hospitalized until the last day of his stay. He further asserts he did not learn the details of his treatment and diagnosis until 2015.63

E. Scott's Subsequent Visits to the Hospital
In March 2014, Scott was once again transported to Hospital's emergency room and again used the VRI system.64 This time, Scott did not have any problem with the VRI image quality.65 He did, however, have difficulty with the small screen size, and experienced pauses while using the system.66 During a visit to the Hospital's emergency room in July 2014, Scott asked his wife to request a live interpreter.67 The Hospital, instead, provided a VRI.68 During the July 2014 visit, the VRI periodically paused as the result of a slow Wi-Fi signal.69 Scott also noted that the image on the screen was blurry and/or pixilated, and that the screen appeared too small.70 During both visits, Scott asserts that he missed words and information when the VRI paused; he posits "there was a lot fo missed information."71

F. The VRI System
The VRI uses a camera mounted on a laptop computer, [*10]  which is set on a movable tray on a mobile cart.72 The VRI is capable of providing a video image at 15 frames per second or 30 frames per second; the VRI terminal displays a better image when it is set at 30 frames per second.73 The VRI system is also capable of providing a video image in low, medium, or high resolution.74 After the VRI system is connected, the display screen showing the VRI interpreter can be enlarged if preferred.75
CMHS's testing of the VRI indicated that when there are brief audiovisual pauses during calls, transmission consistently resumed immediately and the calls were never disconnected.76 Scott's expert conducted tests, however, and observed the same video quality issues Scott and Virginia reported, including intermittent video pauses.77 CMHS's inspection of the VRI equipment revealed that VRI translators were able to communicate effectively and to repeat exactly what was being said both by patient and medical provider without problems, even when there were brief pauses and the screen was not enlarged.78 The hardware and software capabilities of the VRI the Hospital uses meet or exceed those of the Video Relay Service ("VRS"), which is the standard equipment used for the [*11]  most part by the hearing-impaired community to compare video services.79
Regulations implementing the ADA state that VRI must provide "a sharply delineated image that is large enough to display the interpreter's face, arms, hands, and fingers, regardless of his or her body position."80 The relevant regulations also require that public accommodations that choose to provide VRI service must ensure that it affords "[r]eal-time, full-motion video and audio over a dedicated high-speed, wide-bandwidth video connection or wireless connection that delivers high-quality video images that do not produce lags, choppy, blurry, or grainy images, or irregular pauses in communication."81 The implementing regulations require that a facility utilizing VRI provide "[a]dequate training to users of the technology and other involved individuals so that they may quickly and efficiently set up and operate the VRI.82

G. CMHS's Purported Disclosure of Scott's Confidential Medical Information
During Scott's in-patient stay at the Hospital in February 2013, two of his friends - Karen Walker and Karen DeFazio - visited him.83 Scott asserts that a Hospital staff member or his doctor disclosed confidential medical [*12]  information to Walker and DeFazio without his authorization. CMHS disputes this.84 Scott did not observe the purported disclosure of his medical information to Walker and DeFazio, but proffers their declarations to substantiate hat it occurred.85 He asserts that Walker and DeFazio received the information while they were outside his room and also inside his room while he was sleeping. He contends CMHS did not request that either woman demonstrate that they had a legal right the information.86 CMHS disputes Scott's assertions. It notes his medical records do not reflect that he had any visitors, that he was given any pain medication, or that he was asleep at the time he maintains Walker and DeFazio were present.87

II. DISCUSSION

A. Legal Standard Governing Motions for Summary Judgment
A motion for summary judgment must be granted when "the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled [*13]  to judgment as a matter of law. Fed.R.Civ.Proc. 56. A party seeking summary judgment bears the initial burden of informing the court of the basis for its motion and identifying those portions of the pleadings and discovery responses that demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact. See Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323 (1986). Where the moving party will have the burden of proof on an issue at trial, the movant must affirmatively demonstrate that no reasonable trier of fact could find other than for the moving party. On an issue as to which the nonmoving party will have the burden, however, the movant can prevail merely by pointing out that there is an absence of evidence to support the nonmoving party's case. See id.. If the moving party meets its initial burden, the nonmoving party must set forth, by affidavit or as otherwise provided in Rule 56, "specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 250 (1986); Fed.R.Civ.Proc. 56(e)(2). Conclusory, speculative testimony in affidavits or moving papers is insufficient to meet this burden, or raise genuine issues of fact defeating summary judgment. See Nelson v. Pima Community College, 83 F3d 1075, 1081-82 (9th Cir. 1996) ("mere allegation and speculation do not create a factual dispute for purposes of summary judgment"); Falls Riverway Realty, Inc. v. Niagara Falls, 754 F.2d 49, 56 (2d Cir. 1985); Thornhill Pub. Co., Inc. v. GTE Corp., 594 F.2d 730, 738 (9th Cir. 1979).
Evidence presented by the parties at the summary [*14]  judgment stage must be admissible. Fed.R.Civ.Proc. 56(e)(1). In reviewing the record, the court does not make credibility determinations or weigh conflicting evidence. Rather, it draws all interferences in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. See T.W. Electric Service, Inc. v. Pacific Electric Contractors Ass'n, 809 F.2d 626, 630-31 (9th Cir. 1987).

B. Plaintiff's ADA Claim

1. Legal Standard Governing Title III Claims Under the ADA
Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") provides that "[n]o individual shall be discriminated against on the basis of disability in the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations of any place of public accommodation by any person who owns, leases (or leases to), or operates a place of public accommodations." 42 U.S.C. § 12182(a). To prevail on a claim for violation of Title III, a plaintiff must establish that: "(1) he is disabled within the meaning of the ADA; (2) the defendant is a private entity that owns, leases, or operates a place of public accommodations; and (3) the plaintiff was denied public accommodations by the defendant because of his disability." Arizona ex rel. Goddard v. Harkins Amusement Enterprises, 603 F.3d 666, 670 (9th Cir. 2010). See also Paulsen v. PS Business Parks, LP, *4 (W.D. Wash. Aug. 4, 2011) ("In order to establish a prima facie case of discrimination under Title III of the ADA, a plaintiff must prove that (1) [ ]he has a disability; [*15]  (2) the [defendant's facility] is a place of public accommodation; and (3) plaintiff was denied full and equal treatment because of h[is] disability," citing Parr v. L. & L. Drive-inn Restaurant, 96 F.Supp.2d 1065, 1085 (D. Haw. 2000)); Young v. Facebook, Inc., 790 F.Supp.2d 1110, 1114-15 (N.D. Cal. 2011) ("In order to prevail on a discrimination claim under Title III, a plaintiff must show that: (1) [ ]he is disabled within the meaning of the ADA; (2) the defendant is a private entity that owns, leases, or operates a place of public accommodation; and (3) the plaintiff was denied public accommodations by the defendant because of h[is] disability" (citations omitted)).
"Title 42 U.S.C. § 12182(b)(2)(A)(iii) provides that discrimination by public accommodations includes 'a failure to take such steps as may be necessary to ensure that no individual with a disability is excluded, denied services, segregated, or otherwise treated differently than other individuals because of the absence of auxiliary aids and services, unless the entity can demonstrate that taking such steps would fundamentally alter the nature of the good, service, facility, privilege, advantage, or accommodations being offered or would result in an undue burden.'" Goddard, 603 F.3d at 670 (citing 42 U.S.C. § 12182(b)(2)(A)(iii)).

2. Whether Plaintiff Has Standing to Assert a Title III ADA Claim
"[T]o satisfy Article III's standing requirements, a plaintiff must [*16]  show (1) [he] has suffered an 'injury in fact' that is (a) concrete and particularized and (b) actual or imminent, not conjectural or hypothetical; (2) the injury is fairly traceable to the challenged action of the defendant; and (3) it is likely, as opposed to merely speculative, that the injury will be redressed by a favorable decision." Friends of the Earth, Inc. v. Laidlaw Environmental Services (TOC), Inc., 528 U.S. 167, 180-81 (2000). When a plaintiff seeks injunctive relief, there is a further requirement - he must show a significant possibility of future harm. It is insufficient merely to demonstrate past injury. See San Diego County Gun Rights Committee v. Reno, 98 F.3d 1121, 1126 (9th Cir. 1996). The party invoking federal jurisdiction bears the burden of establishing each of these elements of standing. Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 561 (1992).
"Injunctive relief is the only remedy to which a private plaintiff is entitled in a suit brought pursuant to Title III of the ADA." Deck v. American Hawaii Cruises, Inc., 121 F.Supp.2d 1292, n. 8 (D. Haw. 2000) (citing 42 U.S.C. § 12188(a)(1); 28 C.F.R. § 36.501; 28 C.F.R. § 36.504). Thus, Scott must demonstrate that there is a significant possibility of future injury to show that he has standing to assert an ADA claim under Title III.
CMHS asserts that Scott does not have standing to bring an ADA claim because he cannot demonstrate that there is a threat of repeated injury.88 It contends "there is no threat of recurrence of the alleged issues with the VRI" because, inter alia, "there is [*17]  no legal authority to suggest that VRI technology is improper or below the standard of reasonable medical care or reasonable accommodation." CMHS also asserts there is no evidence that "any patient other than Plaintiff has ever alleged issues with the use of the VRI in the emergency room."89 Scott counters that CMHS has failed to proffer evidence "demonstrat[ing] that continuation of the alleged ADA violations would be 'nearly impossible.' . . ."90 As a result, Scott contends, there are triable issues of fact as to whether there is a threat of repeated injury.91
CMHS relies on Aikins v. St.Helena Hospital, 843 F.Supp. 1329, 1334 (N.D. Cal. 1994), in arguing that Scott lacks standing to sue. There, plaintiff was a deaf woman whose husband suffered cardiac arrest, and was taken to St. Helena's emergency room. Aikins, 843 F.Supp. at 1331-32. Aikins accompanied her husband to the hospital; once they arrived, the doctor attempted to communicate information concerning her husband's medical condition and prognosis to Aikins, but was unable to do so. Id. Although Aikins repeatedly requested interpreter services, they were not provided, and she could only communicate with her husband's doctors through friends who were able to interpret for her. Id. at 1332-33. Aikins sued St. Helena for violation of [*18]  Title III of the ADA based on its failure to provide suitable accommodations that would have permitted her to communicate effectively with her husband's doctors. Id. St. Helena moved to dismiss Aikins' ADA claim based on lack of standing. Id. at 1333. The district court concluded that Aikins lacked standing, noting that she did not allege any facts that demonstrated there was a likelihood she would return to the hospital in the near future or that the hospital would fail to provide interpreter services if she did return. Id. at 1333-34 ("Mrs. Aikins has not shown her standing to seek injunctive relief under Lyons. In her complaint, Mrs. Aikins alleges only that she is a deaf individual and within the protection of the ADA, the Rehabilitation Act, and various state statutes. Mrs. Aikins further states that she owns a mobile home seven miles away from St. Helena Hospital and that she stays at the home for several days each year. These allegations do not establish the 'real and immediate threat' of future harm that Lyons requires. Mrs. Aikins has shown neither that she is likely to use the hospital in the near future, nor that defendants are likely to discriminate against her when she does use the hospital"). [*19] 
The Ninth Circuit has stated that "standing for injunctive relief under the ADA requires either (1) 'demonstrating deterrence' or (2) 'demonstrating injury-in-fact coupled with an intent to return to a noncompliant facility.'" Arroyo v. Alva, No. 14-CV-03958-LHK, 2015 WL 534502, *4 (N.D. Cal. Feb. 9, 2015) (quoting Chapman v. Pier 1 Imports (U.S.) Inc., 631 F.3d 939, 944 (9th Cir. 2011)); see also Mason v. Nature's Innovation, Inc., No. 12cv3019 BTM (DHB), 2013 WL 1969957, *2 (S.D. Cal. May 13, 2013) ("To establish standing for prospective injunctive relief, Plaintiff must demonstrate that 'he has suffered or is threatened with a 'concrete and particularized' legal harm . . . coupled with 'a sufficient likelihood that he will again be wronged in a similar way,'" quoting Bates v. United Parcel Service, Inc., 511 F.3d 974, 985 (9th Cir. 2007)).
The Ninth Circuit has made clear, however, that a plaintiff "lacks standing if he is indifferent to returning to the [facility] or if his alleged intent to return is not genuine." Chapman, 631 F.3d at 953; see also Deck, 121 F.Supp.2d at 1298-99 ("The facts in this case are similar to those cases cited above wherein the court denied standing. In the instant case, Plaintiff's Complaint does not allege that she has any plans to use Defendant's services in the future, nor does she allege in her affidavit or deposition anything more than a conditional, speculative interest in doing so. As such Plaintiff fails to establish the 'real and immediate threat' of future injury at the hands of defendants that Lyons requires. To avoid [*20]  summary judgment, a plaintiff must demonstrate standing 'by specific evidentiary facts and not by mere allegations.' 'It is a long-settled principle that standing along cannot be inferred argumentatively from averments in the pleadings, but rather must affirmatively appear in the record.' Plaintiff argues that she has standing because she would like to take a cruise on Defendant's ship in the future. In her declaration, Plaintiff states that although she is unable to commit to a particular date now, because of her mother's health situation, she 'will settle that situation in the near future and will then look into taking such trips as another cruise on the S.S. Independence.' Such speculative and conditional intention is not sufficient to sustain standing"); DeLil v. El Torito Restaurants, Inc., No. C 94-3900-CAL, 1997 WL 714866, *4 (N.D. Cal. June 24, 1997) ("DeLil has alleged only a single incident of discrimination in a restaurant more than a hundred miles away from where she lives and works. As of May 2, 1997, she had not attempted to visit the Monterey El Torito since 1993, nor had she even alleged that she intended to return to the restaurant. She has not demonstrated that she herself faces a real and immediate threat of future harm").
Applying this principle, other district [*21]  courts have concluded, like the court in Aikins, that a plaintiff seeking injunctive relief following a hospital's purported lack of accommodation of his disability lacks standing to sue under Title III of the ADA if he fails to show a real or immediate threat of injury, i.e., a likelihood that he will return to the same hospital that purportedly denied him an accommodation in the past. See, e.g., Bravin v. Mount Sinai Medical Center, 186 F.R.D. 293, 299-301 (S.D.N.Y. 1999) (concluding that plaintiffs lacked standing where they failed to show there was a likelihood they would require the services of the defendant hospital in the future), vacated in part on other grounds, 58 F.Supp.2d 269 (S.D.N.Y. 1999); Proctor v. Prince George's Hospital Center, 32 F.Supp.2d 830, 832-33 (D. Md. 1998) (concluding that a deaf plaintiff who had been denied sign language interpreter services at a hospital lacked standing because any assertion plaintiff would return to the hospital was based on mere speculation).92
The court finds these cases distinguishable. It is undisputed that the Hospital is one of only two hospitals located within five square miles of Scott's home, and that he has never been a patient at any hospital other than the one owned and operated by CMHS.93 Prior to his February 2013 hospitalization, Scott had made multiple visits to the Hospital, starting in 2000; he has visited the Hospital [*22]  - specifically, its emergency room - on at least two occasions following the February 2013 hospitalization.94 On each occasion that he has visited the Hospital since his February 2013 hospitalization, Scott received VRI rather than live interpreter services as he requested.95 He states that VRI continues to have problems, including pauses and screen size, which have prevented him from using it to communicate effectively.96 Scott also asserts it is likely that he will return to the Hospital in the future for medical treatment given its close physical proximity to his home, and the fact that it has his medical information and history on file. This obviates the need for him to attempt to communicate that information to medical personnel when he is being treated.97
As discussed infra, Scott has raised triable issues as to whether CMHS violated the ADA during his February 2013 hospitalization as a result of his purported difficulties communicating effectively through the VRI. As a consequence, and given the fact that Scott's residence is close to the Hospital, that he has never been a patient at any other hospital, that he prefers to be treated at CMHS, that he visited the Hospital after February [*23]  2013, and that CMHS continues to provide VRI services similar to those offered in February 2013, the court cannot say, as a matter of law, that Scott has failed to show that he may likely experience the same harm in the future. It cannot, therefore, enter summary judgment in CMHS's favor on Scott's ADA claim based on lack of Article III standing. See Gough v. PeaceHealth St. Joseph Medical Center, No. 2:12-cv-00346-RAJ, 2013 WL 1148748, *5 (W.D. Wash. Mar. 19, 2013) ("'[A]n ADA plaintiff can show a likelihood of future injury when he intends to return to a noncompliant accommodation and is therefore likely to [suffer repeated injury].' Here, Plaintiffs furnished sufficient evidence to create a triable issue regarding St. Joseph's ongoing noncompliance. Mr. Gough submits that, while at St. Joseph, he has tried to use the VRI twice but could not see the monitor from his lying-down position, the video was 'blurry,' and 'it took too long' for St. Joseph's staff to set up the device. Plaintiffs also have shown that despite their repeated requests, St. Joseph failed to provide a live, on-site ASL interpreter, and that it is likely that St. Joseph will continue to deny such services despite their availability. In addition, Plaintiffs have [*24]  presented evidence that they will visit St. Joseph in the near future because it is the only hospital in their geographic area. This showing is bolstered by the fact that Mr. Gough visited St. Joseph on multiple occasions since his June 2011 hospitalization. Accordingly, given the fact that Plaintiffs seek to enjoin what they claim is an existing unfair policy and practice, the court finds that Plaintiffs have sufficiently demonstrated a 'real and immediate threat of future injury,'" citing Dudley v. Hannaford Bros. Co., 333 F.3d 299, 306 (1st Cir. 2003) ("To sum up, the question before us is whether Dudley has proffered enough evidence to establish a real and immediate threat that Hannaford's policy will again result in a Title III violation. Given the remedial purpose underlying the ADA, courts should resolve doubts about such questions in favor of disabled defendants")); Majocha v. Turner, 166 F.Supp.2d 316, 325 (W.D. Pa. 2001) ("Here, plaintiffs aver that they still would like D.J. to be evaluated and treated by Dr. Turner for his chronic ear infections which, given the nature of such infections, are likely to recur and may require additional surgical procedures, and that they are prevented from doing so because defendants steadfastly refuse to alter their procedures for dealing with hearing impaired [*25]  parents; Dr. Turner has always used written communication by notes in such cases (although plaintiffs offer evidence that Dr. Turner in fact uses qualified sign interpreters when the patients supply their own) and intends to continue that practice despite plaintiffs' exertion of rights claimed under the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. At this point, the Court cannot say plaintiffs will be unable to prevail on their claim for injunctive relief and declaratory judgment, and they will have the opportunity to prove their case for such relief at trial"). Compare Proctor v. Prince George's Hospital Center, 32 F.Supp.2d 830, 832-33 (D. Md. 1998) ("Plaintiff is unable to establish that he himself faces a real and immediate threat of future harm from Defendant, and not merely a conjectural or hypothetical threat. Plaintiff misguidedly argues that he has standing to obtain injunctive relief because 'conditions still exist at PGHC that make it unlikely deaf patients are being provided with equal and effective communication.' Even assuming, arguendo, that this assertion is true, this is still insufficient to confer standing. The present record neither reflects any on-going discrimination against Plaintiff, nor suggests that he is likely to return to PGHC in the near [*26]  future. Indeed, Plaintiff concedes that 'any assertion that he would need to go to PGHC in the future would necessarily involve speculation.' Because Plaintiff has admitted there is no 'actual and imminent' threat to his rights, he does not have standing to seek injunctive relief. Accordingly, Count II must be dismissed for failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted, and any request for injunctive relief under Count III must likewise be dismissed").
Although CMHS asserts that the issues Scott raises are moot because "subsequent events [have] ma[de] it evident that the alleged wrongful behavior could not reasonably be expected to [re]occur,"98 it proffers no evidence that "(1) that there is no reasonable expectation that the alleged violation will recur; and (2) that interim relief or events have completely and irrevocably eradicated the effects of the alleged violation." Baltimore Neighborhoods, Inc. v. LOB, Inc., 92 F.Supp.2d 456, 461 (D. Md. 2000). Although CMHS asserts that "the Hospital can address the alleged problems for any future visits by Plaintiff or other hearing-impaired patients if issues are made known to them in a timely manner" - because the VRI can purportedly be positioned to better suit the patient's body position - Scott has, as [*27]  discussed infra, raised triable issues as to whether this is so and whether the VRI system in use at CMHS violates the ADA. Given these triable issues, it is not clear that "there is no reasonable expectation that the alleged violation will recur," and that CMHS's proposed repositoning of the VRI will ensure effective communication for its patients. Consequently, the court concludes that Scott has carried his burden of demonstrating that there is a threat of recurrence and that triable issues of fact remain regarding his standing to assert a Title III claim against CMHS.99

3. Whether CMHS is Entitled to Summary Judgment on Plaintiff's ADA Claim Concerning His February 2013 Visit
As noted, "[t]o prevail on a discrimination claim under Title III, a plaintiff must show that: (1) he is disabled within the meaning of the ADA; (2) the defendant is a private entity that owns, leases, or operates a place of public accommodation; and (3) the plaintiff was denied public accommodations by the defendant because of his disability." Goddard, 603 F.3d at 670 (citing Molski v. M.J. Cable, Inc., 481 F.3d 724, 730 (9th Cir. 2007)). It is undisputed that Scott is a disabled person within the meaning of the ADA and that CMHS is a private entity that operates a place of public accommodation, [*28]  i.e., the Hospital.100 Consequently, the only issue is whether CMHS denied Scott public accommodations and discriminated against him because of his hearing disability.
Under Title III, discrimination by a public accommodation includes "a failure to take such steps as may be necessary to ensure that no individual with a disability is excluded, denied services, segregated or otherwise treated differently than other individuals because of the absence of auxiliary aids and services, unless the entity can demonstrate that taking such steps would fundamentally alter the nature of the good, service, facility, privilege, advantage, or accommodation being offered or would result in an undue burden." 42 U.S.C. § 12182(b)(2)(A)(iii).101 "The regulations implementing Title III require that places of public accommodation 'furnish appropriate auxiliary aids and services . . . to ensure effective communication with individuals with disabilities." Gough, 2013 WL 1148748 at *7 (citing 28 C.F.R. § 36.303(c)(1) (emphasis added)).
The question is thus whether the various auxiliary aids CMHS made available to Scott during his February 2013 hospitalization ensured "effective communication" on each occasion they were offered; in this regard, the court is cognizant that "[t]he type of auxiliary aid or service necessary to ensure effective communication will vary in accordance with the method of communication used by the individual; the nature, length, and complexity of the communication involved; and the context in which the communication is taking place."102 28 C.F.R. § 36.303(c)(1)(ii).103
a. Whether the VRI CMHS Provided Ensured "Effective Communication"
The court first considers whether the Video Remote Interpreting system made available to Scott upon arrival at the Hospital's emergency room in the early morning on February 20, 2013, complied with Title III.104 As CMHS notes,105 VRI is an appropriate auxiliary aid for hearing impaired individuals as Title III's implementing regulations make clear. See 28 C.F.R. § 36.303(b)(1). CMHS contends that VRI allowed Scott to communicate effectively with his doctors because [*30]  he did not "allege[ ] that there was any resulting misdiagnosis or medical mistake or incorrect health information exchanged."106
Scott does not dispute that VRI is an appropriate auxiliary aid. Instead, he argues that the VRI CMHS provided did not comply with the requirements set forth in the ADA's implementing regulations. Specifically, he contends that the VRI did not provide a "sharply delineated image that [was] large enough to display the interpreter's face, arms, hands, and fingers, and the participating individual's face, arms, hands, and fingers" when he was in the supine position, and that CMHS did not adequately train its staff members so that they could "quickly and efficiently" set up the VRI for Scott's use.107

(1) Whether the VRI System Complied with the Implementing Regulations
The regulations implementing the ADA set forth specific requirements for a VRI system that a place of public accommodation chooses to use as an auxiliary aid. They state:
"A public accommodation that chooses to provide qualified interpreters via VRI service shall ensure that it provides -
(1) Real-time, full-motion video and audio over a dedicated high-speed, wide-bandwidth video connection or wireless [*31]  connection that delivers high-quality video images that do not produce lags, choppy, blurry, or grainy images, or irregular pauses in communication;
(2) A sharply delineated image that is large enough to display the interpreter's face, arms, hands, and fingers, and the participating individual's face, arms, hands, and fingers, regardless of his or her body position;
(3) A clear, audible transmission of voices; and
(4) Adequate training to users of the technology and other involved individuals so that they may quickly and efficiently set up and operate the VRI." 28 C.F.R. § 36.303(f).
CMHS contends that its VRI system complied with this regulation. It asserts that the pauses Scott purportedly experienced while using the VRI did not interfere with the transmission of information or with Scott's ability to communicate effectively through the VRI.108 It contends the pauses were regular pauses, not irregular pauses of the type prohibited by the regulation.109 As support for this contention, CMHS proffers the report of its expert, Christopher Talbot.110 Talbot states that, on January 7, 2015, he conducted an inspection of the VRI system used at the Hospital.111 He reports that during the testing, the VRI permitted him to communicate [*32]  clearly with the interpreter, both through spoken messages and ASL. He states that, although there were two pauses during the two test calls, the audio and video recovered immediately thereafter, the calls did not drop, and both he and the interpreter were able to repeat exactly what was transmitted by the other at the time the pauses occurred.112
Scott counters that the VRI system does not satisfy the regulations because it does not provide "high quality video images that do not produce lags, choppy, blurry, or grainy images, or irregular pauses in communication."113 As evidence of this, Scott proffers the testimony of his expert, M. David Scott ("D. Scott"), who states that, during his inspection of the VRI system in January 2015, he observed, inter alia, "two noticeable, [intermittent] pauses in communication" during a two minute call, and "video artifacts, video smear, pixelation, and poor video quality."114 Scott argues that his expert's observations of intermittent pauses and poor video quality raise triable issues of fact as to whether the VRI provided "high-qualify video images" without "lags, choppy, blurry, or graining images, or irregular pauses in communication." The [*33]  court agrees. Although Talbot opines that there were no "irregular pauses in communication" and that the VRI provided "high-quality video images," D. Scott's contrary opinion creates triable issues of fact that will have to be resolved by a jury to determine whether the VRI was an effective auxiliary aid. D. Scott, for example, observed "video artifacts, video smear, pixelation, and generally poor video appearance," as well as pauses.115 This is consistent with Scott's testimony, who states that the VRI system had pauses and poor image quality that did not permit him to communicate effectively with the interpreter.116 Scott also testified that he missed certain words being communicated to him.117 A reasonable jury could infer, based on Scott's evidence, that the VRI did not provide high-quality video images and had pauses in communication that interfered with Scott's ability to communicate effectively with the interpreter. If it did, it could conclude that CMHS's VRI system was not compliant with the ADA and was thus not an appropriate auxiliary aid.
Scott also proffers evidence that the VRI was not ADA compliant because it did not allow Scott to communicate effectively with the interpreter [*34]  and therefore with his doctors. He asserts, for example, that the VRI could not be used effectively in a supine position because it did not provide "a sharply delineated image . . . large enough to display the interpreter's face, arms, hands, and fingers, and the participating individual's face, arms, hands, and fingers, regardless of . . . body position." CMHS counters that the VRI system complied with regulations and provided an effective means of communication because the cart could be used "facilitate an unobstructed VRI session, regardless of the patient's position and location."118 It relies, once again, on Talbot's testimony. He states that the VRI can be positioned to facilitate effective communication regardless of the patient's position, i.e., in a way that provides a full image of the interpreter's and disabled individual's faces, arms, hands, and fingers.119
Scott's testimony, and D. Scott's opinions controvert Talbot's assertion that the VRI can be positioned to facilitate effective communication regardless of the patient's body position. Scott, for his part, states that he could not use the VRI in a supine position, which was the position in which he was situated during his [*35]  February 2013 hospitalization.120 Based on his review of the specifications for the VRI, moreover, D. Scott opines that it was not suitable for use in a supine position.121 As with the conflicting evidence concerning pauses and video image quality, the evidence Scott proffers concerning the ability to position the VRI so it could be used by a patient laying on his back is sufficient to raise triable issues of fact concerning the VRI's compliance with ADA requirements.
Finally, the court concludes that Scott has adduced evidence raising triable issues as to whether CMHS adequately trained its staff so that they could "quickly and efficiently set up and operate the VRI." It is undisputed that it took more than forty-five minutes for CMHS staff to set up the VRI system for Scott's use.122 Although CMHS argues that the delay does not demonstrate its staff was inadequately trained,123 a jury could conclude that a delay of this length constitutes circumstantial evidence of a lack of training, and that the inadequacy of the training prevented Scott from effectively communicating while in the emergency room at the Hospital.
In sum, Scott has raised triable issues of fact as to whether the VRI system in [*36]  use at the Hospital during his February 2013 hospitalization allowed him to communicate effectively with his doctors and the medical staff, and whether it complied with regulations governing video image quality and pauses. See, e.g., Gough, 2013 WL 1148748 at *8 ("St. Joseph also argues that Plaintiffs' claims must be dismissed as a matter of law because it has satisfactorily revised its policy and practice to comply with the anti-discrimination law as evidenced by the findings of the H RC. 16. St. Joseph failed to cite to, and the court is not aware of, any legal authority that investigative findings, on which the HRC based its decision to close Mr. Gough's case, have binding effect on this court. In fact, the findings stated that '[t]his Commission action does not preclude the Complainant from filing a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction . . . [regarding] the alleged unfair practice.' In addition, Plaintiffs provided evidence that on multiple occasions, when St. Joseph's VRI was utilized, it was ineffective due to the 'blurry' video image and inadequately trained hospital staff unable to quickly set up the device. Plaintiffs also offered evidence that St. Joseph's VRI appears to be incompatible [*37]  with their particular disability because they cannot see the monitor while laying down, which impedes the interpreter's ability to see the 'fingerspellings.' These alleged violations echo the exact requirements needed to ensure that St. Joseph's communication with Plaintiffs is 'effective.' See 28 C.F.R. § 36.303(f)(1), (2), (3), and (4) (for VRIs, the regulations require 'high-quality video images that [are not] choppy, blurry, or grainy, . . . large enough to display . . . the participating individual's face, arms, hands, and fingers, regardless of his or her body position,' and also require '[a]dequate training . . . so that [the staff] may quickly. . . set up and operate the VRI')"). CMHS's motion for summary judgment on Scott's ADA claim must thus be denied to the extent the claim it is based on his use of the VRI during his February 2013 hospitalization.

(2) Whether "Effective Communication" Was Inhibited by Causes Unrelated to the Auxiliary Aids Provided
In addition to arguing that the VRI system complied with ADA regulations, CMHS contends that it provided an effective means of communication as Scott does not assert that there was a misdiagnosis or medical mistake that resulted from his doctor's use of the VRI, [*38]  or that incorrect health information was exchanged.124 CMHS contends no triable issues concerning the effectiveness of Scott's communication using the VRI remain because, although he contends he had difficulty understanding some of his doctor's explanations, he concedes he had similar difficulties when using the services of a live interpreter.125 CMHS also cites Scott's statement that he was unsure whether any misunderstanding was a result of the manner in which information was communicated to him or some other cause.126
A reasonable jury could conclude, based on this evidence, that Scott's confusion regarding his doctor's advice was not a result of the method by which the advice was communicated but rather other factors, e.g., whether he had taken medication, whether he was fatigued, or whether he did not understand certain words that were used. Scott has, nonetheless, adduced evidence raising triable issues of fact as to whether the VRI system provided an effective means of communication. Scott states that, as a result of the video image quality and pauses, he was not able to see the interpreter's hands clearly and could not understand what was being signed.127 Notwithstanding the fact that [*39]  there may have been other factors that interfered with Scott's ability fully to comprehend the medical advice he received - e.g., fatigue or medication - this evidence directly implicates the effectiveness of the VRI system as an auxiliary aid. The relative importance of the multiple causes, and how they impact whether the VRI allowed Scott to communicate effectively with his medical providers is an issue that must be left to the jury. For this additional reason, the court cannot enter summary judgment in CMHS's favor.128

b. Whether Written Notes Resulted in "Effective Communication"
Scot also asserts he did not receive an adequate auxiliary aid during his sigmoidoscopy at the Hospital in February 2013.129 He states that, in anticipation of the procedure, he was shown a video but had no aural information communicated to him.130 He later attempted to ask his doctor about the video and the procedure using written notes; the notes were purportedly the only auxiliary aid provided by CMHS.131 Scott proffers evidence that, although he gave the doctor written notes, he received terse responses, which he did not understand and which further confused him about the procedure.132 Scott asserts the difficulty [*40]  he had understanding the complexity of the procedure was exacerbated by the fact that he has only basic English skills and his proficiency understanding written English is limited.133
CMHS counters that Scott's assertion that he has difficulty reading and understanding English directly contradicts his deposition testimony.134 It cites Scott's affirmative answer when asked whether he could "read and write English easily."135 In the same response, however, Scott stated that he was "not good" at reading and writing "the exact word," and typically understands only "basic English."136 His declaration and deposition testimony suffice to raise triable issues of fact as to whether providing a means for Scott to write written notes to his doctor during the February 2013 hospitalization resulted in "effective communication" as required by the ADA. Given Scott's testimony regarding the complexity of the procedure, and his basic English skills, a reasonable jury could conclude that written notes did not an "effective" means of communication under the circumstances; as the regulations note, "[t]he type of auxiliary aid or service necessary to ensure effective communication will vary in accordance with [*41]  the method of communication used by the individual; the nature, length, and complexity of the communication involved; and the context in which the communication is taking place." 28 C.F.R. § 36.303(c)(1)(ii). Here, given the procedure that was being discussed, triable issues of fact remain as to whether written notes allowed Scott to communicate with his medical providers regarding the sigmoidoscopy. See, e.g., Duffy v. Riveland, 98 F.3d 447, 456 (9th Cir. 1996) ("Appellees argue that the ADA regulations are 'flexible' and permit the use of written communications between deaf inmates and prison officials in proceedings of this nature instead of a qualified interpreter. Appellees rely on the same discussion of the requirements for qualified interpreters contained in Appendix Part 35, specifically the comments that: 'Although in some circumstances a notepad and written materials may be sufficient to permit effective communication, in other circumstances they may not be sufficient. For example, a qualified interpreter may be necessary when the information being communicated is complex, or is exchanged for a lengthy period of time. Generally, factors to be considered in determining whether an interpreter is required include the context in which the communication [*42]  is taking place, the number of people involved, and the importance of the communication.' Appellees argue further that the disciplinary proceeding, in particular, was not a complicated matter. However, at the very least, this presents another factual issue that is more properly resolved in the district court. We therefore reverse both district courts' grants of summary judgment for the Appellees on Duffy's ADA claims, so that these issues may be properly addressed by a fact-finder"); Gough, 2013 WL 1148748 at *7 ("St. Joseph also contends that it complied with the ADA as a matter of law because it reasonably communicated with Plaintiffs in writing. The regulations implementing Title III of the ADA require places of public accommodation to 'furnish appropriate auxiliary aids and services . . . to ensure effective communication with individuals with disabilities.' 28 C.F.R. § 36.303(c)(1). . . . While 'written notes' may qualify as an auxiliary aid or service, 28 C.F.R. § 36.303(b)(1), when viewed in light of Plaintiffs' difficulty with written English, this fact is not dispositive. Here, Plaintiffs submitted evidence that indicates that passing handwritten notes did not result in effective communication. Thus, the court finds that Plaintiffs presented evidence [*43]  that raises a factual issue regarding the effectiveness of the written notes"); Hibbert v. Bellmawr Park Mut. Housing Corp., 937 F.Supp.2d 565, 579-80 (D.N.J. 2013) ("As the Third Circuit indicated in Chisolm, '[w]hile this [ ] may influence a trier of fact's assessment of whether the pad or paper were effective auxiliary aids, it does not show their effectiveness as a matter of law. . . . Generally, the effectiveness of auxiliary aids and/or services is a question of fact precluding summary judgment.' Accordingly, given that genuine issues of material fact remain in the record as to whether Hibbert could effectively communicate with Defendants and whether they failed to reasonably accommodate his disability, the Court will deny summary judgment on the NJLAD claim at this time"); Center v. City of West Carrollton, 227 F.Supp.2d 863, 870 (S.D. Ohio 2002) ("In the present case, Plaintiff has provided evidence that she is not proficient at written English and that she became very frustrated by the use of handwritten notes. She has provided further evidence that she was unable to communicate effectively with Officer Brodbeck, despite his belief that she was able to convey information about her case and that he could understand her. Construing this evidence in the light most favorable to her, Plaintiff has created a genuine issue of material [*44]  fact as to whether communication through handwritten notes constituted an effective auxiliary aid. Accordingly, Defendant is not entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's ADA and Rehabilitation Act claims"). Consequently, the court must deny CMHS's motion for summary judgment on Scott's ADA claim to the extent it alleges the ineffectiveness of written notes as an auxiliary aid in connection with his sigmoidoscopy.137

c. Whether the Nurse Call Button Resulted in "Effective Communication"
Scott next contends that he was not provided with adequate auxiliary aids during his February 2013 hospitalization because the only way he could communicate with the nursing staff when they were not present was to use a nurse call button.138 Scott has adduced evidence that he cannot communicate vocally in any language.139 He states that after learning CMHS provided a nurse call button/intercom system that patients could use to communicate remotely with nurses, Scott told CMHS staff that he could not use the system because he could not communicate verbally over the intercom.140 Upon learning this, CMHS staff purportedly said they would accommodate him by putting a sign next to his room number that indicated [*45]  he was deaf and would advise all nursing staff to respond immediately if he pressed the call button.141 Scott reports that, despite being promised this accommodation, he could feel vibrations through the intercom. He asserts this shows that the nurses were attempting to communicate with him over the intercom, and that he saw staff walk by his room without stopping promptly to see what he needed.142
CMHS counters that summary judgment is appropriate because, apart from speculation and conjecture, Scott adduces no evidence that he was unable to communicate effectively by using the call button/intercom.143 It contends Scott "leaps to conclusions that his disability played a role in certain interactions with Hospital staff."144 Although anyone who has spent timing in a hospital knows that nurses do not always respond promptly when a patient presses the call button, the court must view Scott's evidence in the light most favorable to him. That evidence includes not only Scott's assertion that nurses walked by his room without responding promptly to his call, but also his report that he could feel vibrations coming from the intercom after he pressed the call button145 - giving rise to a reasonable [*46]  inference that nurses were responding to his call verbally - and evidence that nurses did not come into the room promptly despite a notice posted next to his room number that he was deaf and that all nurses would be directed to respond promptly when he pressed the call button. Based on all of this evidence, a reasonable jury could conclude that the call button did not provide an effective means of communication for Scott and that nurses did not respond as quickly as they would had he been able verbally to articulate his request over the intercom. As a result, triable issues of fact preclude summary judgment on Scott's ADA claim to the extent premised on his purported difficulty communicating with CMHS staff via the call button/intercom system.146

d. Whether Gestures Resulted in "Effective Communication"
Scott asserts, in conclusory fashion, that during daily imaging procedures and adjustment of his IV, he was "forced to communicate only through gestures."147 CMHS contends there is no evidence of this.148
Although CMHS asserts Scott did not request an auxiliary aid to communicate at these times, Scott contends he repeatedly expressed concern about his ability to communicate and attempted [*47]  to make CMHS "understand[ ] how to best communicate with [him]."149 It is undisputed that CMHS knew Scott was deaf and required auxiliary aids to communicate. It is also undisputed that upon arriving at the hospital, Scott made a request for accommodation. Given this, the fact that he may not have made a specific request for an auxiliary aid in connection with daily imaging procedures and adjustment of his IV does not mandate the entry of summary judgment in CMHS's favor. Rather, a jury must resolve whether the Hospital provided adequate auxiliary aids on these occasions. See, e.g., Robertson v. Las Animas County Sheriff's Dep't, 500 F.3d 1185, 1198 (10th Cir. 2007) ("First, there is a genuine issue as to whether Mr. Robertson informed the defendants of his need for an accommodation (i.e., whether he made a "request" for an accommodation). Mr. Robertson placed a note in the slot of the cell indicating that he wanted to call his attorney, despite the availability of a phone in his pod. Further, he told the detention officer at the probable cause hearing that he could not hear what was happening. That Mr. Robertson did not request the use of a specific auxiliary aid in either instance - such as a TTY, TDD, or closed captioning - does not matter. While it is true that a [*48]  public entity, in providing an auxiliary aid to prevent discrimination, must 'give primary consideration to the requests of the individual with disabilities,' 28 C.F.R. § 35.160(b)(2), the regulations do not require the plaintiff to request a specific auxiliary aid. Hence, for both Mr. Robertson's use of the phone and his participation in the probable cause hearing, there is a question of fact with respect to whether Mr. Robertson informed the detention facility of his need for an accommodation").
Scott has also raised triable issues as to whether his gestures resulted in effective communication. Although in some circumstances gesturing may be an appropriate auxiliary aid and comply with the ADA's requirements, like all other auxiliary aids, it may not be effective under all circumstances. See, e.g., Liese v. Indian River County Hospital District, 701 F.3d 334, 343 (11th Cir. 2012) ("Whether a particular aid is effective in affording a patient an equal opportunity to benefit from medical treatment largely depends on context, including, principally, the nature, significance, and complexity of the treatment. For example, emergency surgery is often a complicated concept to convey to a person who can hear well; the attendant risks, manner of surgery, prognosis, and advantages or disadvantages [*49]  of immediate or postponed surgery can only complicate this communicative task. Thus, under circumstances in which a patient must decide whether to undergo immediate surgery involving the removal of an organ under a general anesthetic, understanding the necessity, risks, and procedures surrounding the surgery is paramount. Under these circumstances, auxiliary aids limited to written notes, body gestures, and lipreading may be ineffective in ensuring that a hearing-impaired patient receives equal opportunity to benefit from the treatment"); Paulone v. City of Frederick, 787 F.Supp.2d 360, 385-86 (D. Md. 2011) ("According to the General Order, '[i]n many circumstances, oral communication supplemented by gestures and visual aids, an exchange of written notes, use of a computer or typewriter, or use of an assistive listening device may be effective.' However, it recognizes that, in other circumstances, ASL interpreters 'are needed to communicate effectively.' The General Order indicates that, the 'more lengthy, complex, and important the communication, the more likely it is that a qualified interpreter will be required for effective communication. . . .' By way of example, it suggests that written notes may be sufficient if 'a person is asking a deputy for [*50]  directions to a location,' but an interpreter may be necessary if "there has been an incident and the deputy is conducting witness interviews").
Scott asserts that the gestures he used during imaging sessions and adjustment of his IV were not an effective form of communication, as he did not understand what staff members were attempting to communicate to him.150 This testimony is sufficient to raise triable issues of fact as to whether requiring Scott to use gestures to communicate at these times complied with the ADA.151

e. Whether CMHS Violated the ADA By Failing to Provide an Interpreter to Explain the Informed Consent Paperwork Scott Was Required to Sign
Finally, Scott contends that CMHS did not provide a qualified interpreter on February 26, 2013, to explain the "complicated terminology" in his informed consent paperwork.152 CMHS counters that Scott was not entitled to the services of an interpreter, and that he made no request for any other form of auxiliary aid or accommodation.153
The regulations implementing the ADA define "qualified interpreter" as "an interpreter who, via a video remote interpreting (VRI) service or an on-site appearance, is able to interpret effectively, [*51]  accurately, and impartially, both receptively and expressively, using any necessary specialized vocabulary" to make "aurally delivered information available to individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing." 28 C.F.R. § 35.104.
Scott proffers no evidence, and does not appear to contend, that he was unable to understand "aurally delivered information" concerning his informed consent paperwork. Nor does he allege or adduce evidence that he asked CMHS staff questions about the paperwork, but was unable to communicate effectively and/or understand aural information they provided in response to his inquiries. Rather, he contends that he did not understand the meaning of words used in the paperwork. He cites no authority for the proposition that CMHS had an obligation to provide a qualified interpreter or other auxiliary aid where aural communication was not involved. Given that the ADA requires the provision of auxiliary aids to "mak[e] aurally delivered information available to individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing," and the uncontroverted fact that no aural communications took place respecting the informed consent paperwork, the court concludes that summary judgment in CMHS's favor is warranted to the [*52]  extent Scott's ADA claim is based on the Hospital's alleged failure to provide a qualified interpreter who could explain the informed consent paperwork to Scott.154 Because Scott does not allege that he requested an accommodation for anything other than a hearing disability, the Hospital did not violate the ADA by failing to provide an interpreter to help Scott comprehend the informed consent paperwork.155

4. Whether CMHS is Entitled to Summary Judgment on Plaintiff's ADA Claim Concerning His March 2014 and July 2014 Visits
CMHS contends it is entitled to summary judgment on Scott's ADA claim to the extent it is based on allegations that he was not provided with auxiliary aids and was prevented from communicating effectively during visits to the Hospital in March 2014 and July 2014.156 It asserts the undisputed evidence shows that Scott was given an appropriate auxiliary aid - VRI - during each stay and that any issues he experienced with the system did not prevent him from effectively communicating with CMHS staff.157 Scott does not address arguments concerning the 2014 hospitalizations in his opposition. Rather, he solely relies on CMHS's purported violations of the ADA during his February [*53]  2013 hospitalization.158 As a result, in its reply, CMHS argues that Scott has abandoned any claims based on purported violations occurring during Scott's subsequent hospitalizations.159 The court agrees.
The failure of a plaintiff to offer evidence or argument concerning a specific claim in opposition to a motion for summary judgment constitutes abandonment of the claim, and summary judgment is properly entered in the defendant's favor on the claim as a result. See, e.g., Ramirez v. City of Buena Park, 560 F.3d 1012, 1026 (9th Cir. 2009) ("Ramirez's complaint also alleges state law claims for false arrest/imprisonment, trespass to personal property, intentional infliction of emotional distress, negligence, and battery. In their Motion for Summary Judgment, the defendants argued that they were entitled to summary judgment on each [of] these claims. Ramirez did not address his state law claims in either his Motion for Partial Summary Judgment or in his Opposition to Defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment. Now on appeal, Ramirez argues that the district court erred when it granted the defendants [*54]  summary judgment on all of his state law claims. . . . [B]ecause Ramirez abandoned his state law claims by not addressing them in either his Motion for Partial Summary Judgment or his Opposition to Defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment, he waived his challenge to the district court's order. Therefore, we affirm the district court's grant of summary judgment to the defendants on Ramirez's state law claims"); id. ("'It is a general rule that a party cannot revisit theories that it raises but abandons at summary judgment.' 'A party abandons an issue when it has a full and fair opportunity to ventilate its views with respect to an issue and instead chooses a position that removes the issue from the case,'" citing Davis v. City of Las Vegas, 478 F.3d 1048, 1058 (9th Cir. 2007)); Shakur v. Schriro, 514 F.3d 878, 892 (9th Cir. 2008) (holding that a plaintiff "'abandoned . . . claims by not raising them in opposition to [defendant's] motion for summary judgment,'" quoting Jenkins v. City of Riverside, 398 F.3d 1093, 1095 n. 4 (9th Cir. 2005) (alteration original)); Bombard v. Fort Wayne Newspapers, Inc., 92 F.3d 560, 562 n. 2 (7th Cir. 1996) ("Bombard's complaint also alleged that FWN violated the Family and Medical Leave Act. . . . Bombard abandoned his FMLA claim after failing to respond to the FMLA arguments in the FWN's motion for summary judgment"); Resolution Trust Corp. v. Dunmar Corp., 43 F.3d 587, 599 (11th Cir. 1995) ("There is no burden upon the district court to distill every potential argument that could [*55]  be made based upon the materials before it on summary judgment. Rather, the onus is on the Parties to formulate arguments; grounds alleged in the complaint but not relied upon in summary judgment are deemed abandoned").160
Because Scott fails to respond to the arguments CMHS made concerning the adequacy of the auxiliary aids he received during his March 2014 and July 2014 visits, the court concludes he has abandoned his ADA claim to the extent it is based on issues that allegedly arose during those visits.161 The court therefore grants summary judgment in CMHS's favor on Scott's ADA claim to the extent premised on an alleged failure to provide auxiliary aids facilitating effective communication during his March 2014 and July 2014 visits.

C. Whether CMHS is Entitled to Summary Judgment on Plaintiff's Claims for Violation of the Rehabilitation Act, the Unruh Act, and the California Disabled Persons Act
In addition to his ADA claim, Scott pleads claims for violation of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 ("Rehabilitation Act"), 29 U.S.C. § 794 et seq.; California's Unruh Civil Rights Act ("Unruh Act"), California Civil Code § 51 et seq.; and the California Disabled Persons Act ("CDPA"), California Civil Code § 54 et seq.162 Because these claims are based on the [*56]  same allegations and evidence as Scott's ADA claim, CMHS contends it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law on these claims as well.163
When a plaintiff alleges a cause of action for violation of Title III of the ADA, as well as derivative claims for violation of the Rehabilitation Act, the Unruh Act, or the CDPA, courts treat the claims jointly since the showing required for each is the same. See, e.g., Antoninetti v. Chipotle Mexican Grill, Inc., 643 F.3d 1165, 1176 (9th Cir. 2010) ("The California Disabled Persons Act provides that a violation of an individual's rights under the [Americans with] Disabilities Act also constitutes a violation of the C[DPA]," citing Cal. Civ. Code § 54(c)); Molski v. M.J. Cable, Inc., 481 F.3d 724, 731 (9th Cir. 2007) ("In the disability context, California's Unruh Civil Rights Act operates virtually identically to the ADA. It states[:] All persons within the jurisdiction of this state are free and equal, and no matter what their sex, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, disability, medical condition, marital status, or sexual orientation are entitled to the full and equal accommodations, advantages, facilities, privileges, or services in all business establishments of every kind whatsoever. Cal. Civ. Code § 51(b). Any violation of the ADA necessarily constitutes a violation of the Unruh Act. § 51(f)"); Mershon v. St. Louis University, 442 F.3d 1069, 1076 n. 4 (8th Cir. 2006) ("While there are minor [*57]  differences between Title III of the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act, none of those differences [is] material in this case. We will therefore consider cases dealing with each Act as 'applicable and interchangeable,'" citing Stern v. University of Osteopathic Medicine and Health Services, 220 F.3d 906, 908 (8th Cir. 2000); Amir v. St. Louis University, 184 F.3d 1017, 1029 n. 5 (8th Cir. 1999) (noting that Rehabilitation Act claims are similar to ADA claims, except for the requirement in the Rehabilitation Act that a person's disability serve as the sole impetus for adverse action); Gorman v. Bartch, 152 F.3d 907, 912 (8th Cir. 1998) ("The ADA has no federal funding requirement, but it is otherwise similar in substance to the Rehabilitation Act, and cases interpreting either are applicable and interchangeable")).164
Thus, the court's analysis of Scott's ADA claim is equally applicable to his Rehabilitation Act, Unruh Act, and CDPA claims. Because Scott has raised triable issues of fact concerning the accommodations he received during his February 2013 hospitalization, he has also raised triable issues regarding each of his derivative claims to the extent based on that visit. He has, for reasons already stated, not raised triable issues of fact concerning the claims to the extent based on the March 2014 and July 2014 visits. Accordingly, the court denies CMHS's motion for summary judgment on Scott's Rehabilitation [*58]  Act, Unruh Act, and CDPA to the extent they are premised on the February 2013 visit.165 It grants summary judgment on the claims to the extent based on the March 2014 and July 2014 visits.

D. Whether CMHS is Entitled to Summary Judgment on Plaintiff's Claim for Violation of the CMIA
Finally, CMHS seeks summary judgment on Scott's claim for violation of California's Confidentiality of Medical Information Act ("CMIA"), California Civil Code § 56.10 et seq.166 CMHS argues that Scott has failed to adduce evidence that confidential medical information was disclosed to Walker and DeFazio without his authorization.167
"The Confidentiality of Medical Information Act prohibits health care providers and related entities from disclosing medical information regarding a patient without authorization except in certain specified circumstances." Regents of University of California v. Superior Court, 220 Cal.App.4th 549, 553 (2013). California Civil Code § 56.10 provides, in relevant part:
"A provider of health care, health care service plan, or contractor shall not disclose medical information regarding a patient of the provider of health care or an enrollee or subscriber of a health care service plan without first obtaining an authorization."
Cal. Civ. Code § 56.10(a).168
The CMIA provides a private right of action for any patient whose medical information has been disclosed in violation of Act. See Cal. Civ. Code § 56.35 ("In addition to any other remedies available [*59]  at law, a patient whose medical information has been used or disclosed in violation of Section 56.10 or 56.104 or 56.20 or subdivision (a) of Section 56.26 and who has sustained economic loss or personal injury therefrom may recover compensatory damages, punitive damages not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000), attorneys' fees not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000), and the costs of litigation"); see also Lara Urbina v. Carson, No. 1:07-CV-00153 OWW NEW (TAG), 2007 WL 2814652, *12 (E.D. Cal. Sept. 25, 2007) ("Cal. Civ. Code § 56.10, subdivision (a), provides: 'No provider of health care shall disclose medical information regarding a patient of the provider without first obtaining an authorization, except as provided in subdivision (b) or (c).' . . . Cal. Civ. Code § 56.35 provides: 'In addition to any other remedies available at law, a patient whose medical information has been used or disclosed in violation of Section 56.10 or 56.104 or 56.20 or subdivision (a) of Section 56.26 and who has sustained economic loss or personal injury therefrom may recover compensatory damages, punitive damages not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000), attorneys' fees not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000), and the costs of litigation'").
Scott contends that CMHS is liable because a nurse named Jaime' unlawfully disclosed his medical information to Karen Walker and Karen DeFazio when they visited the Hospital on February 23, 2013. CMHS counters that the undisputed evidence [*60]  shows it did not disclose Scott's medical information without his authorization.169 CMHS proffers the declarations of Bobbie McCaffrey, its Vice President of Patient Care Services and Chief Nursing Officer,170 and Jaime Prado, a registered nurse employed by CMHS at the Hospital.171
McCaffrey states that she has reviewed the nurse's notes of Scott's February 2013 hospitalization; these indicate that nurse Jaime Prado entered Scott's room a single time on February 23, 2013, at 4:48 p.m.172 She states that, despite Scott's contention to the contrary, the nursing records indicate that he did not have any visitors other than his wife on February 23, and was not given pain medication and was not asleep at the time his medical information was purportedly disclosed.173 She asserts that thereafter, a Health Facilities Evaluator employed by the California Department of Public Health visited the Hospital; this individual was investigating an anonymous complaint that an undisclosed patient's medical information was communicated to visitors in violation of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act ("HIPAA").174 The evaluator declined to disclose any identifying information concerning the complainant, [*61] 175 inspected the Hospital's patient rooms and equipment, reviewed how the Hospital maintained protected patient information, and interviewed Jaime Prado.176 McCaffrey states that the California Department of Health confirmed that it could not corroborate the anonymous complaint concerning an alleged HIPAA violation.177
Prado states that he visited Scott's room once on February 23, 2013, to administer pain medication at approximately 5:00 p.m.178 He states that he did not observe any visitors in the room and that he did not disclose Scott's medical information without prior authorization.179
Citing McCaffrey's and Prado's declarations, CMHS asserts there is no evidence raising triable issues of fact as to whether it disclosed Scott's confidential medical information. It states:
"Plaintiff alleges that Hospital personnel or his doctors disclosed certain of his medical information to two friends who visited him. But Plaintiff was not present when this alleged disclosure occurred, and has no first-hand information about the alleged exchange. Plaintiff has no information, for example, that it was not simply unprotected information about his general condition. He only assumes that the information [*62]  disclosed was private. Nor does Plaintiff know the context in which the information was disclosed. Therefore, Plaintiff will be unable to present any actual evidence that private medical information was actually disclosed, or that the disclosure was improper and in violation of the Civil Code."180
Scott proffers the declarations of DeFazio and Walker, each of whom dispute CMHS's assertion that it did not disclose Scott's medical information.181 DeFazio states that she and Walker visited Scott while he was hospitalized in February 2013.182 She asserts that, while she was there, a nurse named Jaime came into Scott's room to administer medication.183 DeFazio contends that, after giving Scott the medication, the nurse allowed her to view Scott's x-ray and CT scans, and said medical personnel suspected that an intestinal blockage was the cause of his hospitalization.184 Walker confirms these statements. She reports that she and DeFazio visited Scott on February 23, 2013, between 1:00 p.m. and 3:00 p.m., and that during that time, a nurse named Jaime came into the room to administer Scott's pain medication.185 She asserts that, without first verifying her identity or DeFazio's, or asking Scott for authorization, [*63]  the nurse told them what medications Scott was taking and why they had been prescribed.186 Walker states asserts that the nurse explained, inter alia, what fluids Scott was being given, what tests were being conducted, and what the results of the tests were, and also showed Walker and DeFazio Scott's lab tests.187
Although CMHS argues that DeFazio's and Walker's sworn declarations are "unequivocally false,"188 it is not the court's role at the summary judgment stage to weigh conflicting evidence, nor to make findings of fact; rather, it is the court's duty to consider whether the parties have proffered sufficient evidence to raise triable issues of fact that a jury must resolve by weighing credibility. See, e.g., Aloe Vera of America, Inc. v. United States, 699 F.3d 1153, 1165 (9th Cir. 2012) ("In deciding whether to grant summary judgment, 'the judge's function is not himself to weigh the evidence and determine the truth of the matter but to determine whether there is a genuine issue for trial.' 'Credibility determinations, the weigh of the evidence, and the drawing of legitimate inferences from the facts are jury functions, not those of a judge,'" quoting Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249); Freeman v. City of Fresno, No. 1:05-CV-0328 OWW SMS, 2007 WL 1345440, *3 (E.D. Cal. May 8, 2007) ("A court's role on summary judgment is not to weigh evidence or resolve issues; rather it is to determine [*64]  whether there is a genuine issue for trial");United States v. Bell, 27 F.Supp.2d 1191, 1194 (E.D. Cal. 1998) ("'[T]he evidence of the non-movant is to be believed, and all justifiable inferences are to be drawn in its favor.' A court's role on summary judgment, however, is not to weigh the evidence, i.e., issue resolution, but rather to find genuine factual issues," citing Abdul-Jabbar v. General Motors Corp., 85 F.3d 407, 410 (9th Cir. 1996)).
Based on the record, the court must conclude that Scott has adduced sufficient evidence to raise triable issues of fact concerning his CMIA claim. Although CMHS asserts that Scott has not proffered evidence of when the alleged disclosure took place or the types of medical information that was purportedly disclosed, both DeFazio and Walker state that, on February 23, 2013, a nurse revealed, inter alia, information concerning Scott's medication and dosages, his lab test results, his diagnosis, and his x-ray and CT scans, without receiving Scott's authorization to do so.189 Based on this evidence, a reasonable juror could conclude that CMHS disclosed Scott's "medical information . . . without first obtaining an authorization [from Scott]," Cal. Civ. Code § 56.10(a). The court reaches this conclusion notwithstanding the declarations proffered by CMHS, because, as noted, weighing the evidence and determining [*65]  credibility is the role of the jury. See Hudson v. Sherwood Securities Corp., No. C-86-20344 WAI, 1993 WL 165645, *2 (N.D. Cal. May 14, 1993) ("In considering a motion for summary judgment, the court must determine whether there exists any 'genuine issue as to any material fact' and whether 'the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.' In assessing these essential issues, the court must view the evidence presented on the motion in the light most favorable to the opposing party. The court's role is not to weigh the evidence nor to determine its truth. These are roles for the jury. Accordingly, competent, detailed testimony by one declarant may give rise to a genuine, material and factual dispute, even though it is opposed by numerous declarations to the contrary," citing United States v. One Parcel of Real Property, 904 F.2d 487, 491-92 (9th Cir. 1990)); see also Lemnitzer v. Philippine Airlines, Inc., 52 F.3d 333,1995 WL 230404, *3 (9th Cir. Apr. 18, 1995) (Unpub. Disp.) ("[T]he Appellants offered declarations indicating that they understood the 'bumping' provision applied to them, and that they relied upon it. Appellants also offered general declarations by other PAL managers stating that the 'bumping' provision applied to all employees. PAL countered with declarations by numerous managers that such a provision did not apply to managers. These conflicting declarations create a triable issue of fact regarding whether Appellants reasonably [*66]  relied on section 26.01"); United States v. Seidel, No. C 07-4128 JF (RS), 2008 WL 3822904, *6 (N.D. Cal. Aug. 13, 2008) ("The United States asserts that the August 14, 1996 letter from Penrod to Seidel met the sixty-day preliminary notice requirement. The United States submits Penrod's declaration and a copy of the letter as proof that the letter was sent. Seidel asserts that he did not receive the letter, submitting his own declaration in support. Seidel suggests that Penrod created the letter after the fact, noting that the letter was written on ordinary bond paper rather than IRS stationary, and that there is no evidence that it actually was sent other than Pe[nr]od's word. Given this conflicting evidence, the Court concludes that a triable issue of material fact exists as to whether the August 14 letter was sent or received").
The court thus denies CMHS's motion for summary judgment on Scott's CMIA claim. For the same reason that summary judgment in CMHS's favor cannot be entered, it likewise cannot be entered in Scott's favor. A reasonable juror could, based on the evidence proffered by CMHS, accept McCaffrey's and Prado's testimony rather than DeFazio's and Walker's, and conclude that CMHS did not disclose Scott's confidential medical information in violation of the CMIA. The court [*67]  thus declines to enter summary judgment on the claim sua sponte in Scott's favor.

III. CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated, the court grants in part and denies in part CMHS's motion for summary judgment. Summary judgment is granted in CMHS's favor on Scott's ADA, Rehabilitation Act, Unruh Act, and CDPA claims to the extent they are based on CMHS's purported failure to provide Scott with a certified interpreter during his February 2013 hospitalization to explain Scott's informed consent paperwork to him. The court also grants CMHS's motion for summary judgment on Scott's ADA and derivative state claims to the extent they are based on conduct during Scott's hospitalizations subsequent to February 2013. The court denies CMHS's motion for summary judgment on Scott's ADA, Rehabilitation Act, Unruh Act, and CDPA claims to the extent based on his February 2013 hospitalization, and further denies its motion for summary judgment on Scott's CMIA claim. The court denies Scott's request for summary judgment on each of his claims.
DATED: February 27, 2015
/s/ Margaret M. Morrow
MARGARET M. MORROW
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

