Simpson v. Hospira, Inc.
United States District Court for the District of Kansas
September 17, 2009, Decided; September 17, 2009, Filed
CIVIL ACTION No. 08-1220-MLB

Reporter
2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 150188 *
DAWN SIMPSON, Plaintiff, v. HOSPIRA, INC., Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Dawn Simpson, PLAINTIFF: Ryan M Peck, Morris Laing Evans Brock & Kennedy CHTD--Wichita, Wichita, KS; John W Johnson, Morris Laing Evans Brock & Kennedy CHTD--Wichita, Wichita, KS.
For Hospira Inc, DEFENDANT: Jill A Morris, Michael L Matula, Stacy Murrow Bunck Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart PC-KC, Kansas City, MO; Carey L Bartell, Howard & Howard PLLC-Bloomfield, Bloomfield Hills, MI.
Judges: Monti L. Belot, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: Monti L. Belot
Opinion



MEMORANDUM AND ORDER
Plaintiff, Dawn Simpson, makes claims against her former employer, Hospira, Inc., under the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq. Plaintiff claims defendant terminated her due to her perceived disability (cognitive and visual defects).1 Plaintiff further claims that defendant failed to provide her with reasonable accommodations to perform her job and then retaliated against her for exercising her ADA rights. Defendant denies each of plaintiff's claims.
This case comes before the court on defendant's motion for summary judgment. (Doc. 76). The motion has been fully briefed and is ripe for decision. (Docs. 77, 81, 93). Defendant's motion is granted in part and denied in part for the reasons herein.

I. Facts 2
From 1976 until September 20, 2007, plaintiff was employed at one of defendant's manufacturing facilities in McPherson, Kansas. Defendant manufactures pharmaceuticals for use in hospitals and other critical-care settings. Prior to her termination, plaintiff held the position of Batch Release Supervisor (BRS). Plaintiff's position required her to insure that the drugs in her batch complied with all current Good Manufacturing Practices (cGMP), the documentation was complete and accurate and that the drugs were safe to be released. Plaintiff was also responsible for her department, including (1) supervising thirteen employees; (2) tracking the number of batches reviewed; (3) monitoring errors; and (4) answering questions from batch release coordinators. Plaintiff endeavors to nit-pick defendant's description of her duties but the clear, undisputed evidence is that plaintiff's BRS job required special training, experience, individual judgment and personal responsibility.

2006
During 2005 and part of 2006, plaintiff had taken intermittent medical leave totaling approximately six months. On February 14, 2006, plaintiff suffered an occipital stroke. Defendant granted plaintiff [*3]  fourteen weeks of medical leave at full pay and held her position open.
On May 22, Dr. Overholt, plaintiff's physician, released plaintiff to work on a part-time basis. Defendant allowed plaintiff to return with the expectation that she would return to her full-time position at a later date.3 Plaintiff began working on May 22 and was required to complete training on all updated procedures before she could resume her regular job responsibilities. Plaintiff did not finish the training during her first week back at work. Lisa Thimmesch, plaintiff's supervisor, spoke daily with plaintiff about finishing the training in order for plaintiff to be able to train her subordinates. Around May 30, plaintiff tearfully explained to Thimmesch that it was taking her longer to perform her duties because she needed a different prescription for her glasses due to the fluorescent lighting.
Thimmesch was concerned about plaintiff's ability to perform her job, which required constant thinking, multi-tasking, decision-making and awareness of the safety impact on patients who use defendant's products. On June 1, Thimmesch wrote an email to Charlotte Pinkall, the human resources manager, which stated that Lori [*4]  Whitehill, defendant's staff RN, was going to write a letter to Dr. Overholt regarding plaintiff's limitations and seek "long term paperwork" for plaintiff. (Doc. 81, exh. Y). On June 5, defendant faxed a letter to Dr. Overholt which stated that plaintiff was having difficulties at work and sought Dr. Overholt's opinion on plaintiff's ability to perform her job. On June 7, Dr. Overholt responded to defendant's request and recommended cognitive testing with Dr. Sachdev, a neurologist, and informed defendant that plaintiff would be unable to work for a minimum of two weeks. (Doc. 77, exh. 4 ¶ 8). On June 30, Dr. Overholt discovered potential arterial-venous defects on plaintiff's MRI. Dr. Overholt faxed another note to defendant which described the new "problem" and recommended no work until July 10. (Doc. 77, exh. 4 ¶ 9).
On June 26, defendant posted an opening for plaintiff's BRS position. When plaintiff learned about the notice, she complained, but defendant declined to withdraw the notice.
On July 6, plaintiff called Nurse Whitehill to inform her that Dr. Overholt released her to work with no restrictions. Whitehill emailed Pinkall to inform her of plaintiff's call. Defendant had not [*5]  received such a release from Dr. Overholt and Pinkall responded to Whitehill with the following:
Lori - contact the physician's office and ask them if this information is true and ask them for an explination as to the contraditions we have been getting that she is worse, but now is released to work? Which doctor is this anyway - the same that restricted her from working or a different one? Let Dawn know that we cannot allow her to return to work until we have an explination of these contradictions. . . . I want all her medical information reviewed by the corporate doctor before we consider bringing her back to work. . . . in case we are required to bring her back, be prepared with specific expectations for her and a follow up plan.
(Doc. 81, exh. CC)(sic throughout).
On July 10, defendant received a note dated July 6 from Dr. Overholt which stated that plaintiff "may try full days starting Monday 7-10-06 [I still recommend the testing Dr. Sachev is setting up]." (Doc. 77, exh. 4)(brackets in original). The note also stated that Dr. Overholt was "encouraging Dawn to try going back to work."4
Instead of allowing plaintiff to return to work on July 10, defendant submitted plaintiff's medical [*6]  information to Dr. Janet Collins for review. Dr. Collins, a physician certified in occupational medicine, reviewed the medical records and opined that she would recommend testing in areas of cognitive functioning and visual acuity prior to plaintiff's return to work. Dr. Collins did not opine on plaintiff's ability to perform her position because she did not have enough information to make that determination. (Collins Depo. at 53).
On July 17, Dr. Overholt responded to questions posed by defendant regarding plaintiff's abilities. Dr. Overholt stated that she believed plaintiff was capable of performing her position safely and effectively.
On July 28, plaintiff underwent neuropsychological testing at Prairie View which was set up by Drs. Overholt and Sachdev.5 (Overholt Depo. at 35). Dr. Kathy Pearce, a psychologist at Prairie View, explained that the results of the testing showed that plaintiff "exhibited deficits in her ability to process visual information in an organized, meaningful manner. She also demonstrated deficits in her tracking/sequencing skills, mental processing speed, attention/concentration, verbal fluency, constructional abilities, and attention to visual details." (Doc. [*7]  77, exh. 12). Dr. Pearce concluded that plaintiff's "employer will need to determine whether or not she is capable of performing her specific job duties given the nature of her deficits, as well as her strengths. If not, she may be able to perform different job duties that do not require considerable attention/concentration, mental processing speed, visual processing, tracking/sequencing skills, or verbal fluency. It is also possible that Dawn may need to apply for long-term disability benefits." (Id.)
After reviewing the test results and conferring with legal counsel, defendant concluded that plaintiff was not able to perform her job and decided to fill the position. On August 3, Pinkall and plaintiff discussed alternatives for plaintiff, which included longterm disability, retirement or reassignment. Pinkall identified three reassigned jobs for which plaintiff could be considered but plaintiff was required to submit a certification from her health care provider6 which confirmed that she could perform the positions with or without reasonable accommodation. Pinkall informed plaintiff that if she took long-term disability she would be considered for future employment as an "internal candidate" [*8]  if she was able to return to work. As an "internal candidate," plaintiff would not have been subject to defendant's rehire policy. See Section C, infra. Plaintiff claims that she requested defendant to accommodate her in the BRS position by placing her on probation, testing her on job performance or checking her work. Defendant did not grant those requests. Additionally, plaintiff sought additional time to confer with Dr. Ababio, her psychiatrist.
Plaintiff met with Dr. Ababio on August 7 and he administered a "mini mental status exam." (Doc. 81, exh. N). Dr. Ababio also reviewed the results of Dr. Pearce's report. Plaintiff scored a "27 out of a possible 30" and Dr. Ababio concluded that her mental cognition was intact. The "test" consisted of eleven items. Plaintiff was required to answer questions regarding the year, day, month, country, office, etc. Plaintiff was then asked to repeat words, spell one word backwards, follow a command, write one complete sentence and reproduce a drawing of a symbol.7 Plaintiff claims that she requested Pinkall to contact Dr. Ababio but Pinkall "refused."8
On August 13, defendant initiated the application process with the long-term disability provider. [*9]  On August 18, plaintiff asked to be considered for the pharmaceutical group leader, pharmaceutical assistant and pharmaceutical attendant positions, the positions mentioned by Pinkall on August 3. Pinkall again told plaintiff that she must submit a certification from her health care provider for consideration for those positions. Plaintiff did not do so.
On September 7, plaintiff filed a charge of discrimination with the KHRC and EEOC. On September 8, defendant sent requests to Drs. Sachdev, Rettig (plaintiff's opthamalogist) and Pearce, in which it sought their opinions on plaintiff's ability to perform the job of pharmaceutical assistant. On September 11, defendant received notice of plaintiff's charge. On September 12, Dr. Sachdev stated that plaintiff needed to be evaluated by an eye doctor to determine her concentration and focus. On October 11, Dr. Pearce responded that plaintiff could not perform the position based on the prior testing. The record is unclear whether Dr. Rettig responded but the court will assume that her July opinion that plaintiff was able to return to work had not changed.

2007
On September 20, 2007, defendant administratively terminated plaintiff's employment. [*10]  (Defendant's leave policy provides that separation from employment will occur after twelve months of continuous medical leave.)

2008
On April 15, 2008, plaintiff submitted a report completed by Dr. Ababio to Standard Insurance, her disability benefits provider, which stated that plaintiff was able to return to work. As a result, Standard terminated her disability insurance on July 9, 2008. Plaintiff filed this case on July 23, 2008.
In August 2008, plaintiff applied for employment with defendant as a production supervisor. Plaintiff had performed this position prior to her promotion to BRS. Defendant's policy states that an employee may be rehired under certain circumstances, e.g. if there is a benefit to the company. Pinkall reviewed plaintiff's application and performance reviews and ultimately determined that plaintiff would not be rehired because it would not be to the companies' benefit. Plaintiff was informed of defendant's decision on September 11, 2008.

II. Summary Judgment Standards
The rules applicable to the resolution of this case, now at the summary judgment stage, are well-known and are only briefly outlined here. Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56(c) directs the entry of summary judgment in favor of a party [*11]  who "show[s] that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). An issue is "genuine" if sufficient evidence exists so that a rational trier of fact could resolve the issue either way and an issue is "material" if under the substantive law it is essential to the proper disposition of the claim. Adamson v. Multi Community Diversified Svcs., Inc., 514 F.3d 1136, 1145 (10th Cir. 2008). When confronted with a fully briefed motion for summary judgment, the court must ultimately determine "whether there is the need for a trial—whether, in other words, there are any genuine factual issues that properly can be resolved only by a finder of fact because they may reasonably be resolved in favor of either party." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 250, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). If so, the court cannot grant summary judgment. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-23, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986).

III. Analysis

A. Perceived Disability Discrimination
The ADA prohibits an employer from discriminating against a qualified individual with a disability. 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). The "analytical framework" first pronounced in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973), applies to causes of action under the ADA. MacKenzie v. City and County of Denver, 414 F.3d 1266, 1274 (10th Cir. 2005). Because plaintiff presents no direct evidence of discrimination but instead relies on indirect evidence, she has the initial burden of establishing a prima facie case of disability discrimination. See [*12]  McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802. If plaintiff does so, then defendant must "articulate some legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason" for the challenged personnel action. Id. Plaintiff then bears the ultimate burden of demonstrating that defendant's stated reason is a pretext for unlawful discrimination and, therefore, unworthy of belief. See id. at 804.
In order to make a prima facie case of discrimination, plaintiff must show: 1) she is a disabled person as defined by the ADA; 2) she is able to perform the essential functions of her job, with or without accommodation; and 3) defendant discriminated against her because of her disability. MacKenzie, 414 F.3d at 1274. The term "disability" is defined by section 12102(2) of the ADA as: 1) "a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such individual"; 2) "a record of such an impairment"; or 3) "being regarded as having such an impairment." Plaintiff disavows any disability under definitions 1) and 2) and asserts that she meets the third definition.
A person is regarded as disabled when "(1) a covered entity mistakenly believes that a person has a physical impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, or (2) a covered entity mistakenly believes [*13]  that an actual, nonlimiting impairment substantially limits one or more major life activities." Justice v. Crown Cork and Seal Co., Inc., 527 F.3d 1080, 1086 (10th Cir. 2008). Plaintiff asserts that defendant perceived that she was substantially limited in the major life activity of working. "An employee is perceived as substantially limited in working when the employer believes the employee is unable to perform either a class of jobs or a broad range of jobs in various classes." Lanman v. Johnson County, Kansas, 393 F.3d 1151, 1157 (10th Cir. 2004)(internal citation and quotation omitted). The applicable EEOC regulation provides:
With respect to the major life activity of working-(i) The term substantially limits means significantly restricted in the ability to perform either a class of jobs or a broad range of jobs in various classes as compared to the average person having comparable training, skills and abilities. The inability to perform a single, particular job does not constitute a substantial limitation in the major life activity of working.
29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(3)(i).
"Where the recognition of Plaintiff's limitations is not an erroneous perception, but is instead a recognition of fact, a finding that Plaintiff was regarded as disabled is inappropriate." Lusk v. Ryder Integrated Logistics, 238 F.3d 1237, 1241-42 (10th Cir. 2001).
Defendant asserts that plaintiff's claim must fail because it did not regard plaintiff as having [*14]  an impairment that was nonlimiting but instead relied on medical records from her cognitive testing to conclude that she could not perform her BRS job. In response, plaintiff points to Dr. Overholt's July 17 opinion as an indication that she could perform her BRS job. Plaintiff also relies on Dr. Ababio's "opinion" that she could perform the duties of her position, but she does not provide evidence that defendant actually received or otherwise was aware of Dr. Ababio's opinion prior to August 3, 2006.
Plaintiff relies almost exclusively on Justice v. Crown Cork and Seal Co., Inc., 527 F.3d 1080, 1088 (10th Cir. 2008), in support of her position that defendant perceived her as substantially limited in her ability to work. (Doc. 81 at 19-25). Judge Briscoe, writing for the panel, noted that it is particularly difficult for a plaintiff to prevail on this type of claim which "takes a plaintiff to the farthest reaches of the ADA." Justice, 527 F.3d at 1087 (internal citations and quotations omitted).
In Justice, the plaintiff worked for Crown as an electrician for ten years prior to a stroke. After his stroke, Justice walked with an unstable gait. Justice was released to return to work with a restriction to refrain from working on ladders or scaffolding because of his impaired balance. He [*15]  worked for more than two years with no issues. After Crown's employees went on strike, Crown initially refused to allow Justice to return to work because of his restrictions. The union filed a grievance and Justice returned to work in March 2002, but subject to restrictions regarding working at heights. Between March 2002 and February 2003, Justice was the subject of several evaluations, all of which concluded, in one manner or another, that Justice was restricted from working at heights, near moving machinery or where balance was involved. Then, in February 2003, Crown informed Justice that he was disqualified from working at any job which required him to be around machinery or at heights. When asked what job he felt he could do around the plant, Justice replied "any job" and, in fact, he was qualified to do any job. Justice, 527 F.3d at 1085. Nevertheless, Crown made Justice a janitor at a much lower salary. Justice filed an ADA suit claiming, as plaintiff does here, that Crown regarded him as having a substantially limiting impairment.
Crown moved for and was granted summary judgment. Apparently Crown claimed, and the district court accepted, that it only believed that Justice was unable to do electrician's [*16]  work in Crown's plant but could "work as an electrician in other environments." Justice, 527 F.3d at 1087. Judge Briscoe pointed to other evidence in the record which suggested that Crown "at least initially believed that Justice's balance and vertigo problems could disqualify him from employment as an electrician in general - or, for that matter, from any employment where he might have to work with high voltages or electrical current . . . in any environment." Id. Judge Briscoe also observed that to the extent medical and other records restricted Justice, all pertained to balance problems. None, however, supported a belief by Crown that balance problems posed a threat when Justice was working around electricity. In the end, Judge Briscoe concluded that Justice had presented sufficient evidence to support an inference that Crown mistakenly believed Justice was substantially limited in the major life activity of working in either a "class of jobs" or a "broad range of jobs in various classes." Id. at 1088. Judge Briscoe wrote:
For this reason, we distinguish the present case from the Supreme Court's decision in Murphy v. United Parcel Service, Inc., 527 U.S. 516, 524, 119 S. Ct. 2133, 144 L. Ed.2d 484 (1999), which held that an employer's belief that the plaintiff is incapable of performing a particular job only under [*17]  certain conditions does not show that the employer believed the plaintiff to be incapable of performing an entire class of jobs.
Id. at 1087. The district court's order of summary judgment was reversed.
In this case, defendant did not initially restrict plaintiff from working. Plaintiff was allowed to return to work on a part-time basis in accordance with Dr. Overholt's instructions. Upon her return, however, plaintiff admitted that she was unable to perform her BRS job due to vision problems. Dr. Overholt then completely restricted plaintiff from working and recommended cognitive testing. Defendant became concerned about plaintiff's performance based on her short time back at work and the recommendations of cognitive testing. Dr. Overholt's seeming about-face on July 10 provided further concern because the note stated that plaintiff could "try" to return to work but that Dr. Overholt still recommended the testing; hardly an unqualified statement. Due to the nature of plaintiff's BRS position, defendant wanted to wait until the testing was performed. After receiving the results of the testing, defendant determined that plaintiff would be unable to perform her BRS position. Plaintiff has not produced [*18]  evidence that defendant's belief as to her ability to do the BRS job was mistaken, which is clearly required under either method of proving a "regarded as" claim. The undisputed evidence is that the evidence available to defendant may have been somewhat conflicting, but plaintiff has not provided authority that an employer's decision based on conflicting evidence is the equivalent of a mistaken belief.9
Defendant informed plaintiff of its decision on August 3 and stated that it would consider her for different positions if she was able to provide documentation that she could perform the jobs. Unlike the plaintiff in Justice, plaintiff has not even attempted to establish that defendant believed on August 3 that plaintiff could not perform a class of jobs or a broad range of jobs in various classes. Plaintiff does not provide any evidence of defendant's beliefs and instead makes the unsupported statement that defendant's actions in initiating the long-term disability benefits "meant that she remained incapable of performing any jobs at the McPherson plant." (Doc. 81 at 25). The fact that defendant recommended that plaintiff apply for disability insurance does not support a finding [*19]  that defendant believed plaintiff could not perform a class of jobs or a broad range of jobs in various classes. See Ruggles v. Keebler Co., 224 F. Supp.2d 1295, 1302 (D. Kan. 2002). "The standards for receiving disability insurance are different from the standards for being 'disabled' under the ADA." Id.
The evidence in this case is that defendant was concerned about plaintiff's cognitive functioning to perform her BRS position because of the safety implications to the customers who are provided with defendant's products. Plaintiff's BRS position was the final check for batches of injectables used in hospitals and critical care centers. Clearly, defendant had justification for wanting to insure that plaintiff was fully capable of performing her BRS position. The evidence shows that defendant's concerns were focused on the sensitive nature of the product produced by defendant and not that defendant believed that plaintiff was completely unable to perform other types of jobs due to her limitations. On the contrary, the undisputed evidence is that plaintiff showed no interest in the other jobs Pinkall suggested. Plaintiff failed to take any initiative in applying for those jobs and submitting a physician's certification.
Therefore, plaintiff has failed [*20]  to meet her burden to establish that she was disabled as defined by the ADA.

B. Reasonable Accommodation
Plaintiff further claims that she "is entitled to recover under the ADA because defendant refused to make reasonable accommodations for her perceived disability or even engage in the interactive process." (Pretrial Order at 18).
Plaintiff asserts that defendant should have accommodated her BRS job by implementing a probationary period, providing job-related testing or having a co-worker check or verify her work. In order to succeed on this claim, plaintiff must establish "(1) that [she] was an individual who had a disability within the meaning of the statute; (2) that the [employer] had notice of [her] disability; (3) that with reasonable accommodation [she] could perform the essential functions of the position . . . .; and (4) that the [employer] refused to make such accommodations." Spielman v. Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Kansas, Inc., 33 Fed. Appx. 439, 2002 WL 524549, 4 (10th Cir. 2002)(quoting Rhoads v. F.D.I.C., 257 F.3d 373, 387 n. 11 (4th Cir. 2001)); Jewell v. Blue Valley Unified School Dist. No. 229, 210 F. Supp.2d 1241, 1247 (D. Kan. 2002); see also Selenke v. Medical Imaging of Colo., 248 F.3d 1249, 1261-63 (10th Cir. 2001) (discussing failure-to-accommodate claim)).
Plaintiff has failed to establish the required elements. While a plaintiff with a perceived disability can meet the first element of a failure to accommodate claim, Kelly v. Metallics West, Inc., 410 F.3d 670, 676 (10th Cir. 2005), the court has determined, supra, that plaintiff does not have a perceived [*21]  disability as that term is defined under the ADA.
Plaintiff has also failed to put forth any evidence that she could perform her BRS job with the accommodations that she had "requested." First, plaintiff requested a probationary period. Plaintiff does not provide any details about the period that she requested. Moreover, the only evidence regarding her ability to perform her BRS job after her termination is Dr. Ababio's opinion in April 2008. Clearly, prior to this time, there were conflicting opinions regarding plaintiff's ability to perform the BRS job. Therefore, plaintiff has not identified any opinion that would support the conclusion that the probationary period would have been a successful accommodation and that she would have been able to perform the BRS job.
Second, plaintiff states that she should have been tested. Plaintiff's brief states that it was a test "she created." (Doc. 81 at 27). An affidavit by Thimmesch states that the test was one which tested whether an employee could identify procedural errors in the manufacturing batch records. (Doc. 93, exh. 26). Thimmesch testified that this test only covered a portion of the BRS job's essential duties (Doc. 93, exh. 26) and [*22]  that there was no test which would have covered all of the essential duties of the BRS job. (Doc. 77, exh. 21). Plaintiff has not provided any facts regarding the test she created to controvert Thimmesch's testimony that there is no test which covers all duties of a BRS.
Finally, plaintiff requested that another employee oversee her work. Plaintiff suggests that a certain employee had plenty of free time. Plaintiff, however, has not provided any evidence that there were or are employees sitting around and available to oversee her work. In support of her position, plaintiff is apparently relying on email communications between Pinkall and Thimmesch which occurred on July 18. (Doc. 81, exh. Q). Those communications were done in anticipation of plaintiff returning to work after the cognitive testing. The email states that Thimmesch would not have plaintiff review batch records for a few weeks but she would train personnel and make table changes with another person verifying. (Doc. 81, exh. Q). Plaintiff asserts that this is evidence that defendant was willing to make accommodations. The problem with this argument is that the email exchanges occurred prior to the results of the cognitive [*23]  testing. The emails stated that plaintiff would not return to work until after the results of the testing had been reviewed. Clearly, after the results were reviewed, defendant was not willing to place plaintiff in the BRS job due to plaintiff's limited cognitive functioning.
The court finds that plaintiff has failed to put forth evidence to support a claim for failure to accommodate. Defendant's motion for summary judgment on that claim is therefore granted.

C. Retaliation
Finally, plaintiff asserts a claim of retaliation against defendant. Plaintiff claims that defendant refused to rehire her in retaliation for protected activity under the ADA. In order to establish a claim for retaliation under the ADA, plaintiff must show (1) that she engaged in an activity protected by the statute; (2) that she was subjected to an adverse employment action subsequent to or contemporaneous with the protected activity; and (3) that there was a causal connection between the protected activity and the adverse action. Selenke v. Medical Imaging of Colo., 248 F.3d 1249, 1264 (10th Cir. 2001).
The first element requires that plaintiff participated in a protected activity. The filing of an ADA lawsuit is a protected activity. Plaintiff filed this lawsuit on July 23, 2008. Plaintiff [*24]  then applied for employment as a Production Supervisor on August 8. Plaintiff was informed on September 11 that her application would not be considered. So, less than 2 months elapsed between filing of suit and plaintiff's rejection. The Tenth Circuit liberally defines the phrase "adverse employment action." Anderson v. Coors Brewing Co., 181 F.3d 1171, 1178 (10th Cir. 1999). The court is to "take a case-by-case approach in determining whether a given employment action is "adverse." Id. The court finds, for purposes of summary judgment only, that plaintiff has satisfied the first two elements of a retaliation claim and defendant agrees. (Doc. 77 at 27). The court must now consider whether plaintiff has established a causal connection between the protected activity and adverse action.
"A causal connection may be shown by evidence of circumstances that justify an inference of retaliatory motive, such as protected conduct closely followed by adverse action." O'Neal v. Ferguson Constr. Co., 237 F.3d 1248, 1253 (10th Cir. 2001). "Unless there is very close temporal proximity between the protected activity and the retaliatory conduct, the plaintiff must offer additional evidence to establish causation." Id. The Tenth Circuit has "held that a one and one-half month period between protected activity and adverse action may, [*25]  by itself, establish causation. By contrast, [it has] held that a three-month period, standing alone, is insufficient to establish causation." Anderson, 181 F.3d at 1179 (citations omitted). Based on the close temporal proximity of plaintiff's filing this lawsuit and defendant's refusal to consider her application, the court is compelled to find that plaintiff has satisfied her burden of establishing causation.
The burden then shifts to defendant to demonstrate a legitimate non-discriminatory reason for its actions. Defendant has asserted that it did not rehire plaintiff because of its policy that the company does not rehire past employees, which as follows:
GENERAL POLICY
It is Hospira's general practice to not rehire former employees. This practice reflects our appreciation for those employees who are dedicated and remain committed to Hospira throughout their careers.
There must be a significant benefit to Hospira to consider rehiring an employee who has left the Company.
When former employees are considered for rehire, a thorough review and the following approvals are required.
REVIEW
Former employees who terminated and were rated "Eligible for Rehire" at the time of termination may be considered for rehire subject [*26]  to review of the following factors.
A. Significant benefit to Hospira resulting from the rehire.
B. The possible negative impact of rehire on peers and work associates.
C. Evidence that qualified employees are not available to fill the position.
D. Circumstances of original termination, and subsequent employment history including references.
E. Completion of satisfactory internal referencing to confirm good performance during prior Hospira employment.
F. Position and pay at the time of termination versus prospective position and pay.
APPROVAL
All rehire proposals must be reviewed and approved jointly by the Human Resources Manager of the client area and the Corporate Employee Relations Programs Office. In case of disagreement, the Corporate Vice President, Global Human Resources, will determine a resolution.
In all cases, reviews and approvals should be complete before interview or other substantive contact with the former employee/applicant.
(Doc. 77, exh. 1 at attach. C).
Plaintiff asserts that defendant's reason of not hiring plaintiff was pretext for discrimination because Pinkall admittedly did not fully consider each of the factors but instead stopped at factor A. Defendant responds with [*27]  numerous reasons for its decision which it believes are legitimate. No purpose will be served in detailing the reasons. The court is satisfied that there are disputed issues of material fact pertaining to plaintiff's 2008 application and defendant's decision to reject the application which preclude summary judgment on plaintiff's retaliation claim.

IV. Conclusion
Defendant's motion for summary judgment is granted in part and denied in part. (Doc. 76). The clerk is ordered to set this case for trial.
A motion for reconsideration of this order pursuant to this court's Rule 7.3 is not encouraged. The standards governing motions to reconsider are well established. A motion to reconsider is appropriate where the court has obviously misapprehended a party's position or the facts or applicable law, or where the party produces new evidence that could not have been obtained through the exercise of reasonable diligence. Revisiting the issues already addressed is not the purpose of a motion to reconsider and advancing new arguments or supporting facts which were otherwise available for presentation when the original motion was briefed or argued is inappropriate. Comeau v. Rupp, 810 F. Supp. 1172 (D. Kan. 1992).
Any such motion shall not exceed five pages [*28]  and shall strictly comply with the standards enunciated by this court in Comeau v. Rupp. The response to any motion for reconsideration shall not exceed three pages. No reply shall be filed.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
Dated this 17th day of September 2009, at Wichita, Kansas.
/s/ Monti Belot
Monti L. Belot
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

