Stoj v. New Britain Bd. of Educ.
United States District Court for the District of Connecticut
July 14, 2011, Decided
3:09-cv-78 (CFD)

Reporter
2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 75979 *
CHRISTINE STOJ, Plaintiff, v. NEW BRITAIN BOARD OF EDUCATION A/K/A CONSOLIDATED SCHOOL DISTRICT OF NEW BRITAIN, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Christine Stoj, Plaintiff: Eugene N. Axelrod, LEAD ATTORNEY, Axelrod & Associates, LLC., Woodbridge, CT; Robert T. Moller, LEAD ATTORNEY, Axelrod & Associates, LLC-CT, Woodbrige, CT.
For New Britian Bd of Ed, Defendant: Irena Jadwiga Urbaniak, LEAD ATTORNEY, Corporation Counsel's Office, City of New Britain, New Britain, CT.
Judges: CHRISTOPHER F. DRONEY, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: CHRISTOPHER F. DRONEY
Opinion



RULING ON MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT

I. Introduction
This is an employment discrimination case brought by plaintiff Christine Stoj against her former employer, defendant New Britain Board of Education ("the Board"). Stoj brings claims under the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), the Connecticut Fair Employment Practices Act ("CFEPA"), and state common law. The Board has moved for summary judgment on all her claims.

II. Background1
Christine Stoj was a teacher in the New Britain public schools system from 1979 to 2007. In 1999, she became a teacher of English as a second language ("ESL") at the Smith School, an elementary school. Before  [*2] moving to Smith, Stoj taught second grade for four years at the Smalley School, also an elementary school. Diane Dugas was principal of the Smith School until 2005. Paula Eshoo became principal at Smith at the beginning of the 2005-06 school year. During the period relevant to this lawsuit, Adnelly Marichal was the district-wide coordinator for ESL and bilingual programs, Ronald Jakubowski was the Assistant Superintendent, and Robert Stacy was the Human Resources Director. Stoj had several incidents with the school and district administrations during her time at Smith. Over the years, she had been criticized for excessive absences, suspended for leaving school early, not providing adequate information about her schedule, having the school secretary do her work, and incorrect ESL testing.
Stoj suffers from a back condition that affects her gait, inhibits her ability to walk for extended periods of time, and causes discomfort in certain seated positions. Because of her back condition, in 2003 Stoj was assigned a handicapped space in the Smith School parking lot. She also received a key so that she could use the elevator, and was relieved of bus duty. In addition to her back condition,  [*3] Stoj also suffers from a chronic urological disorder, including recurrent urinary infections and kidney stones. Her urological condition sometimes creates a frequent need to urinate.
On May 14, 2006, Stoj was hospitalized after a kidney stone episode. She was scheduled for surgery to remove the stone on June 8, 2006. On May 21, 2006, she wrote a letter to Principal Eshoo asking for a leave of absence until she recovered. At the end of her note she indicated she "was requesting [Family Medical Leave Act] FMLA forms." Eshoo sent a memo to Stoj at the end of school year 2005-06 calculating that she had 37 absences for the school year, and that nine of those had not been reported to the substitute teacher service as required. Stoj argues the days between when she was hospitalized and when the memo was sent should not count as "absences," because she had requested a leave of absence and FMLA forms.
On September 13, 2006, Stoj attended a series of meetings with Marichal, Eshoo, and others. According to a memo Eshoo sent to Stoj summarizing the meetings, they discussed Stoj's performance as an ESL instructor, including her level of professionalism, her level of stress, her patterns of absenteeism,  [*4] and the need to allow the central office to handle issues with parents. In October, Eshoo wrote two more memos to Stoj, noting that Stoj had not been present to supervise students at dismissal, and that on two occasions when she had called Stoj's classroom, students answered the phone because Stoj had not been present.
That winter, Stoj had two meetings with Human Resources Director Robert Stacy and Eshoo to discuss her performance and attendance issues. Throughout the beginning of 2007, there were various communications among Stoj, Marichal, Eshoo and others regarding scheduling conflicts Stoj had with other teachers. On April 25, 2007, a meeting was held with Stoj, Eshoo, Assistant Superintendent Jakubowski, and others. During that meeting, Jakubowski decided to involuntarily transfer Stoj from her position as an ESL elementary school teacher to a position as a second grade classroom teacher at Smith School. Jakubowski stated at his deposition that he made the decision based on his conversations with Stoj, Eshoo, and Marichal, and that Marichal and Eshoo felt there would be less friction with other teachers at the school if Stoj worked with just one group of students in her own second  [*5] grade classroom, rather than in different classrooms each period as an ESL teacher. At the time of her transfer, Stoj was certified to teach elementary education, and thus certified to teach second grade. The next day, Stoj's teachers' union filed a grievance regarding the involuntary transfer. The grievance was rescinded on June 5, 2007, but then re-filed on June 8. Neither grievance petition made any mention of Stoj's health conditions or a disability.
After she learned that she would be transferred, Stoj filed a formal re-application for the ESL position, and stated that this was the only position for which she was qualified given her disability. Stacy wrote Stoj a letter about this on June 1, 2007. In his letter, Stacy said the Human Resources Department had no knowledge of her disability, and asked that she provide the Department medical documentation of her condition. In response, Stoj sent to Stacy a letter from her urologist stating that Stoj had a chronic urinary problem which required frequent trips to the restroom. Stacy stated at his deposition that he did not know Stoj had a disability or claimed to be disabled until he received the urologist's letter. 2 In June, Stoj repeatedly  [*6] expressed that she would like to return to her ESL elementary school position. On June 18, 2007, Rhonda Barker, a union representative, wrote to Marichal, Eshoo, Jakubowski and Stacy requesting a meeting to address Stoj's questions. The meeting was scheduled for June 27, but on June 22, Stoj wrote to the administrators asking that the meeting be postponed.
On June 25, 2007, Dr. Robert Ave'Lallemant, Stoj's urologist, wrote a letter detailing her condition which Stoj forwarded to Stacy. Dr. Ave'Lallemant stated that Stoj needed to be able to use a restroom at a minimum of every two hours. He stated that in his opinion, "she cannot be expected to be a sole full-time teacher in a classroom responsible for 25 students." His opinions were based solely on Stoj's representations to him. At the end of the summer, on August 21, 2007, Stoj submitted notice of her retirement, effective immediately.
Stoj argues that no one from the school district ever addressed her concerns about how her urological condition would  [*7] affect her ability to teach a second grade class. There was a bathroom contiguous to her new classroom, but Stoj stated at her deposition that she felt it was inadequate because it was not large enough to allow her to wash or change her clothes. She also stated that overseeing a group of children for an entire day would not allow her to use the restroom as frequently as she had been able to do as an ESL teacher. However, Stoj admits that she never requested additional accommodations to be able to teach second grade. She claims her submission of Dr. Ave'Lallemant's letter, and the union grievance, was sufficient to establish that she needed accommodations in order to be able to teach second grade. As for the district's understanding of Stoj's limitations, Stacy stated at his deposition that Stoj never made a claim that she could not perform the essential functions of her job. He also stated that Eshoo and Marichal felt they could accommodate Stoj's walking limitations in her new position.
Stoj filed this lawsuit on January 16, 2009. The complaint alleges ten counts: five ADA counts under theories of disability discrimination, constructive discharge, failure to accommodate, retaliation,  [*8] and hostile work environment; three CFEPA counts under theories of disability discrimination, failure to accommodate, and retaliation; and Connecticut common law claims of negligent supervision and intentional infliction of emotional distress. In her memorandum in opposition to summary judgment, Stoj withdrew the ADA hostile work environment claim, and requests the court decline to exercise supplemental jurisdiction over the negligent supervision and intentional infliction of emotional distress claims if it grants summary judgment on the ADA claims.

III. Discussion

A. Summary Judgment Standard
In a summary judgment motion, the burden is on the moving party to establish that there are no genuine disputes as to any material fact and that it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. See Fed.R.Civ.P. 56; Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 256, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986); White v. ABCO Eng'g Corp., 221 F.3d 293, 300 (2d Cir. 2000). Once the moving party has met its burden, in order to defeat the motion the nonmoving party must "set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial," Anderson, 477 U.S. at 255, and present such evidence as would allow a jury to find in his favor.  [*9] Graham v. Long Island R.R., 230 F.3d 34, 38 (2d Cir. 2000).
In assessing the record, the trial court must resolve all ambiguities and draw all inferences in favor of the party against whom summary judgment is sought. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 255; Graham, 230 F.3d at 38. "This remedy that precludes a trial is properly granted only when no rational finder of fact could find in favor of the non-moving party." Carlton v. Mystic Transp., Inc., 202 F.3d 129, 134 (2d Cir. 2000). Consistent with this standard, all evidence favorable to the nonmoving party must be credited if a reasonable jury could credit it. Evidence favorable to the moving party, on the other hand, must be disregarded unless a reasonable jury would have to credit it because it comes from a disinterested source and is uncontradicted and unimpeached. See Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 150-51, 120 S. Ct. 2097, 147 L. Ed. 2d 105 (2000). "When reasonable persons, applying the proper legal standards, could differ in their responses to the question" raised on the basis of the evidence presented, the question must be left to the jury. Sologub v. City of New York, 202 F.3d 175, 178 (2d Cir. 2000).

B. ADA Claims
The Americans with Disabilities Act  [*10] provides that "[n]o covered entity shall discriminate against a qualified individual on the basis of a disability in regard to job application procedures, the hiring, advancement, or discharge of employees, employee compensation, job training, and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment." 42 U.S.C. §12112(a). "Claims alleging disability discrimination in violation of the ADA are subject to the burden-shifting analysis originally established by the Supreme Court in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973)." McBride v. BIC Consumer Products Mfg. Co., Inc., 583 F.3d 92, 96 (2d Cir. 2009). Under such an analysis, "[a] plaintiff must establish a prima facie case; the employer must offer through the introduction of admissible evidence a legitimate non-discriminatory reason for the discharge; and the plaintiff must then produce evidence and carry the burden of persuasion that the proffered reason is a pretext." Sista v. CDC Ixis North America, Inc., 445 F.3d 161, 169 (2d Cir. 2006).
"To establish a prima facie case under the ADA, a plaintiff must show by preponderance of the evidence that: '(1) his employer is subject to the ADA; (2) he was disabled within the meaning  [*11] of the ADA; (3) he was otherwise qualified to perform the essential functions of his job, with or without reasonable accommodation; and (4) he suffered adverse employment action because of his disability.'" Id., quoting Giordano v. City of New York, 274 F.3d 740, 747 (2d Cir. 2001). The Board concedes that it is subject to the ADA and that Stoj was otherwise qualified to perform the essential functions of her job, but argues in its motion for summary judgment that Stoj has failed to establish the second and fourth prongs of a prima facie case.

1. Whether Stoj Had a "Disability"
The ADA defines disability as:
(A) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities of such individual;
(B) a record of such an impairment; or
(C) being regarded as having such an impairment.
42 U.S.C. §12102(1). As to the first definition, the Board concedes that Stoj's urological and back conditions were an "impairment," but argues they did not "substantially limit" a "major life activity." Stoj argues that the major life activities limited by her conditions are walking, standing, and controlling her excretory functions. These fall within the ADA's non-exhaustive list of  [*12] major life activities, which include "walking, standing, lifting, bending" and "the operation of major bodily function, including but not limited to, functions of the . . . bladder." 42 U.S.C. §12102 (2)(A)-(B). Therefore, the question is whether Stoj's conditions "substantially limit" her ability to walk, stand and urinate. The relevant Equal Employment Opportunity Commission regulations define "substantially limits" as:
(i) Unable to perform a major life activity that the average person in the general population can perform; or
(ii) Significantly restricted as to the condition, manner or duration under which an individual can perform a particular major life activity as compared to the condition, manner, or duration under which the average person in the general population can perform that same major life activity.
29 CFR §1630.2(j)(1). Stoj does not claim she is unable to urinate, walk, or stand, but claims her conditions significantly restrict her ability to do so. The letter from Dr. Ave'Lallemant states that "she needs freedom to be able to use restroom on a regular basis to minimum of every two hours." A letter from a Dr. Gerratana states Stoj "is allowed to work with the restriction  [*13] that she avoids prolonged standing and walking limited to her level of comfort and no stair climbing."
These are not "substantial limitations" of major life activities for the purposes of the ADA. As for her incontinence, "in general, federal courts that have considered the issue have resisted finding that a plaintiff's incontinence, or inability to control waste elimination, supports a disability claim under the ADA." Shannon v. Verizon New York, Inc., No. 05-cv-555, 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 28096, 2007 WL 1135307 at *4 (N.D.N.Y April 13, 2007). See also, Sacay v. Research Found. of the City of New York, 193 F. Supp. 2d 611, 629-30 (E.D.N.Y. 2002) (holding that "merely needing to be near a bathroom is not a limitation" that requires a finding of a disability under the ADA); Williams v. H.N.S. Management Co., Inc., 56 F. Supp. 2d 215, 221 (D. Conn. 1999) (holding that a need to urinate frequently was not a disability). As for Stoj's mobility problems, "the inability to walk long distances or to climb stairs does not in itself substantially limit an individual's ability to perform a major life activity." Sussle v. Sirina Protection Systems Corp., 269 F. Supp. 2d 285, 312 (S.D.N.Y. 2003) (internal citation omitted)  [*14] (collecting cases). Similarly, "infringements on the ability to stand are not generally considered to be substantial limitations." De La Rosa v. City of New York Police Dept., No. 09-cv-5290, 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 112770, 2010 WL 4177626 at *8 (S.D.N.Y October 22, 2010). None of the major life activities Stoj identifies—bladder function, walking, and standing—are substantially limited by her urological and back conditions, and therefore neither condition separately, nor the two conditions together, meet the ADA's first definition for "disability."
As an alternative, Stoj suggests her conditions meet the ADA's second definition for a "disability" because she has a record of impairment. Stoj points to the fact that to accommodate her back condition, the Smith School gave Stoj a handicapped parking space and a key to use the elevator, Marichal (the district ESL coordinator) discussed Stoj's walking restrictions with her, and former principal Dugas worked to structure Stoj's schedule to minimize the amount of walking she had to do. Stoj also argues the district has a record of her urological condition consisting of her request for FMLA forms after her kidney surgery, as well as the letter from Dr. Ave'Lallemant about  [*15] her kidney condition. Although the district does have a record of Stoj's medical problems, the record is insufficient to meet the ADA's second definition of a disability. To meet the definition, Stoj's record must indicate she has a substantially limiting impairment. "The impairment indicated in the record must be an impairment that would substantially limit one of more of the individuals major life activities." Colwell v. Suffolk County Police Dept., 158 F.3d 635 (2d Cir. 1998). 3 However, as discussed above, Stoj's impairment did not constitute a substantial limitation on a major life activity. The fact that the school administration was aware of some of Stoj's limitations does not convert her conditions into a "disability" under the ADA.
Finally, as to the third definition of "disability," there is no evidence that the Board regarded Stoj as having a substantially limiting impairment before April 25, 2007. "A plaintiff is disabled under [this section of] the ADA if her employer wrongly believes she is disabled—that is, if the employer believes her impairments substantially limit her ability to work when in fact they do not." Curcio v. Bridgeport Bd. of Educ., 477 F. Supp. 2d 515, 520 (D. Conn. 2007) (Droney, J.). Stoj has not shown that her employer believed her to have a substantially limiting impairment. While the school did provide some accommodations for Stoj's back condition, there is no evidence that the administration believed her back condition substantially limited her ability to stand or walk. As for her urinary condition, Stacy stated in his deposition that he had no knowledge of Stoj's urological problems until June, after she had already been transferred to the second grade position. Therefore, the district could not have "regarded" Stoj as having a disability  [*17] before making the transfer.
For these reasons, Stoj has failed to establish that she is "disabled" under any of the ADA's three definitions.

2. Whether Stoj Suffered an "Adverse Employment Action"

a. The Involuntary Transfer
To make out a prima facie case of disability discrimination, the plaintiff must also show she suffered an adverse employment action because of her disability. Stoj claims that the district's decision to transfer her from an elementary school ESL position to a second-grade position constitutes an adverse employment action. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit has held that "an involuntary transfer may constitute an adverse employment action if the plaintiff shows that the transfer created a materially significant disadvantage with respect to the terms of her employment." Williams v. R.H. Donnelley, Corp., 368 F.3d 123, 128 (2d Cir. 2004). If the transfer is lateral, "the fact that the employee views the transfer either positively or negatively does not of itself render the [transfer] an adverse employment action." Id., quoting Sanchez v. Denver Pub. Sch., 164 F.3d 527, 532-33 n.6 (10th Cir. 1998) (internal marks omitted).
Stoj admits that a transfer to a  [*18] second grade regular classroom assignment would not have resulted in any material change to her pay or benefits. Stoj argues, though, that her responsibilities would have significantly increased, because she would have been responsible for various aspects of recess, the lunch room, lockers, fire drills, and field trips for which she was not responsible as an ESL teacher. She also argues the transfer was materially adverse because it rendered useless her training in bilingual education and Polish studies. At her deposition, Stoj stated she obtained a bilingual/bicultural graduated degree from the University of Connecticut in 1982, and that she has taken postgraduate courses at Connecticut Central State University and Wesleyan University in Polish studies. She also stated that she has taken classes in Poland during the summers for the teaching of Polish outside Poland. In support of her argument, Stoj principally relies on Rodriguez v. Board of Ed. of Eastchester Union Free School Dist., 620 F.2d 362 (2d Cir. 1980). In Rodriguez, the Second Circuit reversed the dismissal of the Title VII claim of a junior high art teacher who argued her involuntary transfer from a junior high art position  [*19] to an elementary school art position constituted an adverse employment action. The plaintiff in Rodriguez held both a master's and doctoral degree in art and art education, with a focus on programs for the junior high school student. "Indeed, her doctoral dissertation was titled, 'A Model Arts Program for the Middle School of Eastchester School District Number 1.'" Rodriguez, 620 F. 2d at 364. Her doctoral degree was tailored to the art curriculum of this particular middle school. The court found the transfer represented a "severe professional trauma," and that the plaintiff had stated a valid Title VII claim although the transfer did not result in a decrease in her salary.
In contrast, Stoj's transfer to second grade in this case was not similarly professionally disruptive. She was certified to teach second grade, and had taught second grade in the past. While Stoj took some postgraduate course work in Polish studies, her training was not as extensive or as specific as the plaintiff's training in Rodriguez, and the change in content not so substantial. See, e.g., Galabya v. New York City Bd. of Educ., 202 F.3d 636, 640-42 (2000) (holding that plaintiff's transfer from a junior high  [*20] special education keyboarding class to a high school mainstream keyboarding class did not constitute an adverse employment action); Carmellino v. Dist. 20 of the New York Dept. Of Educ., 03-cv-5942, 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 63705, 2006 WL 2583019 at *29 (S.D.N.Y Sept. 6, 2006) (holding that plaintiff's transfer from teaching ESL at one school to third grade at another did not constitute an adverse employment action).
Furthermore, in order to establish this prong of the prima facie case, Stoj must show she suffered the adverse employment action because of her disability. See Giordano, 274 F.3d at 747. There is no evidence that reasonable jury could credit that shows Stoj was transferred from an ESL position to a second grade position because of either her back or urological condition. When Stoj filed two union grievances about her transfer to second grade, neither grievance made any reference to her health problems or a disability. Indeed, Stacy stated that he was not even aware of Stoj's urological condition at the time she was transferred. Therefore, Stoj has failed to show she suffered an adverse employment action because of her disability to establish a prima facie case of disability discrimination.

b. Constructive  [*21] Discharge
As an alternate theory, Stoj argues that she can establish a prima facie case because the adverse employment action she suffered was a constructive discharge. Federal courts have held that an employee who voluntarily resigns can nevertheless hold his claim for constructive discharge when the "employer, rather than discharging him directly, intentionally creates a work atmosphere so intolerable that he is forced to quit involuntarily." Terry v. Ashcroft, 336 F.3d 128, 151-52 (2d Cir. 2003). "Working conditions are intolerable when, viewed as a whole, they are so difficult or unpleasant that a reasonable person in the employee's shoes would have felt compelled to resign." Id. at 152.
Here, taking all facts in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, Stoj has failed to show that the Board intentionally made her working conditions so intolerable that she was forced to resign. Stoj accuses the Board of failing "to engage in the interactive process" to determine whether or not she would be comfortable teaching second grade, but this falls short of creating an intolerable situation that would compel a reasonable person to resign.

3. Failure to Accommodate
Finally, as a third alternate  [*22] theory of disability discrimination, Stoj argues she can establish a prima facie case because instead of suffering an adverse employment action, the Board failed to accommodate the needs created by her disability. A prima facie case for discrimination based on failure to accommodate requires a showing that "the employer had notice of the plaintiff's disability and failed to provide [a reasonable] accommodation." Lyons v. Legal Aid Soc., 68 F.3d 1512, 1515 (2d Cir. 1995). Federal regulations require an "informal, interactive process" between employer and employee to determine which accommodations will assist the employee in continuing to perform her job. 29 C.F.R. §1630.2(o)(3). The employee has the initial responsibility to notify the employer that she needs an accommodation, and to identify the limitation that requires the accommodation. See Worthington v. City of New Haven, No. 94-cv-609, 1999 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 16104, 1999 WL 958627 (D. Conn. Oct. 5, 1999). Stoj admits that prior to resigning, she never requested an accommodation to teach second grade. However, even if she had, the Board is not responsible for the breakdown in the interactive process. Stoj postponed a meeting scheduled for June 27, 2007 with  [*23] various administrators to discuss her concerns, and then resigned in August before beginning to teach second grade.
In addition, even if the interactive process had not broken down, the ADA only "mandates reasonable accommodation of people with disabilities." Stamos v. Glen Cove School Dist., 78 Fed.Appx. 776, 778 (2d Cir. 2003) (quoting Felix v. New York City Transit Authority, 324 F.3d 102 (2d Cir. 2003)). There was a bathroom next to Stoj's new classroom, and there is no evidence to show the Board refused to consider other accommodations. Consequently, Stoj has not made out a prima facie case for discrimination under a theory of the Board's failure to accommodate.
Therefore, the Court grants summary judgment on Counts One (ADA disability discrimination), Three (ADA failure to accommodate) and Ten (constructive discharge).

C. CFEPA Claims
Stoj brings similar claims under the Connecticut Fair Employment Practice Act, which provides in relevant part, that:
it shall be a discriminatory practice in violation of this section . . . [f]or an employer . . . to refuse to hire or employ or to bar or discharge from employment any individual or to discriminate against such individual in compensation  [*24] or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of the individual's . . . physical disability.
Conn. Gen. Stat. §46a-60(a)(1). Discrimination claims brought under CFEPA "are construed similarly to that of ADA claims," however "the CFEPA has a far broader definition of 'disabled' than the ADA." Worster v. Carlson Wagon Lit Travel, 353 F. Supp. 2d 257, 267 (D. Conn. 2005). The meaning of "physically disability" within CFEPA, "refers to any individual who has any chronic physical handicap, infirmity, or impairment, whether congenital or resulting from bodily injury. . ." Conn. Gen. Stat. §46a-51(15). While the Board argued that Stoj's condition did not qualify as a "disability" under the terms of the ADA, the Board concedes that Stoj's back condition falls within the definition of "physical disability" under the CFEPA.
Disability discrimination claims brought under the CFEPA are construed similarly to ADA claims, and the same McDonnell Douglas burden shifting analysis applies. Levy v. Commission on Human Rights and Opportunities, 236 Conn. 96, 671 A.2d 349 (1996); see also, Sample v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 273 F. Supp. 2d 185, 188 (D. Conn. 2003). Therefore, even though Stoj is "disabled"  [*25] under CFEPA, because she has not demonstrated that she suffered an adverse employment action, that she was constructively discharged, or that the Board failed to make an accommodation, she has not made a prima facie case for discrimination under CFEPA. See Murphy v. BeavEx, Inc., 544 F. Supp. 2d 139, 154 (D. Conn. 2008) (granting summary judgment on CFEPA claim when plaintiff failed to establish constructive discharge and failure to accommodate as to his ADA claims). For these reasons, the Court grants summary judgment on Count Five (CFEPA disability discrimination), Count Seven (CFEPA failure to accommodate), and Count Ten (constructive discharge). 4

D. Retaliation
ADA and CFEPA retaliation claims are analyzed in the same manner. Gomez v. Laidlaw Transit, Inc., 455 F. Supp. 2d 81, 90 (D. Conn. 2006). To make out a prima facie case of retaliation, Stoj must show that (1) she engaged in ADA-protected  [*26] activity (2) of which the Board was aware, (3) she was subjected to an adverse employment action, and (4) a causal connection existed between the adverse employment action and her protected activity. See Ragusa v. Malverne Union Free School Dist., 381 Fed. Appx. 85, 89 (2d Cir. 2010). Because Stoj has failed to show she suffered an adverse employment action, she has failed to make out a prima facie case for retaliation. Therefore, the Court grants summary judgment on Count Two and Count Six.

E. Remaining Claims
Because Stoj requests the Court decline to exercise supplemental jurisdiction over the negligent supervision and intentional infliction of emotional distress claims if it grants summary judgment on the ADA claims, summary judgment is granted on Count Eight (negligent supervision) and Count Nine (intentional infliction of emotional distress). Stoj has withdrawn the ADA hostile work environment claim

IV. Conclusion
For the reasons stated above, defendant's motion for summary judgment [Dkt. #35] is GRANTED. The Clerk is directed to close the case.
SO ORDERED this 14th day of July 2011, at Hartford, Connecticut.
/s/ Christopher F. Droney
CHRISTOPHER F. DRONEY
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

