Sugimoto v. Inter-Con Sec. Sys., Inc.
United States District Court for the Southern District of California
July 11, 2019, Decided; July 12, 2019, Filed
Case No. 19-cv-00025 DMS (BLM)

Reporter
2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 249534 *; 2019 WL 13269708
GENE SUGIMOTO, an individual, Plaintiff, v. INTER-CON SECURITY SYSTEMS, INC., a California corporation; and DOES 1 through 25, inclusive, Defendants.
Counsel:  [*1] For Gene Sugimoto, an individual |, Plaintiff: Aisling Sokitch Gilliland, LEAD ATTORNEY, The Gilliland Firm, San Diego, CA USA; Corey Patrick Hanrahan, LEAD ATTORNEY, The Hanrahan Firm, San Diego, CA USA; Joshua D Gruenberg, LEAD ATTORNEY, Law Office of Joshua D. Gruenberg, San Diego, CA USA.
For INTER-CON SECURITY SYSTEMS, INC., a California corporation |, Defendant: Cheryl Johnson-Hartwell, Susan E Coleman, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Burke Williams & Sorensen LLP, Los Angeles, CA USA; Lindsay Marie Samuel, LEAD ATTORNEY, Davis Wright Tremaine LLP, Los Angeles, CA USA; Mitchell A. Wrosch, Ogletree, Deakins, Nash, Smoak & Stewart, PC, Costa Mesa, CA USA.
Judges: Hon. Dana M. Sabraw, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Dana M. Sabraw
Opinion



ORDER GRANTING IN PART AND DENYING IN PART DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR PARTIAL JUDGMENT ON THE PLEADINGS
Pending before the Court is Defendant Inter-Con Security System, Inc.'s motion for partial judgment on the pleadings. Plaintiff Gene Sugimoto filed an opposition, and Defendant filed a reply. For the reasons set forth below, Defendant's motion is granted in part and denied in part.

I.

BACKGROUND
In 2009, Plaintiff was hired to work as a Court Security Officer ("CSO") by Akal Security, a company [*2]  that contracted with the U.S. Marshals Service to provide security for federal courthouses in California. (FAC ¶ 12.) Prior to starting his employment, Plaintiff underwent a pre-employment physical. (Id.) During his physical, Plaintiff revealed that he was diagnosed with sleep apnea in the past, but that it resolved due to his weight loss. (Id.) He also provided letters from doctors indicating he no longer exhibited classic symptoms of sleep apnea and that he could perform the duties of a CSO. (Id.)
Plaintiff worked as a CSO under the employment of Akal Security for approximately five years. (Id. ¶ 14.) On November 2, 2013, Akal Security lost its contract with the U.S. Marshals Service, and was replaced by Defendant Inter-Con Security Systems, Inc. (Id.) Plaintiff continued working as a CSO under Defendant's employment. (Id.) Approximately two weeks after this transition, Defendant and the U.S. Marshals Service asked Plaintiff to provide medical information regarding his sleep apnea. (Id. ¶ 15.) In response, Plaintiff submitted a letter from his doctor, which stated that Plaintiff was able to perform all of his duties as a CSO despite his prior sleep apnea diagnosis. (Id.) Plaintiff's [*3]  doctor opined that he did not need additional tests because he did not exhibit classic symptoms of sleep apnea. (Id.)
On January 30, 2015, Defendant and the U.S. Marshals Service requested that Plaintiff undergo an overnight sleep examination to determine the extent of his sleep apnea and whether it could interfere with his duties. (Id. ¶ 16.) Defendant ordered Plaintiff to complete the examination by April 24, 2015. (Id.) Plaintiff made repeated attempts to complete the testing but found it difficult to meet the deadline because of scheduling conflicts and an extended vacation by his doctor. (Id. ¶17.) On April 6, 2015, Plaintiff requested an extension of time to complete the examination, but Defendant did not respond. (Id.) In order to demonstrate his efforts to meet Defendant's request, Plaintiff sent Defendant a description of the costs associated with the sleep examination. (Id. ¶ 18.) Shortly after, Plaintiff inquired about the status of his request for an extension, but again, received no response. (Id. ¶ 19.) Plaintiff was unable to meet the deadline and was terminated three days later. (Id.) After his termination, Plaintiff filed a discrimination complaint against Defendant [*4]  with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC") and thereafter received a right to sue letter. (Id. ¶ 10.)
Based on these alleged facts, Plaintiff filed a First Amended Complaint asserting eight causes of action for (1) discrimination based on medical condition and physical disability under the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") and Fair Employment and Housing Act ("FEHA"); (2) discrimination based on perceived medical condition and physical disability under the ADA and FEHA; (3) failure to engage in the interactive process under the ADA and FEHA; (4) failure to accommodate under the ADA and FEHA; (5) failure to prevent discrimination under the FEHA; (6) retaliation under the ADA and FEHA; (7) unlawful medical inquiry under the FEHA; and (8) intentional infliction of emotional distress. Defendant moves for judgment on the pleadings as to Plaintiff's third, fourth, sixth, and seventh causes of action.

II.

LEGAL STANDARD
Under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(c), "[a]fter the pleadings are closed—but early enough not to delay trial—a party may move for judgment on the pleadings." Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(c). "Judgment on the pleadings is properly granted when there is no issue of material fact in dispute, and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Chavez v. United States, 683 F.3d 1102, 1108 (9th Cir. 2012) [*5]  (internal quotation marks and citation omitted).
Analysis of the pleadings under Rule 12(c) is substantially identical to analysis under Rule 12(b)(6). Id. Dismissal under Rule 12(b)(6) is warranted where the complaint lacks a cognizable legal theory. Shroyer v. New Cingular Wireless Servs. Inc., 622 F.3d 1035, 1041 (9th Cir. 2010) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Alternatively, a complaint may be dismissed where it presents a cognizable legal theory, yet fails to plead essential facts under that theory. Robertson v. Dean Witter Reynolds, Inc.,749 F.2d 530, 534 (9th Cir. 1984); see also Shroyer, 622 F.3d at 1041. In reviewing the motion, the Court must assume the truth of all factual allegations and construe them most favorably to the nonmoving party. Huynh v. Chase Manhattan Bank, 465 F.3d 992, 997 (9th Cir. 2006). However, legal conclusions need not be taken as true merely because they are couched as factual allegations. Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 555, 127 S. Ct. 1955, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929 (2007). Similarly, "conclusory allegations of law and unwarranted inferences are not sufficient to defeat a motion to dismiss." Pareto v. Fed. Deposit Ins. Corp., 139 F.3d 696, 699 (9th Cir. 1998).

III.

DISCUSSION

A. Failure to Accommodate (Fourth Claim)
Plaintiff contends that Defendant's failure to grant his request for an extension of time was a failure to accommodate his disability under the ADA and FEHA.1 The ADA prohibits an employer from "not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who is an applicant [*6]  or employee .... " 42 USC § 12112(b)(5)(A). Similarly, the FEHA makes it unlawful for an employer to "fail to make reasonable accommodation for the known physical or mental disability of an applicant or employee." Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(m). "Reasonable accommodation" is defined as "a modification or adjustment to the workplace that enables the employee to perform the essential functions of the job held or desired." Alamillo v. BNSF Railway Company, 869 F.3d 916, 922 (9th Cir. 2017) (citing Scotch v. Art Institute of California, 173 Cal. App. 4th 986, 994, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d 338 (2009); Garcia v. Salvation Army, 918 F.3d 997, 1010 (9th Cir. 2019) (citing 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(1)(ii)).
Here, Plaintiff's request for an extension of time to complete the sleep examination was unrelated to his ability to perform the essential functions of his job as a CSO. In fact, Plaintiff alleges that his sleep apnea had "resolved," and that he could "perform all the duties of his position as a court security officer." (FAC ¶¶ 12, 15.) Nor was Plaintiff's failure to meet the deadline a result of any physical or mental limitations from his sleep apnea. To the contrary, Plaintiff alleges he was unable to meet the deadline because of "scheduling conflicts and an extended vacation by the doctor." (Id. ¶ 17.) Because Plaintiff fails to plausibly allege he sought a reasonable accommodation for a disability, Defendant's motion is granted as to Plaintiff's fourth claim.

B. Failure to Engage in the [*7]  Interactive Process (Third Claim)
Similarly, Plaintiff argues that Defendant's failure to grant an extension was a failure to engage in the interactive process under the ADA and FEHA. Under the ADA, "[o]nce an employer becomes aware of the need for accommodation, that employer has a mandatory obligation to engage in an interactive process with the employee to identify and implement appropriate reasonable accommodations." Humphrey v. Memorial Hospitals Ass'n, 239 F.3d 1128, 1137 (9th Cir. 2001) (citations omitted). Similarly, under the FEHA, it is unlawful for an employer to "fail to engage in a timely, good faith, interactive process with the employee or applicant to determine effective reasonable accommodations, if any, in response to a request for reasonable accommodation by an employee or applicant with a known physical or mental disability or known medical condition." Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(n).
As discussed, Plaintiff's request for an extension to complete his sleep examination does not constitute a request for an accommodation under the ADA or FEHA. Accordingly, Defendant's motion as to Plaintiff's third claim is granted.

C. Retaliation (Sixth Claim)
Next, Plaintiff alleges that Defendant retaliated against him because he opposed Defendant's request for a sleep examination. In [*8]  order to state a prima facie case of retaliation under the ADA or FEHA, the employee must show that (1) he undertook a protected activity; (2) his employer subjected him to an adverse employment action; and (3) there is a causal link between the protected activity and the adverse action. T.B. ex rel. Brenneise v. San Diego Unified Sch. Dist., 806 F.3d 451, 473 (9th Cir. 2015); Yanowitz v. L'Oreal USA, Inc., 36 Cal. 4th 1028, 1042, 32 Cal. Rptr. 3d 436, 116 P.3d 1123 (2005).
As Defendant points out, Plaintiff fails to state a claim for retaliation because he does not allege that he engaged in a protected activity. Protected activity includes "oppos[ing] any act or practice made unlawful by [the ADA or FEHA.]" See 42 U.S.C. 12203(a); accord Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(h); see also Hashimoto v. Dalton, 118 F.3d 671, 680 (9th Cir. 1997); Yanowitz, 36 Cal. 4th at 1042. "The relevant question ... is not whether a formal accusation of discrimination is made but whether the employee's communications to the employer sufficiently convey the employee's reasonable concerns that the employer has acted or is acting in an unlawful discriminatory manner." Yanowitz, 36 Cal. 4th at 1047.
Besides Plaintiff's conclusory allegation that he "opposed Defendant's discrimination," Plaintiff's FAC does not include any factual allegations of how he conveyed his opposition to Defendant's request. (See FAC ¶ 57.) In his opposition brief, Plaintiff argues that his doctor's letter constitutes a protected opposition, and that Defendant refused his request [*9]  for an extension because of this opposition. (Opp'n to Mot. at 9.) The letter states that Plaintiff was able to perform his duties as a CSO and that he did not need to undergo additional tests. Plaintiff contends this letter is "tantamount to the opposition" in Ray v. Henderson, 217 F.3d 1234 (9th Cir. 2000). While the plaintiff in Ray engaged in opposition by filing an EEOC complaint against his employer for harassment, here, the letter from Plaintiff's doctor simply was a medical opinion submitted in response to Defendant's request for information regarding Plaintiff's sleep apnea. See 217 F.3d at 1237, 1240. Even construing the facts in Plaintiff's favor, the letter does not reasonably convey any concerns Plaintiff had about Defendant's purported discriminatory conduct. In fact, Plaintiff alleges he made "a good faith effort to demonstrate his efforts to meet [Defendant]'s demands" and that Defendant "knew Plaintiff was in the process of complying with its demands." (FAC ¶¶ 17-18); see Yanowitz, 36 Cal. 4th at 1046 ("[A]n employee's unarticulated belief that an employer is engaging in discrimination will not suffice to establish protected conduct for the purposes of establishing a prima facie case of retaliation, where there is no evidence the employer knew that the employee's [*10]  opposition was based upon a reasonable belief that the employer was engaging in discrimination."). For these reasons, Plaintiff fails to state a plausible claim for retaliation. Accordingly, Defendant's motion is granted as to this claim.2

D. Unlawful Medical Inquiry (Seventh Claim)
Lastly, Plaintiff contends Defendant's request for a sleep examination was an unlawful medical inquiry under the FEHA. Under the FEHA, it is an "unlawful employment practice ... for any employer or employment agency to require any medical or psychological examination of an employee. Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(f)(1). However, an employer "may require any examinations or inquiries that it can show to be job related and consistent with business necessity." Id. § 12940(f)(2). The business necessity standard "is quite high, and is not to be confused with mere expediency." Brownfield v. City of Yakima, 612 F.3d 1140, 1146 (9th Cir. 2010) (citations omitted). It "may be met even before an employee's work performance declines if the employer is faced with significant evidence that could cause a reasonable person to inquire as to whether an employee is still capable of performing his job. Id.; see Mantolete v. Bolger, 767 F.2d 1416, 1422 (9th Cir. 1985) ("The question is whether, in light of the individual's work history and medical history, employment of that individual would [*11]  pose a reasonable probability of substantial harm."). Indeed, "there must be genuine reason to doubt whether that employee can perform job-related functions." Brownfield, 612 F.3d at 1146.
Plaintiff alleges that in his five years of working as a CSO, his prior sleep apnea did not interfere in any way with his ability to perform his job. Consistent with his work history, Plaintiff's medical documentation also indicates that he was able to fully perform his duties as a CSO despite his prior sleep apnea diagnosis, which Plaintiff claims had resolved due to his weight loss. Construing these allegations as true, as it must at this stage, the Court cannot find as a matter of law that Defendant had genuine reason to doubt Plaintiff's ability to perform his job-related functions. As such, Defendant is not entitled to judgment on the pleadings as to Plaintiff's seventh claim.

IV.

CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, the Court GRANTS in part and DENIES in part Defendant's motion for partial judgment on the pleadings. Specifically, Defendant's motion is granted as to Plaintiff's third, fourth, and sixth causes of action, and denied as to Plaintiff's seventh cause of action. In accordance with his request, Plaintiff is granted [*12]  leave to file a Second Amended Complaint that cures the pleading deficiencies set out in this Order. Plaintiff is cautioned that if his Second Amended Complaint does not cure these deficiencies, his claims will be dismissed with prejudice and without leave to amend. The Second Amended Complaint shall be filed within fourteen (14) days of this Order.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
Dated: July 11, 2019
/s/ Dana M. Sabraw
Hon. Dana M. Sabraw
United States District Judge


End of Document

