SW. Fair Hous. Council v. WG Chandler Villas SH LLC
United States District Court for the District of Arizona
February 23, 2023, Decided; February 24, 2023, Filed
No. CV-19-00178-TUC-RM

Reporter
2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 142208 *; 2023 WL 5158889
Southwest Fair Housing Council, Plaintiff, v. WG Chandler Villas SH LLC, Defendant.
Prior History: Southwest Fair Hous. Council v. WG Chandler Villas SH LLC, 2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 53677, 2021 WL 1087200 (D. Ariz., Mar. 22, 2021)
Counsel:  [*1] For Southwest Fair Housing Council, an Arizona non-profit corporation, Plaintiff: Andrew Rozynski, Eric Mark Baum, Reyna N Lubin, William Juhn, LEAD ATTORNEYS, PRO HAC VICE, Eisenberg & Baum LLP, New York, NY USA; Shayna Gabrielle Stuart, LEAD ATTORNEY, Sherman & Howard LLC - Phoenix, AZ, Phoenix, AZ USA; William August Richards, LEAD ATTORNEY, Richards & Moskowitz PLC, Phoenix, AZ USA.
For WG Chandler Villas SH LLC, doing business as Atria Chandler Villas, Defendant: Misty Leslie, Peter Christopher Prynkiewicz, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Littler Mendelson PC - Phoenix, AZ, Phoenix, AZ USA; Robert Shawn Oller, LEAD ATTORNEY, Littler Mendelson, Phoenix, AZ USA.
Judges: Honorable Rosemary Marquez, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Rosemary Marquez
Opinion



ORDER
On October 25 and 26, 2022, the Court held a bench trial in the above-captioned matter. (Docs. 98, 99.) Following the bench trial, the Court directed the parties to submit proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law. (Id.) Plaintiff Southwest Fair Housing Council ("Plaintiff" or "SWFHC") and Defendant WG Chandler Villas SH LLC ("Defendant" or "Chandler Villas") each submitted proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law. (Docs. 108, 109.) The Court finds [*2]  that, as a matter of fact and law, Defendant violated the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), the Fair Housing Act (FHA), and the Arizona Fair Housing Act (AZFHA) by refusing to provide a potential deaf resident with the reasonable accommodation of a flashing doorbell, which would have provided him equal access to its safety check service.
....
....
....
....

I. Background
Plaintiff brought this action pursuant to the ADA, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, the Affordable Care Act (ACA), the FHA, and the AZFHA.1 The parties filed cross-motions for summary judgment. (Docs. 47, 49.) The Court resolved the motions by granting summary judgment for Defendant on the Rehabilitation Act and ACA claims and granting in part and denying in in part summary judgment on the ADA and FHA claims. (Doc. 62.) Specifically, the Court granted summary judgment for Defendant on the issue of the ASL interpreter under the ADA and the FHA, but denied summary judgment for Defendant on the issue of the flashing doorbell accommodation. (Id.) Accordingly, the remaining issue for trial was whether Defendant violated the ADA and/or the FHA by denying Plaintiff a flashing doorbell accommodation, or another reasonable accommodation, that would give deaf residents of Defendant's facility full and equal access to the safety check [*3]  service. (See Doc. 106 at 7.)

II. Factual Findings2
Plaintiff is a non-profit organization based in Tucson, Arizona that seeks to ensure that all people, including deaf individuals, have equal access to housing in Arizona. (Doc. 62 at 3.) Plaintiff employed testers to investigate Defendant's willingness to provide auxiliary aids and services at its facilities, including American Sign Language ("ASL") interpreters, as part of its mission to alleviate disability discrimination in housing. (Id.)
Defendant Chandler Villas is a 164-unit residential apartment complex located in Chandler, Arizona, that provides private apartments for active seniors. (Id.) Chandler Villas provides specific amenities to its residents, the cost of which is included in rent, such as housekeeping, common dining experiences, and 24-hour staffing. (Id.) As a "supervisory care" community, Chandler Villas provides residents with limited services, which do not include health care, medical care, or complex services. (Id.) Chandler Villas does offer a medication management program which involves staff reminding a resident when to take a medication and observing the resident take the medication. (Id.) None of Chandler [*4]  Villas' services involve direct physical contact between staff and residents. (Id.) All apartments and services at Chandler Villas are strictly private pay, and the facility does not accept or receive any Medicare or Medicaid reimbursement for the apartments or services provided. (Id.) The community is intended for, and serves, those who are looking to live "independently" without having to cook or clean. (Id.) Chandler Villas staff members conduct "safety checks" on residents. (Id. at 3-4.) The safety checks ensure that a resident is present and safe at the facility and include, for example, checking to make sure that a resident has not fallen in his apartment. (Id. at 4.)
On August 23, 2016, SWFHC tester Gladys Beebe ("Beebe") visited Defendant's assisted living facility on behalf of her deaf grandfather, Frank, who was a fictional character created for testing purposes. (Id.) Each contact or communication between Plaintiff's testers and Defendant's employees that is at issue in this lawsuit was audio recorded. (Id.) The facts and circumstances of Plaintiff's tester's contacts with Defendant's employee are set forth below.
During Beebe's August 23, 2016 tour with Defendant's Executive [*5]  Director Kim Woda ("Woda"), Beebe discussed details about her grandfather Frank, including that he was deaf and used ASL to communicate, that he had been living alone in Florida for years and was contemplating relocating to Arizona, that he was "pretty active," and that he took heart medication one time per day. (Id.) Beebe indicated that her communications with Frank were primarily limited to written communications such as sending cards. (Id.)
During the tour, Beebe asked Woda what accommodations Defendant would provide regarding vital communications with her deaf grandfather, including medicine-related conversations. (Id.) Woda responded that staff would likely use "pen and paper" to communicate with him because no staff member had sign language abilities. (Id.) Beebe asked if there would be any issue with Frank being deaf and participating in the medication program, and whether staff would be able to "converse, write, whatever?" (Id.) Woda stated she did not believe it would be a problem and told Beebe that communication between Chandler Villas' staff and Beebe's grandfather would be "something that we're going to have to figure out together . . . Frank and all of us." (Id.) Woda [*6]  further stated that they would find Frank's "comfort zone" for communication. (Id.) Woda expressed a willingness to meet with Frank to assess his needs and whether Chandler Villas would be a good fit. (Id.) Woda stated that she had used lip-reading in the past to communicate with deaf individuals. (Id. at 5.)
During the August 23, 2016 tour, Woda told Beebe that Chandler Villas staff would knock on a deaf resident's door to conduct a safety check.3 (Id.) Woda further stated that Frank would have to pay for and install his own auxiliary device, a doorbell with a flashing light, to know when someone was present at his door. (Id.) Woda further stated that a special phone could be installed so that staff could check on him if he did not come down for a meal, and that all residents have a life alert button they can use in case of an emergency. (Id.) The conversation between Beebe and Woda regarding the flashing doorbell went as follows:
BEEBE: Oh, okay. How -- would you guys be able to put in like a light, you know, so, like, if somebody knocks on his door or rings the doorbell? Because that's what he has in his house now. So he knows if someone's at his door that a light will flash.
WODA: [*7]  He can install that.
BEEBE: Oh, okay.
WODA: He can install that.
BEEBE: Okay.
WODA: And he -- you know, if -- when I take you around, you'll see that some -- some of the apartments have screen doors or screen porches. Those folks did those upgrades themselves.
BEEBE: Oh, okay.
WODA: And so that would be something that he could do as well.
BEEBE: Okay.
WODA: And -- and so you know and to have peace of mind, everybody has a life alert button here.
BEEBE: Okay.
WODA: And if he doesn't come down for breakfast and lunch, we're calling him. If he doesn't answer -- I'm sure he has a special phone too.
BEEBE: Mm-hmm.
WODA: If he doesn't answer, then we'll go over and knock on the door and check on him.
(Doc. 109-2 at 13-14.)
The doorbell was mentioned once more during the tour:
BEEBE: Okay. Okay. So then we would put in like a doorbell for him. And then there wouldn't be -- do we have to take it out then --
WODA: I don't think so.
BEEBE: -- when we leave? WODA: I don't think so. The only time anything weird like that would come into play, Gladys, is if you --
BEEBE: Uh-huh.
WODA: -- painted it purple. And I would just say paint it back to the original color.
(Doc. 109-5 at 155.4 )
At trial, witnesses provided [*8]  additional testimony regarding the flashing doorbell accommodation.5 (Docs. 106, 107.) Jay Young, SWFHC's executive director, testified that Defendant's marketing materials indicated that it offered an alert system in each apartment and 24-hour support from staff in case of an emergency. (Doc. 106 at 28-29.) Young testified that he believed that, based on the conversation between Beebe and Woda, Woda had stated that Frank would have to provide and install the doorbell himself. (Doc. 106 at 38-39.) Young testified that he believed this was a violation of anti-discrimination laws because Chandler Villas was legally required to provide the doorbell accommodation to Frank free of charge and could not require him to install it himself. (Id.) Young testified that he believed deaf residents were treated differently or unequally compared to hearing residents, because hearing residents were able to hear a knock on the door from a staff member providing supervisory services, whereas deaf residents would not be able to hear a knock and could therefore miss services. (Id. at 46-47.) Young testified that SWFHC updated its communications and training materials regarding deaf discrimination in response [*9]  to its investigation of Chandler Villas. (Id. at 48-49.)
Erica Hardwick, SWFHC's director of enforcement, testified at trial that she believed it was Chandler Villa's responsibility to provide and pay for a reasonable accommodation for an individual with a disability, and that, during the conversation between Woda and Beebe, Woda never offered to provide a flashing doorbell, a special cell phone, or an alternative auxiliary aid for Frank. (Id. at 121-122.) Hardwick testified that Defendant's safety check system was designed for hearing individuals, and that a deaf individual would not hear a knock on the door. (Id. at 123.) Hardwick testified that, during SWFHC's testing, it learned that Chandler Villas would not accommodate a flashing doorbell. (Id. at 125, 164-165.) Hardwick testified that, during follow-up testing, SWFHC did not follow up with Chandler Villas about a flashing doorbell because "the questions about the doorbell were answered," and they said that "the tester could do it" and "they were not going to provide one." (Id. at 125.) Hardwick testified that she thought a flashing doorbell was necessary for Frank's safety at Chandler Villas, and were there an emergency, such [*10]  as a fire or a gas leak at the facility, that he may not be able to be notified in time without a flashing doorbell. (Id. at 165-167.) Hardwick testified that Woda never explained how Chandler Villas would conduct a safety check for a deaf individual. (Id. at 181-182.)
Michael Mejia, a senior executive at Atria Senior Living ("Atria")6, who in 2016 oversaw the region in which the Chandler Villas facility is located, testified at trial that he was responsible for ensuring that Chandler Villas operated in compliance with Atria policies. (Doc. 107 at 5-6.) Mejia testified that, when a staff member performed a "courtesy knock" as part of a safety check after a resident did not answer their phone and had not been seen, the staff member would enter the apartment if the resident did not answer the door. (Id. at 10.) Mejia testified that it was part of the facility's duty to lay eyes on the resident if there was no response to a safety check, and that a resident's blanket refusal to let any staff member ever enter their apartment would disqualify them from residing there. (Id. at 10-11.) Mejia testified that the safety check is an integral part of the services Chandler Villas provides its residents. [*11]  (Id. at 8-9, 15-20.) Mejia testified that, in addition to the safety check, Chandler Villas staff might knock on a door to seek entry to an apartment for several reasons, including housekeeping, pest control, medication supervision, and maintenance. (Id. at 27-28.) Mejia testified that Chandler Villas would evaluate a deaf resident's needs for accommodations during the assessment portion of the intake process. (Id. at 27, 31, 57, 70.) Mejia testified that purchasing and installing a flashing doorbell would not present an undue financial burden, nor would it require a fundamental alteration to an apartment or the facility's services. (Id. at 32.) Mejia testified that, pursuant to Atria policy, a flashing doorbell could be a reasonable accommodation provided for free to a deaf resident, and that such a doorbell would alert the resident to a staff member's presence at the door. (Id. at 36.) Mejia testified that if a deaf resident requested a flashing doorbell, Atria would provide it. (Id. at 38-39, 70.) Mejia testified that Atria trained its employees on providing reasonable accommodations. (Id. at 50-51.)7
Kimberly Barczyk (formerly Woda), the former executive director at Chandler [*12]  Villas in 2016, testified that the facility's safety protocols were very important because they provided residents and their families peace of mind. (Id. at 91, 93, 96.) Barczyk testified that every resident should be able to receive all safety services, and that multiple safety services existed in case one failed. (Id. at 96.) Barczyk testified that, while employed at Atria, she never provided an accommodation to a deaf individual and did not receive training on how to handle the needs of individuals with disabilities or deaf individuals. (Id. at 99-100.) Barczyk testified that she was not aware of any Atria policies or procedures involving accommodations for deaf individuals. (Id. at 100.) Barczyk testified that, in 2016, she did not understand that a facility such as Chandler Villas was required to provide an accommodation for a deaf resident free of charge, because it was an "independent living community," and she did not know that a housing provider has an affirmative obligation to provide reasonable accommodations to residents. (Id. at 101, 141.) She further testified that she still believed, at the time of trial, that an individual with a disability had to provide his own accommodations. [*13]  (Id. at 102.) Barczyk testified that she did not know whether Atria provided reasonable accommodations for residents free of charge because it never came up. (Id. at 107.)

III. Applicable Law

A. ADA
Title III of the ADA prohibits discrimination based on disability by places of public accommodation. 42 U.S.C. § 12182(a). Specifically, Title III provides that "No individual shall be discriminated against on the basis of disability in the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations of any place of public accommodation8 by any person who owns, leases (or leases to), or operates a place of public accommodation." Id. Title III further provides that "[i]t shall be discriminatory to exclude or otherwise deny equal goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, accommodations, or other opportunities to an individual or entity because of the known disability of an individual with whom the individual or entity is known to have a relationship or association." 42 U.S.C. § 12182(b)(1)(E).
Title III defines discrimination as the failure to make reasonable modifications in policies, practices, or procedures, when such modifications are necessary to afford such goods, services, facilities, [*14]  privileges, advantages, or accommodations to individuals with disabilities, unless the entity can demonstrate that making such modifications would fundamentally alter the nature of such goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations. 42 U.S.C. § 12182(b)(2)(A)(ii); Martin v. PGA Tour, 532 U.S. 661, 121 S. Ct. 1879, 149 L. Ed. 2d 904 (2001). To prevail on an ADA claim, a plaintiff must show: (1) he or she is a disabled individual under the statute; (2) the defendant is a place of public accommodation; and (3) the defendant discriminated against the plaintiff by denying a full and equal opportunity to enjoy the services the defendant provides. Arizona ex rel. Goddard v. Harkins Amusement Enterprises, Inc., 603 F.3d 666, 670 (9th Cir. 2010). To establish the final element, a plaintiff must further show that "accommodation of the handicap may be necessary to afford the [disabled] person an equal opportunity to use and enjoy the dwelling," that the accommodation is "reasonable," and that the defendant "refused to make the requested accommodation." See Dubois v. Ass'n of Apt. Owners, 453 F.3d 1175, 1179 (9th Cir. 2006).
The Department of Justice ("DOJ") has issued implementing regulations for Title III of the ADA as well as Technical Assistance ("TA") Manuals. See 28 C.F.R. 36.101 et seq. The regulations provide that a public entity "shall furnish appropriate auxiliary aids and services where necessary to ensure effective communication with individuals with disabilities." [*15]  28 C.F.R. § 36.303(c). The regulations further provide that a public entity "shall take those steps that may be necessary to ensure that no individual with a disability is excluded, denied services, segregated or otherwise treated differently than other individuals because of the absence of auxiliary aids and services." 28 C.F.R. § 36.303(a).
The regulations state that "a public accommodation should consult with individuals with disabilities whenever possible to determine what type of auxiliary aid is needed to ensure effective communication, but the ultimate decision as to what measures to take rests with the public accommodation, provided that the method chosen results in effective communication." 28 C.F.R. § 36.303(c)(1)(ii). "The type of auxiliary aid or service necessary to ensure effective communication will vary in accordance with the method of communication used by the individual; the nature, length, and complexity of the communication involved; and the context in which the communication is taking place." 28 C.F.R. § 36.303(c)(1)(ii). "It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to permit, at the expense of a handicapped person, reasonable modification of existing premises, occupied or to be occupied by a handicapped person, if the proposed modification may be necessary [*16]  to afford the handicapped person full enjoyment of the premises of a dwelling." 24 C.F.R. § 100.203(a).
An entity violates the ADA when it fails to provide a reasonable accommodation unless the entity can demonstrate that such accommodation would create an undue burden or fundamentally alter the nature of the service being offered. 42 U.S.C. § 12182(b)(2)(A)(iii). An "undue burden" is defined as "significant difficulty or expense." 28 C.F.R. § 36.104. The ADA requires that reasonable accommodations be provided and paid for by the public accommodation unless providing them would be an undue financial and administrative burden or a fundamental alteration of the program. PGA Tour, Inc. v. Martin, 532 U.S. 661, 688, 121 S. Ct. 1879, 149 L. Ed. 2d 904 (2001).

B. FHA
Under the FHA, unlawful discrimination includes "a refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford [a disabled] person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling." 42 U.S.C. § 3604(f)(3)(B). The Ninth Circuit has "repeatedly interpreted this language as imposing an 'affirmative duty' on landlords and public agencies to reasonably accommodate the needs of disabled individuals." McGary v. City of Portland, 386 F.3d 1259, 1261 (9th Cir. 2004). This duty includes the responsibility to provide and pay for reasonable accommodations that are not unduly burdensome. See Giebeler v. M & B Assocs., 343 F.3d 1143, 1148-52 (9th Cir. 2003) (internal citations [*17]  and quotations omitted) ("[T]he history of the FHA clearly establishes that Congress anticipated that landlords would have to shoulder certain costs involved, so long as they are not unduly burdensome."); see also H.R. REP. No. 100-711 at 25 ("it [is] illegal to refuse to make reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices, or services if necessary to permit a person with [a disability] equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. The concept of 'reasonable accommodation' has a long history in regulations and case law dealing with discrimination on the basis of [disability].") Courts "often rely on and apply the case law and regulations interpreting the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act in interpreting the 'accommodation' of disabled individuals under the FHA." Montano v. Bonnie Brae Convalescent Hosp., Inc., 79 F. Supp. 3d 1120, 1127, n.3 (C.D. Cal. 2015) (citing Giebeler, 343 F.3d at 1149 (courts interpret the FHA's accommodation provisions with the FHA's goal of "protect[ing] the right of handicapped persons to live in the residence of their choice in the community" in mind) (internal citations omitted)).
To prevail on a claim under 42 U.S.C. § 3604(f)(3), a plaintiff must prove all of the following elements: "(1) that the plaintiff or his associate is handicapped within the meaning of 42 U.S.C. § 3602(h); (2) that the defendant knew [*18]  or should reasonably be expected to know of the handicap; (3) that accommodation of the handicap may be necessary to afford the handicapped person an equal opportunity to use and enjoy the dwelling; (4) that the accommodation is reasonable; and (5) that defendant refused to make the requested accommodation." See 42 U.S.C. § 3604(f)(3)(B); Dubois 453 F.3d at 1179 (listing elements required to prevail on FHA claim); see also United States v. California Mobile Home Park Mgmt. Co., 107 F.3d 1374, 1380 (9th Cir. 1997) (listing prima facie elements of FHA claim).
Reasonable accommodations on behalf of disabled persons "may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling." 42 U.S.C. § 3604(f)(3)(B). The FHA requires "reasonable accommodations necessary to meet the disability-created needs of a disabled person, so that the disabled person may enjoy the same [housing] opportunities enjoyed by nondisabled persons." Giebeler, 343 F.3d at1150 (citing U.S. Airways v. Barnett, 535 U.S. 391 (2002)). The Barnett Court held that reasonable accommodations to achieve equal opportunity may require preferential treatment for disabled persons, because facially neutral policies or practices, even if not invidiously discriminatory, may result in treatment that denies disabled persons equal access and opportunity. Id. at 1150. The Seventh Circuit has held that "[w]hether the requested accommodation is necessary requires [*19]  a "showing that the desired accommodation will affirmatively enhance a disabled plaintiff's quality of life by ameliorating the effects of the disability." Dadian v. Vill. of Wilmette, 269 F.3d 831, 838 (7th Cir. 2001) (internal citation omitted).
"Ordinarily, an accommodation is reasonable under the [FHA] when it imposes no fundamental alteration in the nature of the program or undue financial or administrative burdens." Giebeler, 343 F.3d at 1157 (internal citation and quotation omitted). "The question whether a particular accommodation is reasonable 'depends on the individual circumstances of each case' and 'requires a fact-specific, individualized analysis of the disabled individual's circumstances and the accommodations that might allow him to meet the program's standards.'" Vinson v. Thomas, 288 F.3d 1145, 1154 (9th Cir. 2002) (citing Wong v. Regents of the Univ. of Cal., 192 F.3d 807, 818 (9th Cir.1999)). The plaintiff bears "the initial burden of producing evidence that a reasonable accommodation was possible." Id. Thereafter, the burden shifts to the defendant "to produce rebuttal evidence that the requested accommodation was not reasonable." Id.
The FHA requires a housing provider to engage in an interactive process with a tenant or resident with a disability. Montano, 79 F. Supp. 3d at 1128 ("Defendant's conduct, by failing to engage in the interactive process relating to the nature and scope of plaintiff's requested [*20]  accommodations, also constitutes a violation of the FHA.") The Montano Court cites Jankowski Lee & Assocs. v. Cisneros, 91 F.3d 891, 895 (7th Cir. 1996), as amended, for the proposition that a housing provider who fails to engage in an interactive process in order to determine the scope and nature of the requested accommodation violates the FHA. "If a landlord is skeptical of a tenant's alleged disability or the landlord's ability to provide an accommodation, it is incumbent upon the landlord to request documentation or open a dialogue." Id.

IV. Legal Conclusions
Plaintiff's First Amended Complaint (FAC) alleges that Chandler Villas violated the FHA and the ADA by refusing to provide Frank with a reasonable accommodation—specifically, a flashing doorbell—that would have given him an equal opportunity to use and enjoy the services offered by Chandler Villas. (See Doc. 108 at 12.) Defendant's primary argument is that it did not refuse or fail to provide Frank with the accommodation of a flashing doorbell. (Id. at 16-17.) Defendant also argues that the evidence does not show that the flashing doorbell accommodation was necessary for Frank to enjoy its services fully and equally, including the safety check service, because Woda believed, at the time of the tour, [*21]  that Frank had his own flashing doorbell and special phone that he would bring with him to the facility. (Id. at 17.)
With respect to the ADA, the parties do not dispute that Frank was a disabled individual within the meaning of the statute or that Defendant was a place of public accommodation. The parties dispute the third element of an ADA claim, which is whether Defendant discriminated against Plaintiff by denying a full and equal opportunity to enjoy the services it provided. The Court finds that Defendant did deny Plaintiff a full and equal opportunity to use and benefit from the safety check service it provides its residents. Specifically, the transcript of the conversation between Beebe and Woda shows that, when Beebe asked Woda whether Chandler Villas could install a flashing doorbell for Frank so that he could see when someone knocked on his door or rang his doorbell, Woda responded—not once, but twice—that Frank could install it himself. Woda further responded that other residents added "upgrades" to their apartments, such as screen doors, themselves, and added that Frank could also install such upgrades. Woda's testimony at trial indicated that she was not aware that Chandler [*22]  Villas had any obligation to provide a deaf resident with an accommodation, such as a flashing doorbell, under the ADA. And while her testimony further indicated that she would have been willing to discuss the doorbell further with Frank upon his applying to live at Chandler Villas, her response that Frank could install the doorbell himself, and her comparison of the doorbell to an upgrade such a screen door, demonstrates a denial of Frank's right to fully access and benefit from the "courtesy knock" portion of Defendant's safety check service.
Defendant argues that Woda's statements did not constitute a denial of the safety check service. However, Woda could have responded to Beebe's question in any number of ways. An ADA-compliant response would have clearly indicated to Beebe that Chandler Villas would provide and install a flashing doorbell for Frank to accommodate his deafness in the context of the safety check. Woda's response did not do so. Rather, Woda told Beebe that Frank could install the doorbell himself and even compared it to an optional "upgrade." Woda's response revealed a complete lack of understanding of the ADA's requirement that a public accommodation such as Chandler [*23]  Villas has an affirmative obligation to provide its residents with accommodations to allow them to fully participate in the facility's services. Woda did not address how Frank would be aware of a knock at his door that was performed as part of a safety check. She did not address the fact that a deaf individual would not hear a knock at the door. She did not indicate in any way that Chandler Villas would take steps to ensure that Frank had full and equal access to the safety check service. Woda exhibited a total lack of awareness of the needs of deaf individuals and completely failed to express or explain how Chandler Villas would accommodation them.
Further, Mr. Mejia testified at trial, and the parties do not dispute, that the safety check service, including the "courtesy knock," is an essential component of Defendant's services. But there is no meaningful dispute that Chandler Villas marketed and provided the safety check service for each of its residents, and Woda testified that the safety check was important for the residents' and their family members' peace of mind. Were the safety check not an essential service, an ADA violation still would have occurred. But the essential nature [*24]  of the service, as well as its safety-related purpose, makes the ADA violation even more concerning. Furthermore, Chandler Villas provides its residents with additional services that require a staff member to knock on a resident's door, such as medication management, pest control, housekeeping, and maintenance. In response to Beebe's question about the flashing doorbell, Woda did not address or communicate how Frank would receive the benefit of these additional services. The Court cannot assume, as Defendant appears to suggest, that an individual providing these services would or could simply enter Frank's apartment without first notifying him of their presence at his door. Such an expectation would violate basic standards of human interaction so far as to effectively render the safety check service unavailable to Frank. Were staff members to simply enter the apartments of deaf residents without first notifying the residents, the deaf residents would not be provided with equal access to and benefit from the safety check service. Accordingly, the facts and law show that Defendant violated the ADA by failing to provide the reasonable accommodation of a flashing doorbell.
With respect [*25]  to the FHA, the parties do not dispute that Frank was disabled within the meaning of the statute, that Defendant knew that Frank was deaf, or that the flashing doorbell accommodation was reasonable. The parties dispute the third and fifth elements of an FHA claim, namely, whether accommodation of Frank's disability was necessary to afford him an equal opportunity to use and enjoy Defendant's facility, and whether Defendant refused to make the requested accommodation. As discussed above, the Court finds that accommodation of Frank's deafness, in the form of a flashing doorbell that would alert him to a staff member's presence at his door as part of a safety check, was necessary to allow him to use and benefit from Defendant's safety check service. Without a flashing doorbell, Frank would not be aware that a staff member was knocking at his door to check on him. Woda did not propose, nor is the Court aware of, any alternative accommodation that would allow a deaf individual such as Frank to receive the benefit of the safety check service, or any of the other services that require a staff member to enter a resident's apartment. Thus, a flashing doorbell is clearly necessary to afford [*26]  Frank an equal opportunity to use and benefit from the services offered to Chandler Villas residents. Lastly, the Court finds that Woda did refuse to provide the requested accommodation. Beebe asked Woda during the tour whether the facility would be able to "put in" a flashing doorbell. Woda responded by saying, twice, that Frank could install it, and then compared the flashing doorbell to a screen door "upgrade" that other residents "did themselves." Without simply responding "no" to Beebe's question, this response is about as close to an outright refusal of a request for an accommodation as the Court can imagine. Again, Woda could have responded in any number of ways to Beebe's request, including asking more questions about the flashing doorbell, discussing why Beebe felt that it was necessary, or stating that the facility would provide and install a flashing doorbell for Frank free of charge. Had Woda been aware of Defendant's legal obligation to provide reasonable accommodations to disabled individuals, perhaps she would have responded in such a manner. But Woda clearly indicated that Frank would have to install the doorbell himself and compared it to an optional upgrade. This [*27]  response reveals a lack of understanding of Chandler Villas' obligation under the FHA to provide disabled residents with reasonable accommodations to allow them a full and equal opportunity to benefit from the facility's services—a lack of understanding that Woda's trial testimony affirmed and underscored. Accordingly, the facts and law show that Defendant violated the FHA and the AZFHA with respect to the flashing doorbell accommodation.
Accordingly,
IT IS ORDERED that judgment be entered in favor of Plaintiff on the ADA, FHA, and AZFHA claims. The Clerk of Court shall enter judgment accordingly and close this case.
Dated this 23rd day of February, 2023.
/s/ Rosemary Marquez
Honorable Rosemary Marquez
United States District Judge


End of Document