Taylor v. Pompeo
United States District Court for the District of Columbia
January 6, 2021, Decided; January 6, 2021, Filed
Case No. 19-cv-2987 (CRC)

Reporter
2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 256417 *; 2021 WL 7904001
WILLIAM TAYLOR, Plaintiff, v. MICHAEL R. POMPEO, Secretary of State, et al., Defendants.
Counsel:  [*1] For Barbara M. Barrett, Secretary of the Air Force, Mark T. Esper, Secretary of Defense, Michael R. Pompeo, Secretary of State, William P. Barr, Attorney General, Defendants: Dedra Seibel Curteman, LEAD ATTORNEY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, Washington, DC; Marsha Wellknown Yee, U.S. ATTORNEY'S OFFICE FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, Washington, DC.
For William Taylor, Plaintiff: Brant Casavant, Fair Work P.C., Boston, MA; Daniel K. Gebhardt, SOLOMON LAW FIRM PLLC, Washington, DC; Hillary Schwab, LEAD ATTORNEY, FAIR WORK P.C., Boston, MA.
Judges: CHRISTOPHER R. COOPER, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: CHRISTOPHER R. COOPER
Opinion



OPINION AND ORDER
Perhaps feeling a bit anchored down in Anchorage,1 Assistant U.S. Attorney William Taylor sought out and obtained a plum detail at the U.S. Embassy in Kabul, Afghanistan. Unfortunately, the posting was rescinded after the government, citing Taylor's Type-1 diabetes, declined to issue him a medical clearance to deploy to a war zone. Taylor responded with this suit under the Rehabilitation Act against the Attorney General and the Secretaries of State, Defense, and the Air Force, alleging that their agencies failed to accommodate his disability and unlawfully denied him a career-advancing [*2]  position. The government has moved to dismiss and, alternatively, for summary judgment. Finding that Taylor has plausibly alleged claims against all the defendants, and that many of the government's arguments for dismissal turn on facts that are subject to discovery, the Court will deny the motion.

I. Background
The following facts are drawn from Taylor's amended complaint and are accepted as true for purposes of deciding the government's motion to dismiss. The government naturally disputes many of Taylor's assertions.
Taylor is a criminal prosecutor in the United States Attorney's Office in Anchorage, Alaska, where he has accumulated an exemplary personnel record. Am. Compl. ¶¶ 12-13, ECF No. 14. Taylor lives with Type 1 diabetes but his condition has never adversely affected his job performance. Id. ¶ 18. In 2018, Taylor applied for a prestigious one-year detail in the Rule of Law Program in Kabul, Afghanistan, which is jointly administered by the Department of Justice ("DOJ") and Department of State ("DOS"). Id. ¶¶ 19-24. The job listing encouraged applications from individuals with disabilities. Id. ¶ 23. After several rounds of interviews, Taylor was selected for the [*3]  program. Id. ¶ 24. Prior to deploying, Taylor was required to complete a Foreign Affairs Counter Threat training course and receive medical clearance. Id. ¶¶ 28-29. DOS's Bureau of Medical Services, in collaboration with the Department of Defense's United States Central Command ("CENTCOM"), oversaw the medical clearance process. Id. ¶ 30.
Taylor claims that he was medically cleared for work in Afghanistan by two independent medical providers who evaluated him using forms provided by DOS. Id. ¶¶ 32-33. But after DOS received the clearance forms, it informed Taylor that his Type 1 diabetes barred him from deploying to Afghanistan absent a waiver from CENTCOM, which DOS requested shortly thereafter. Id. ¶ 32, 34-35. According to Taylor, DOS mistakenly believed that Department of Defense ("DOD") policy prohibited Type 1 diabetics from working in Afghanistan when, in fact, that policy requires that they receive an individualized assessment of their condition. Id. ¶¶ 35-36. Taylor maintains that CENTCOM denied DOS's waiver request without contacting him, consulting his medical providers, or reviewing his medical records. Id. ¶¶ 37-38.
Despite having been denied the DOD clearance to work in [*4]  Afghanistan, Taylor received a Class 1 Unlimited Clearance for Worldwide Assignment ("Class 1 Clearance") from DOS. Id. ¶ 40. DOS issues Class 1 Clearances to individuals with no identifiable medical issues limiting assignment abroad. Id. ¶ 41. DOS nonetheless informed Taylor that he was prohibited from working at the Embassy in Afghanistan because of his diabetes—again, according to Taylor, misciting DOD's policy as a categorical ban on Type 1 diabetics in Afghanistan. Id. ¶¶ 42-44, 46.
Taylor appealed DOS's decision to the DOS Bureau of Medical Services medical review board. Id. ¶ 47. Taylor contends that, like CENTCOM, the board denied his appeal without contacting him, his providers, or any Type 1 diabetes specialists. Id. ¶¶ 48-49. Taylor also lodged a written request to DOS to discuss reasonable accommodations. Id. ¶ 50. He received no response. Id. Subsequently, the administrators of the Rule of Law Program informed Taylor that they were requesting a waiver on his behalf from DOJ and, as a result, that he should not contact DOJ's human relations staff directly. Id. ¶¶ 54, 57. Despite these reassurances, no waiver request was ever submitted. Id. ¶ 55. Instead, the program administrators [*5]  cancelled Taylor's participation in a Foreign Affairs Counter Threat course, which was required preparation for the Kabul detail, and informed him that they no longer supported his participation in the program. Id. ¶¶ 56, 58.
Taylor then summitted both a waiver request and a request to engage in discussions about reasonable accommodations to the Executive Office for United States Attorneys' Human Resources Director and Assistant General Counsel. Id. ¶ 62. Both requests were unsuccessful. Id. ¶¶ 63-65. In denying the waiver request, the director allegedly told Taylor that DOJ "had other attorneys who could fill the position." Id. ¶ 65. Two months later, Taylor submitted a waiver request to DOD asking that CENTCOM conduct an individualized assessment of his health. Id. ¶¶ 67-68. CENTCOM denied the request. Id. ¶¶ 70-72. Citing its inability to accommodate a Type 1 diabetic at the Kabul Embassy, CENTCOM refused to recommend Taylor for work in Afghanistan. Id. ¶¶ 70, 72.
Taylor thereafter filed written complaints with DOS's Office of Civil Rights, DOJ's Office of Civil Rights, and DOD's Diversity Management Operations Center. Id. ¶¶ 90, 92, 94. He has since received final investigation reports [*6]  from each Department, as well as a notice authorizing him to pursue civil action against the Secretary of the Air Force. Id. ¶¶ 91, 93, 95, 96.
Having exhausted his administrative remedies, Taylor now brings suit under the Rehabilitation Act against defendants Michael R. Pompeo, in his official capacity as Secretary of State for the United States, Jeffrey A. Rosen, in his official capacity as the Attorney General of the United States, Christopher C. Miller, in his official capacity as the United States Secretary of Defense, and Barbara M. Barrett, in her official capacity as Secretary of the Air Force.2 Id. ¶¶ 1, 90-96. Taylor brings two claims under the Rehabilitation Act: first, a failure-to-accommodate claim stemming from the defendants' purported refusal to discuss potential accommodations that would have allowed him to deploy to Afghanistan to work in the Rule of Law Program; and second, an intentional discrimination claim stemming from the government's alleged refusal to allow him to participate in the Foreign Affairs Counter Threat course or work in the Rule of Law Program due to his diabetes.
The government timely moved to dismiss the complaint or, in the alternative, for summary judgment. The motion is now ripe [*7]  for consideration.

II. Legal Standard
Dismissal under Rule 12(b)(6) is proper when the complaint "fail[s] to state a claim upon which relief can be granted." Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6). While "detailed factual allegations" are not necessary to withstand a Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss, the complaint must provide "more than labels and conclusions" or "a formulaic recitation of the elements of cause of action." Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 555, 127 S. Ct. 1955, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929 (1955). In other words, the "complaint must contain sufficient factual matter, accepted as true, to state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face." Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678, 129 S. Ct. 1937, 173 L. Ed. 2d 868 (2009) (cleaned up). In evaluating a motion to dismiss, the Court "must treat the complaint's factual allegations as true and must grant plaintiff the benefit of all inferences that can be derived from the facts alleged." Sparrow v. United Air Lines, Inc., 216 F.3d 1111, 1113, 342 U.S. App. D.C. 268 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (cleaned up).
Summary judgment is proper when "the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). A factual dispute is "material" if the resolution might affect the "outcome of the suit under the governing law" and "genuine" if "the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986) (cleaned up). The party moving for summary judgment "bears the heavy [*8]  burden of establishing that the merits of his case are so clear that expedited action is justified." Taxpayers Watchdog, Inc. v. Stanley, 819 F.2d 294, 397 (D.C. Cir. 1987). In determining whether there is a genuine issue of material fact, the Court must view the evidence in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party and draw all reasonable inferences in that party's favor. Talavera v. Shah, 638 F.3d 303, 308, 395 U.S. App. D.C. 7 (D.C. Cir. 2011).
Where, as here, a defendant has moved for summary judgment under Rule 56 as an alternative to dismissal under Rule 12(b)(6), "the decision regarding whether or not to treat [the] motion to dismiss as one for summary judgment is committed to the sound discretion of the trial court," and the court "need not necessarily accede to [the defendant's] request regarding how its motion should be evaluated." Ross v. U.S. Capitol Police, 195 F. Supp. 3d 180, 192 (D.D.C. 2016) (cleaned up).

III. Analysis
Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act prohibits discrimination in federal employment on the basis of disability. 29 U.S.C. § 791. The Rehabilitation Act incorporates certain provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") and "cases interpreting either are applicable or interchangeable." Alston v. Wash. Metro. Area Transit Auth., 571 F. Supp. 2d 77, 81 (D.D.C. 2008) (cleaned up). An ADA disability discrimination claim can take one of four forms: (1) intentional discrimination, otherwise known as disparate treatment; (2) disparate impact; (3) hostile work environment; or (4) failure to accommodate. Lee v. Dist. of Columbia, 920 F. Supp. 2d 127, 132-33 (D.D.C. 2013). Though Taylor's complaint does not frame his [*9]  claims in any of those terms, it can reasonably be read as raising a failure-to-accommodate claim and an intentional discrimination claim.
A. Motion to Dismiss
The government moves to dismiss Taylor's claims on three grounds: first, that the complaint improperly names the Secretary of State, Secretary of Defense, and Secretary of the Air Force as defendants; second, that Taylor's failure-to-accommodate claim fails to allege that the government denied his accommodation requests or that Taylor was a "qualified individual with a disability" within the meaning of the Rehabilitation Act; and third, that Taylor's discrimination claim fails to allege an adverse employment action or "but-for" causation. The Court will address each asserted ground in turn.

1. Proper defendants
The government first moves to dismiss Taylor's claims against the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, and the Secretary of the Air Force. It argues that because none of these officials are or would have been Taylor's employer, he cannot bring suit against them. According to the government, the only proper defendant is the Attorney General.
The government is correct that most employment discrimination cases are filed against an existing [*10]  or prospective employer, and that Taylor does not allege that he was or would have been employed by any agency other than DOJ. But the D.C. Circuit has recognized an exception to that general rule—namely, a plaintiff may bring a discrimination claim against defendants "who are neither actual nor potential direct employers of particular complainants, but who control access to such employment and who deny such access by reference to invidious criteria." Sibley Memorial Hosp. v. Wilson, 488 F.2d 1338, 1342, 160 U.S. App. D.C. 14 (D.C. Cir. 1973) (permitting Title VII claim brought by male nurse against non-employer hospital after hospital limited plaintiff's employment opportunities by refusing to refer female patients to him); see also Koch v. Holder, 930 F. Supp. 2d 14, 17 (D.D.C. 2013).3
Taylor alleges that DOD, DOS, and the Air Force controlled the medical clearance process and rejected his repeated requests for a waiver. Their control, Taylor claims, foreclosed his employment in the Rule of Law Program based on "invidious criteria" (his diabetes). See, e.g., Am. Compl. ¶¶ 31, 37, 42, 45, 69-70, 72-73, 86-87, 104. While the government contends that DOJ was the ultimate decisionmaker with respect to Taylor's detail, that contention is one to be resolved at summary judgment or trial following discovery. Taylor has plausibly [*11]  alleged that DOD, DOS, and the Air Force acted as gatekeepers to the posting. Accordingly, the officials of those departments are all appropriate defendants at this stage of the case.

2. Failure to accommodate
Under the Rehabilitation Act, federal employers are required to "take reasonable affirmative steps to accommodate the handicapped, except where undue hardship would result." Barth v. Gelb, 2 F.3d 1180, 1183, 303 U.S. App. D.C. 211 (D.C. Cir. 1993). Failure-to-accommodate claims require the plaintiff to demonstrate that (1) he was a qualified individual with a disability, (2) the defendant had notice of the disability, and (3) the defendant denied the plaintiff's request for a reasonable accommodation. Ward v. McDonald, 762 F.3d 24, 32, 412 U.S. App. D.C. 24 (D.C. Cir. 2014); see also Weatherspoon v. Azar, 380 F. Supp. 3d 65, 71 (D.D.C. 2019).
The defendants do not dispute the second element of Taylor's claim, which requires that they had notice of his disability. Rather, they argue that Taylor has failed to allege the first and third elements: that he was "qualified" and that he was denied a requested accommodation. Following the parties' lead, the Court will take these arguments in reverse order.
a. Denial of a requested accommodation
As to the third element, the defendants argue that Taylor has failed to allege that he requested an accommodation or that any such request was denied. The Court disagrees. [*12] 
"An underlying assumption of any reasonable accommodation claim is that the plaintiff-employee has requested an accommodation which the defendant-employer has denied." Flemmings v. Howard Univ., 198 F.3d 857, 861, 339 U.S. App. D.C. 110 (D.C. Cir. 1999). No "magic words" are required for an employee to have requested an accommodation under the Act, but the employee "must make clear that [he or she] wants assistance with his or her disability." Butler v. Wash. Metro. Area Transit Auth., 275 F. Supp. 3d 70, 84 (D.D.C. 2017) (cleaned up). "Once the employer knows of the disability and the employee's desire for accommodations," the burden falls "on the employer to request additional information that the employer believes it needs." Woodruff v. LaHood, 777 F. Supp. 2d 33, 41 (D.D.C. 2011) (cleaned up). Specifically, in order "[t]o determine the appropriate reasonable accommodation, it may be necessary for the agency to initiate an informal, interactive process with the individual with a disability in need of the accommodation." Ward, 762 F.3d at 32 (cleaned up).
Taylor alleges that he made repeated, unsuccessful requests to engage the defendants in a dialogue to pursue a reasonable accommodation for his diabetes. He contends that the requests made clear that he sought assistance with his disability, and that they were handled to varying extents by all of the defendant agencies. See, e.g., Am. Compl. ¶¶ 33-35, 50 (DOS); id. [*13]  ¶¶ 53-55 (DOJ); id. ¶¶ 35, 67-73 (DOD); id. ¶ 69 (Air Force). Taylor further alleges that each of his requests for dialogue and assistance were either denied outright or completely ignored. See, e.g., id. ¶ 50 ("Taylor . . . submitted a written request to discuss reasonable accommodations, to which [DOS] declined to respond"); id. ¶ 64 ("Mr. Flinn [of EOUSA] refused the request to meet or to discuss reasonable accommodations with [Taylor]"); id. ¶ 70 (CENTCOM "refused to engage in the interactive process for purposes of identifying a reasonable accommodation"); id. ¶ 82 ("Defendants never engaged in discussions about reasonable accommodations despite [Taylor's] specific written requests to do so."); id. ¶ 101 ("Taylor made written requests to engage in a discussion about reasonable accommodations, but Defendants refused to speak with [Taylor] regarding potential accommodations"). These allegations may or may not prove true. But they are more than sufficient to meet Taylor's pleading burden at this stage of the case.
The Court likewise rejects defendants' contention that "the amended complaint does not allege what relief Taylor sought as an accommodation[.]" Defs.' Mot. to Dismiss or for Summ. J. at 5, ECF No. 20 ("Mot."). In fact, the complaint notes several times that Taylor requested an accommodation in the form of a medical or administrative waiver, which would have permitted him to staff the program in Kabul as initially planned. See, e.g., Am. Compl. ¶¶ 34-35, 47, 62-63, 67-69, 86. Numerous courts in this district and across the country have considered waivers from agency policy to be accommodations (reasonable or otherwise) for purposes of the ADA and Rehabilitation [*14]  Act. See, e.g., Bey v. WMATA, 341 F. Supp. 3d 1, 17-18 (D.D.C. 2018) (considering request for a waiver from public transportation authority's prescription reporting policy to be a request for an accommodation); Carrington v. Pompeo, No. 18-0880, 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 48494, 2020 WL 1323140, at *4 (D.D.C. Mar. 20, 2020) (considering request for a waiver from State Department's "hardship post" policy for foreign service officers to be a request for an accommodation); Wash. v. Ind. High Sch. Athletics Ass'n, 181 F.3d 840, 848, 850 (7th Cir. 1999) (considering request for a waiver from school's athletic eligibility policy to be request for an accommodation). The defendants cite no precedent for treating Taylor's waiver request differently.
Regardless, dismissal of Taylor's claim for failure to specify an accommodation would be contrary to the purposes of the Act. The D.C. Circuit has expressly stated that "it may be necessary for the agency to initiate an informal, interactive process with the individual with a disability in need of the accommodation" in order to "[t]o determine the appropriate reasonable accommodation" and fulfill its duties under the Act. Ward, 762 F.3d at 32 (cleaned up) (emphasis added). That is so because the Act contemplates a "flexible give-and-take" process "so that together [the parties] can determine what accommodation would enable the employee to continue working." Id. (cleaned up). Accordingly, courts are to "look [*15]  for signs of failure to participate in good faith or failure by one of the parties to make reasonable efforts to help the other party determine what specific accommodations are necessary." Id. (cleaned up).
While it may not say so explicitly, Taylor's complaint alleges facts to support a conclusion that the defendants failed to participate in the collaborative process as contemplated by the Act. Again, he claims to have made specific requests to engage in discussions to identify a reasonable accommodation, which were denied or ignored. See, e.g., id. ¶ 50 ("Taylor submitted a written request to discuss reasonable accommodations, to which [DOS] declined to respond"); id. ¶ 64 ("Mr. Flinn [of EOUSA] refused the request to meet or to discuss reasonable accommodations with [Taylor]"); id. ¶ 70 ("USCENTCOM . . . refused to engage in the interactive process for purposes of identifying a possible reasonable accommodation"); id. ¶ 82 ("Defendants never engaged in discussions about reasonable accommodations despite [Taylor's] specific written requests to do so"). As the D.C. Circuit has recognized, "[n]either party should be able to cause a breakdown in the process for the purpose of either [*16]  avoiding or inflicting liability." Ward, 764 F.3d at 32 (cleaned up). Granting defendants' motion to dismiss for failure to specify an accommodation would disregard that mandate.
b. Qualified individual
As to the first element of Taylor's failure-to-accommodate claim, the government argues that Taylor lacked the requisite medical clearance and thus was not an "otherwise qualified individual."4 Again, the Court disagrees.
Under the Rehabilitation Act, a plaintiff must be a "qualified individual with a disability." 29 U.S.C. § 794(a). To be "qualified," the plaintiff must, "with or without reasonable accommodation," be able to "perform the essential functions of the employment position that [he] holds or desires." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). Essential job functions include the "fundamental job duties of the employment position . . . not includ[ing] the marginal functions of the position." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(1). Essential job functions "bear[] more than a marginal relationship to the job." Kalekiristos v. CTF Hotel Mgmt. Corp., 958 F. Supp. 641, 660 (D.D.C. 1997) (cleaned up). Whether a particular function is essential is a factual inquiry. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n). Evidence of a function being essential includes: the employer's judgment, written job descriptions prepared before advertising the position or interviewing applicants, and the amount of time spent on the [*17]  job performing the function. Id. § 1630.2(n)(3).
Courts are divided as to where medical certifications fit into the analytical framework. Some courts have indicated that a lack of a required medical certification renders an employee unable to perform an essential function of his job, meaning that the employee fails to satisfy the "otherwise qualified" element of the prima facie case. See Harris v. P.A.M. Transp. Servs., Inc., 339 F.3d 635, 638-39 (8th Cir. 2003); Bay v. Cassens Transp. Co., 212 F.3d 969, 974-76 (7th Cir. 2000). Other courts have considered medical certifications to be a "qualification standard," which the employer may assert as a defense. See Bates v. UPS, Inc., 511 F.3d 974, 990 (9th Cir. 2007); Hatter v. WMATA, 244 F. Supp. 3d 132, 137 (D.D.C. 2017). Qualification standards are "personal and professional attributes" that may include "skill, experience, education, physical, medical [and] safety requirements." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(q).
The Court need not resolve this conflict, however, because either approach yields the same outcome at this early stage in the litigation. Should the Court deem medical clearance as an element of Taylor's prima facie case, he has sufficiently alleged that he possessed the requisite certification: specifically, Taylor claims that he obtained the necessary clearance—a Class 1 Unlimited Worldwide Availability Clearance—after his medical providers determined that he met the applicable DOS criteria. See Am. Compl. ¶¶ 32, [*18]  40. Whether this clearance qualified Taylor for the role's essential functions presents "a question of fact, which [he] has not (and need not have) alleged with particularity." Floyd v. Lee, 968 F. Supp. 2d 308, 327 (D.D.C 2013). Additionally, Taylor claims that he performed the essential job functions of being a DOJ attorney without any interference from his diabetes. Am. Compl. ¶¶ 17-18. Finally, according to Taylor, the government offered him the position and encouraged individuals with disabilities to apply for the program. Id. ¶¶ 23-24, 28.
Alternatively, treating medical clearance as a "qualification standard" rather than an "essential function" would also render Taylor "otherwise qualified." Under this approach, a qualification standard "may be a defense to a charge of discrimination" if the standard is "job-related and consistent with business necessity[.]" 42 U.S.C. § 12113 (emphasis added); see also Hatter, 244 F. Supp. 3d at 136-37. But this defense would be properly raised via a motion for summary judgment, not in a pre-discovery motion to dismiss. See Williams v. Shinseki, 161 F. Supp. 3d 77, 85 (D.D.C. 2011).
Accordingly, given that Taylor has pled the prima facie elements of a failure-to-accommodate claim, the Court will deny the government's motion to dismiss. This is not to suggest that Taylor's claim would survive summary [*19]  judgment. The government ultimately may be able to prevail by proving that Taylor's medical clearance was deficient and that he could not perform the essential functions of the job. Alternatively, the government may demonstrate that Taylor's lack of medical clearance means he has not met the qualification standards of the position. At this stage in the litigation, however, Taylor has sufficiently discharged his burden to plead a plausible failure-to-accommodate claim.

3. Discrimination claim
The government also moves for dismissal of Taylor's discrimination claim, arguing that he fails to state a claim because he has neither alleged that he suffered a materially adverse action nor sufficiently pled "but-for" causation. To make out a claim of disability discrimination under the Rehabilitation Act, a plaintiff must show that: "(i) [he] suffered an adverse employment action (ii) because of [his] disability." Adeyemi v. D.C., 525 F.3d 1222, 1226, 381 U.S. App. D.C. 128 (D.C. Cir. 2008). An adverse employment action is one that results in "materially adverse consequences affecting the terms, conditions, or privileges of employment or future employment opportunities such that a reasonable trier of fact could find objectively tangible harm." Forkkio v. Powell, 306 F.3d 1127, 1131, 353 U.S. App. D.C. 301 (D.C. Cir. 2002). "[I]n most cases," a tangible employment [*20]  action "inflicts direct economic harm." Burlington Indus. v. Ellerth, 524 U.S. 742, 762, 118 S. Ct. 2257, 141 L. Ed. 2d 633 (1998). The Court will first address whether Taylor has adequately alleged an adverse employment action before turning to causation.
a. Adverse employment action
In arguing that Taylor has not alleged a materially adverse employment action, the government first trains its fire on the cancellation of Taylor's participation in the Foreign Affairs Counter Threat training course. Generally, "[t]o rise to the level of an adverse employment action, the denial of a training opportunity must result in an objectively tangible harm that has a discernible, as opposed to a speculative, effect on the terms, conditions, or privileges of one's employment." Pauling v. Dist. of Columbia, 286 F. Supp. 3d 179, 203 (D.D.C. 2017) (cleaned up). For that reason, "[t]he denial of a single training or travel opportunity does not constitute an adverse employment action unless the plaintiff can tie the alleged discriminatory employment action to some actual, tangible adverse employment consequence." Doe v. Gates, 828 F. Supp. 2d 266, 270 (D.D.C. 2011) (cleaned up).
The government is correct that Taylor fails to allege that the cancellation of the Foreign Affairs Counter Threat course affected his employment opportunities in any objectively tangible way. He therefore has not sufficiently alleged [*21]  that the inability to participate in the course was a materially adverse action. But that is not fatal to Taylor's discrimination claim because his inability to participate in the course is part of his broader claim of being denied participation in the Rule of Law Program altogether. Accordingly, while being excluded from the training course is not independently actionable, to the extent evidence related to the exclusion bears on the legality of being denied the detail, that evidence would be relevant and discoverable.
This brings us to whether rescinding Taylor's detail to the Rule of Law Program constitutes a materially adverse action. The government claims that Taylor has offered only the type of "vague and speculative assertions" of lost professional advancement opportunities that are insufficient to "constitute an adverse action." Brookens v. Solis, 616 F. Supp. 2d 81, 91 (D.D.C. 2009). But the government's claim overlooks significant portions of Taylor's complaint. Taylor does not limit his allegations to future advancement opportunities.5 Rather, contrary to the government's argument, see Mot. 8-10, Taylor alleges that he was denied present income as well. See Am. Compl. ¶ 88 (alleging "lost income and lost professional opportunities") [*22]  (emphasis added); id. ¶ 107 (seeking relief for lost "back pay, front pay, retirement, and related benefits") (cleaned up); see also Taylor Aff. ¶¶ 2-3, ECF No. 22-2 (claiming that rescission of the Kabul detail resulted in a lost seven percent salary increase and other benefits, totaling approximately $55,000). Denial of a higher salary plainly qualifies as an adverse employment action. See, e.g., Johnson v. District of Columbia, 572 F. Supp. 2d 94, 108 (D.D.C. 2008) (finding that an "alleged failure to pay [plaintiff] a salary increase based on his protected class status is well within the scope of an adverse employment action").
b. But-for causation
The government next moves to dismiss Taylor's discrimination claim on the ground that he failed to allege that his disability was the "but for" cause of his being prevented from working in the Rule of Law Program. See Drasek v. Burwell, 121 F. Supp. 3d 143, 154 (D.D.C. 2015). "In an employment discrimination case, the threshold for pleading facts in support of causation is relatively low, and the court need not undertake a full causation analysis in determining whether [the] plaintiff has stated a claim." Badwal v. Bd. of Trustees of Univ. of D.C., 139 F. Supp. 3d 295, 311 (D.D.C. 2015) (cleaned up). Instead, the Court must simply evaluate whether the complaint contains "sufficient factual matter" that the Court can draw a "reasonable inference [*23]  that the defendant is liable for the misconduct alleged." Iqbal, 556 U.S. at 678. "Merely alleging that the employer's proffered reasons for the adverse employment actions is false may support an inference of discrimination sufficient to survive a motion to dismiss." Nurridin v. Bolden, 674 F. Supp. 2d 64, 90 (D.D.C. 2009). Additionally, "[a] plaintiff may support an inference [of pretext] . . . by citing the employer's . . . inconsistent or dishonest explanations, [or] its deviation from established procedures or criteria[.]" Walker v. Johnson, 798 F.3d 1085, 1092, 418 U.S. App. D.C. 364 (D.C. Cir. 2015).
Taylor maintains that the government's statement that it "had other attorneys who could fill the position," Am. Compl. ¶ 65, constitutes direct evidence that it was looking to fill his spot with a non-diabetic. He finds additional evidence of pretext in numerous claimed inconsistencies and deviations from policy—including the government's alleged vacillating support for Taylor's appointment; its purported departure from its policy requiring individualized assessments of waiver requests; and its ultimate refusal to accept disabled individuals into the Rule of Law Program despite encouraging them to apply. See id. ¶¶ 23, 36, 45, 52-58, 71. While the government may ultimately show that it had a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for preventing [*24]  Taylor from deploying to Afghanistan, the above allegations are sufficient to discharge Taylor's burden to plead that the defendants acted based on his disability. Accordingly, the Court denies the government's motion to dismiss Taylor's discrimination claim.
B. Motion for Summary Judgment
Finally, the government moves in the alternative for summary judgment. The government maintains that there is no material dispute that it denied Taylor's medical waiver because of government policy and, in any case, that it would have selected a different candidate for the detail; thus, Taylor's diabetes could not have been the "but for" cause of the denial. But granting summary judgment on that basis would be premature. "As the Supreme Court and this Circuit have repeatedly held, summary judgment is ordinarily appropriate only after the plaintiff has been given an adequate opportunity to conduct discovery." Coleman v. Johnson, 19 F. Supp. 3d 126, 138 (D.D.C. 2014) (cleaned up), rev'd on other grounds sub nom. Coleman v. Duke, 867 F.3d 204, 432 U.S. App. D.C. 216 (D.C. Cir. 2017). "This is especially true in employment discrimination cases" because "[b]efore discovery has unearthed relevant facts and evidence, an employment discrimination plaintiff may have difficulty defining the precise formulation of his case." Williams, 161 F. Supp. 3d at 85 (cleaned [*25]  up). For that reason, this Court's "ordinary practice" is to "declin[e] to consider an employer's evidence regarding its reasons for undertaking the challenged employment action prior to authorizing the discovery process[.]" Tyson v. Brennan, 306 F. Supp. 3d 365, 372 (D.D.C. 2017).
In accordance with Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56(d), Taylor has requested additional discovery, outlining the evidence he believes is necessary to gather before the Court should render a decision on summary judgment. See Pl.'s Resp. to Defs.' Stmt. Facts, ECF No. 22-1; see also Taylor Aff. ¶ 6. He specifically requests discovery to respond to the government's contentions that CENTCOM did make an individualized assessment in denying his waiver request, that his diabetes would have burdened CENTCOM's deployed health system, and that the government would have sent another qualified, medically cleared attorney in lieu of Taylor regardless of his diabetes. Id. Taylor also seeks discovery to determine whether DOD in fact has a categorical policy prohibiting all Type 1 diabetics from working in Afghanistan. See Pl.'s Opp'n at 25, ECF No. 22. In general, Rule 56(d) motions should be granted "almost as a matter of course unless the non-moving party has not diligently pursued discovery of the evidence." Berkeley v. Home Ins. Co., 68 F.3d 1409, 1414, 314 U.S. App. D.C. 358 (D.C. Cir. 1995) (cleaned [*26]  up).
Taylor has sufficiently identified areas of inquiry that he believes will enable him to establish his claims. See Stewart v. Gates, 786 F. Supp. 2d 155, 170 n.8 (D.D.C. 2011) (stating that plaintiff is not "necessarily entitled to all other discovery sought" but "may seek relevant discovery . . . before being required to respond to the defendant's motion for summary judgment"). If fruitful, this discovery may provide Taylor the necessary evidence to prove that his diabetes was the but-for cause of the government's rescission of his enrollment in the Rule of Law Program. Or, it might support the government's proffered reason for denying Taylor the opportunity to deploy. But that determination must wait until Taylor is given an opportunity to develop the evidence. Accordingly, the Court will deny the government's motion for summary judgment without prejudice.

IV. Conclusion
For the foregoing reasons, it is hereby
ORDERED that [20] Defendants' Motion to Dismiss or, Alternatively, for Summary Judgment is DENIED.
SO ORDERED.
/s/ Christopher R. Cooper
CHRISTOPHER R. COOPER
United States District Judge
Date: January 6, 2021


End of Document