Tejero-Cabrera v. Hamilton Sundstrand De P.R., Inc.
United States District Court for the District of Puerto Rico
January 25, 2012, Decided; January 25, 2012, Filed
CIVIL NO. 10-1456 (JAG/CVR)

Reporter
2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 92322 *; 2012 WL 2746841
JOSE TEJERO-CABRERA, DORIS RODRIGUEZ AND THEIR CONJUGAL PARTNERSHIP, Plaintiffs, v. HAMILTON SUNDSTRAND DE PUERTO RICO, INC., ET AL., Defendants.
Counsel:  [*1] For Plaintiff(s) or Petitioner: Rafael Colón-Flores, Esq.
For Defendant(s) or Respondent: Miguel A. Rivera-Arce, Esq., María Antongiorgi, Esq.
Judges: CAMILLE L. VELEZ-RIVE, UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE.
Opinion by: CAMILLE L. VELEZ-RIVE
Opinion



REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION

INTRODUCTION
Plaintiffs José Tejero Cabrera, his wife Doris Rodríguez, and their conjugal partnership (hereafter "plaintiffs Tejero") filed an Amended Complaint under the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. §12101 (hereafter "ADA") and supplemental state claims for disability discrimination and unjustified dismissal, against defendants for failing to provide reasonable accommodation to plaintiff Tejero's disabilities and for related adverse employment actions. 1 (Docket No. 17).
On July 20, 2011, defendant Hamilton Sundstrand de Puerto Rico (hereafter "defendant Hamilton Sundstrand" or the "Company") filed a Motion for Summary Judgment with its statement of uncontested facts and the corresponding memorandum of law. (Docket Nos. 22 and 23).
On October 19, 2011, plaintiff Tejero's opposition  [*2] to defendant's request for summary disposition was stricken by the Court. (Docket No. 46). On November 23, 2011, the Court referred the unopposed summary judgment motion to this Magistrate Judge for report and recommendation. (Docket No. 47).

STANDARD FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
Summary judgment is appropriate when "the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with the affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed.R.Civ.P. 56(c). Pursuant to the language of the rule, the moving party bears the two-fold burden of showing that there is "no genuine issue as to any material facts," and that he is "entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Vega-Rodríguez v. Puerto Rico Tel. Co., 110 F.3d 174, 178 (1st Cir. 1997). 2
After the moving party has satisfied this burden, the onus shifts to the resisting party to show that there still exists "a trial worthy issue as to some material fact." Cortés-Irizarry v. Corporación Insular, 111 F.3d 184, 187 (1st Cir. 1997). A fact is deemed "material" if it potentially could affect the outcome of the suit. Id. Moreover, there will only be a "genuine" or "trial worthy" issue as to such a "material fact," "if a reasonable fact-finder, examining the evidence and drawing all reasonable inferences helpful to the party resisting summary judgment, could resolve the dispute in that party's favor." Id.
At all times during the consideration of a motion for summary judgment, the Court must examine the entire record "in the light most flattering to the non-movant and indulge all reasonable inferences in the party's favor." Maldonado-Denis v. Castillo-Rodríguez, 23 F.3d 576, 581 (1st Cir. 1994). There is "no room for credibility determinations,  [*4] no room for the measured weighing of conflicting evidence such as the trial process entails, [and] no room for the judge to superimpose his own ideas of probability and likelihood . . . ." Greenburg v. Puerto Rico Mar. Shipping Auth., 835 F.2d 932, 936 (1st Cir. 1987). In fact, "[o]nly if the record, viewed in [this] manner and without regard to credibility determinations, reveals no genuine issue as to any material fact may the court enter summary judgment." Cadle Co. v. Hayes, 116 F.3d 957, 960 (1st Cir. 1997).
When opposing a motion for summary judgment non-movant is to comply with the provisions of Rule 56 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and the corresponding Local Rule in this district. Fed.R.Civ.P. 56 provides in its pertinent part: "A party asserting that a fact cannot be or is genuinely disputed must support the assertion by (A) citing to particular parts of materials in the record, including depositions, documents, ... admissions, interrogatory answers... showing that the material cited do not establish the absence or presence of a genuine dispute, or that an adverse party cannot produce admissible evidence to support the fact."
Local Rule 56(e) provides: "(e) Statement  [*5] of Facts Deemed Admitted Unless Properly Controverted; Specific Record of Citations Required. Facts contained in a supporting or opposing statement of material facts, if supported by record citations as required by this rule, shall be deemed admitted unless properly controverted. An assertion of fact set forth in a statement of material fact shall be followed by a citation to the specific page or paragraph of identified record material supporting the assertion. The court may disregard any statement of fact not supported by a specific citation to record material properly considered on summary judgment. The court shall have no independent duty to search or consider any part of the record not specifically referenced in the parties' separate statement of facts." (Emphasis in the original).
Succinctly, the opposing party is to accept or deny the moving party's statements of uncontested facts, as well as submit its own statement of uncontested/additional facts, which need to be also supported by proper citation to the record. Under these circumstances and having the Court already stricken plaintiff's statement of material facts in opposition to defendant's motion for summary judgment, this  [*6] Magistrate Judge first and foremost cautions that he who departs from the plain language of the rules and fails to comply with the anti-ferret rule does so at his own peril. 3
Nevertheless, even an unopposed motion for summary judgment is not automatically granted for the court must still consider the plaintiff's claim based on the record properly before the court and view the uncontested facts in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Sánchez-Figueroa v. Banco Popular de Puerto Rico, 527 F.3d 209, 212 (1st Cir. 2008) (citing Aguiar-Carrasquillo v. Agosto-Alicea, 445 F.3d 19, 25 (1st Cir. 2006). Thus, regardless that there is no opposition to defendant's motion for summary judgment, we still need to address the merits of defendant's request and determine if, under the pertinent legal provisions  [*7] and case law, defendant is entitled to summary judgment in its favor.

FINDINGS OF FACT
Plaintiff Tejero claims in the Amended Complaint that, while being employed with defendant Hamilton Sundstrand in the position of Maintenance Mechanic for about ten (10) years, he was eventually designated Supervisor. (Docket No. 17, ¶2). Around December of 2005, plaintiff underwent a left knee surgery and developed an osteoarthritic condition, for which he underwent a second surgery in August of 2008. He was then cleared to go back to his work with medical restrictions that included not climbing stairs or ladders. (Id. ¶3).
Plaintiff Tejero further avers his supervisor, Edda Vega, by September 2008, informed him that, due to his medical restrictions, the Company could not offer him a full time job and by October of 2008 he was transferred to another position as Machine Operator with a salary decrease. (Id. ¶¶3, 4). Upon having thereafter developed a mental condition and being under disability benefits with SINOT around August of 2009, plaintiff Tejero was not called back to work when his sick/disability leave expired. (Id ¶5). Plaintiff Tejero submits that, being an individual with disability under  [*8] the ADA and able to perform the essential functions of his job as Maintenance Mechanic, he was constructively discharged in violation of the ADA for failure to receive reasonable accommodation for his substantially limiting impairment. (Id. ¶¶5-7).
Defendant Hamilton Sundstrand proposes in its request for summary judgment there are uncontested facts establishing plaintiff Tejero has failed to establish the necessary elements for his ADA and supplemental claims. Defendant Hamilton Sundstrand submits as uncontested the following undisputed facts:

A. Plaintiff Tejero's Work, Jobs and Duties.
1. Defendant Hamilton Sundstrand is a manufacturing company dedicated mainly to aereospacial parts, products and other mechanical and electrical components to be used in commercial and private airplanes. It is incorporated under the laws of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. (Docket No. 23, ¶1; Exhibit A, ¶4, Nelanis Garcia's statement). 4
2. Plaintiff Tejero began working as a regular employee of defendant Company on March 22, 1999 as Assembler. On July 17, 2000, he was transferred to the position of Maintenance Helper.  [*9] (Id. ¶¶2, 3; Exhibit A ¶5, 6; Exhibit A-1, letter of employment 7-14-200; Exhibit B-I, Tejero's depo., pp. 72-73).
3. Plaintiff Tejero received the Company's Employees Manuals on December 17, 2002, September 25, 2006, and July 1, 2008. (Id. ¶4; Exhibit A-2, acknowledgments receipt 12-17-2002, 9-25-2006, 7-1-2008; Exhibit B-I, pp. 78-79).
4. On June of 2003, plaintiff Tejero was promoted to Maintenance Mechanic and on September of 2005 to Maintenance Mechanic II. Tejero's supervisor as Maintenance Mechanic II was Edda Vega. (Deft's Uncontested ¶¶5, 6; Exhibit A, ¶¶8, 9; Exhibit B-I, pp. 78-79).
5. The job description for the position of a Maintenance Mechanic II, which included the duties and responsibilities of plaintiff Tejero while he occupied the position until October of 2008, included:
I) sets up and installs machines and related equipment;
ii) makes major repairs on all plant equipment and facilities;
iii) fabricates and contracts guardrails machines guards, safety devices and related equipment;
iv) diagnosis and corrects problems causing malfunction of machines or equipment;
v) sets up and operates mills, drills, lathes, sheet metal equipment;
vi) installs air, gas, waterlines in accordance  [*10] with applicable codes;
vii) performs sheet metal, pipe fitting, plumbing, carpentry, welding, painting, masonry and structural steel fabricating tasks to construct, repair and maintain plant equipment, building facilities, and grounds;
viii) makes small-scale electrical installations and/or repairs of machines, lighting, switches and controls;
ix) diagnoses and corrects minor machine electrical control problems;
x) assists with major electrical work as required;
xi) constructs such special equipment as may be needed;
xii) uses precision measuring instruments, testing and gagging devices;
xiii) builds walls, partitions and offices in accordance with applicable codes;
xiv) works from blueprints, specifications, diagrams, sketches, schematic and verbal instructions;
xv) works with a minimum supervision;
xvi) produces a requisite amount of work of good quality;
xvii) observes safety and good housekeeping rules and practices;
xviii) performs other related duties as required;
xix) accurately reports labor;
xx) performs task to hazardous waste operation as described below:
a) inspected hazardous waste satellite areas;
b) inspect and maintain hazardous waste accumulation areas;
c) label hazard waste containers  [*11] to approved carrier;
d) maintain inventory of hazardous waste in an accumulation area;
e) provide hazardous waste container to approved carrier;
f) integrate emergency respond committee;
g) perform emergency clean up operations in case of hazardous material spill as described in the spill prevention control, countermeasures and contingency plan SPCC;
h) participate in annual training related to hazardous waste operation.
xxi) attends scheduled EH&S training program;
xxii) actively supports the organization's efforts to meet or exceed EH&S goals and plans;
xxiii) recommend improved EH&S practices
(Id. ¶8; Exhibit A, ¶10; Exhibit A-3, Maintenance Mechanic II Job Description 3-7-2007; Exhibit B-I, Tejero's depo., pp. 13-16).
6. Out of the duties and responsibilities in the job description for Maintenance Mechanic II, the essential functions of this particular job position are:
I) sets up and installs machines and related equipment;
ii) makes major repairs on all plant equipment and facilities;
iii) fabricates and contracts guardrails, machine guards, safety devices and related equipment;
iv) diagnosis and corrects problems causing malfunction of machines or equipment;
v) sets up and operates mills,  [*12] drills, lathes, sheet metal equipment;
vi) installs air, gas, waterlines in accordance with applicable codes;
vii) performs sheet metal, pipe fitting, plumbing, carpentry, welding, painting, masonry and structural steel fabricating tasks to construct, repair and maintain plant equipment, building facilities and grounds;
viii) makes small-scale electrical installations and/or repairs of machines, lighting, switches and controls;
(Id. ¶8; Exhibit A, ¶11).
7. As per plaintiff Tejero's admissions in his deposition, some of the essential functions of his job position as Maintenance Mechanic, along with the physical activity required from him are:
a) preventive maintenance and repair of plant equipment, including pumps and vacuums; use of heavy tools; stoop, kneel and squat for a prolonged time. (Id. ¶9(a); Exhibit B-I, Tejero's depo., pp. 88-92, 110-112).
b) installation of air, gas, waterlines and pipes, mainly in the plant ceiling; required to repeatedly climb stairs, lift heavy objects, weld, use physical strength of the extremities, stoop, kneel and squat. These installations could last for days or even weeks and were very physical in their nature. (Id. ¶9(b); Exhibit B-I, pp. 81-83, 86-88).
c)  [*13] pipe fitting, plumbing, carpentry, welding, masonry and structural steel fabricating tasks to construct, repair and maintain plant equipment, building facilities and grounds; requiring him to use and lift heavy tools and materials, use physical force, stoop, kneel, and squat. (Id. ¶9(c);Exhibit B-I, pp. 94-97).
8. Plaintiff Tejero admitted the incidental clerical work he performed regarding processing purchasing orders of materials and services was limited to a few hours every month and there were months he did not process any purchasing orders. (Id. ¶10; Exhibit B-I, pp. 199-203).

B. Plaintiff Tejero's Restrictions and Functional Capacity of his Position as Maintenance Mechanic.
9. Around August 25, 2008, plaintiff Tejero was subject to an orthopedic surgery of his right knee. (Id. ¶12; Exhibit B-I, p. 117; Exhibit A, ¶13).
10. Around September 15, 2008, plaintiff Tejero was cleared to return to work with defendant Company by his personal physician, Dr. Derick Colón, with the physical restrictions that: he could not climb stairs; could not sustain any prolonged walking or standing; was restricted to work at ground level; could not do any repetitive and/or prolonged kneeling, squatting  [*14] or standing. Tejero had discussed with his physician Dr. Colón what were his functions as Maintenance Mechanic. Dr. Colón issued the medical restrictions based on Tejero's description of his job position and related functions. (Id. ¶¶13, 14; Exhibit A, ¶14, medical certificate Dr. Derick Colón September 15, 2008; Exhibit B-I, Tejero's depo., pp. 119-121, 166-168).
11. On September 16, 2008, plaintiff Tejero went to the Company to report back to work and notified the medical restrictions of his physician. In light of these purported restrictions, Tejero was evaluated by Dr. José Arroyo, the Company's in house physician, which initiated the interactive process to evaluate the restrictions to determine if Tejero could perform the essential functions of his job, with or without reasonable accommodations. (Id. ¶¶16, 17; Exhibit A, ¶¶ 15, 16; Exhibit B-I, pp. 21-25, 166, 168).
12. On September 16, 2008, Dr. Arroyo preliminarily concluded that Tejero would not be able to perform most of the essential functions of his current job position due to the medical restrictions indicated by his treating physician. Dr. Arroyo recommended a transfer to another job position, if available. (Id. ¶17; Exhibit  [*15] A, ¶17; Exhibit A-5, Health Care Professional Report of Dr. Arroyo of 9-16-2008).
13. Around the third week of September, Nelanis García, Edda Vega and Dr. Arroyo met to discuss Tejero's medical restrictions and determine if he could perform the essential job functions of his position. They concluded he could not and that, to accommodate him, the Company would have to change the essential duties of the position. It was determined to offer Tejero a vacant job position that did not involve the physical activities prohibited by plaintiff Tejero's physician, Dr. Colón. (Id. ¶19; Exhibit A, ¶¶ 18, 19).
14. Around September 24, 2008, Nelanis García met with Tejero to notify him of the Company's determination, offering him the job of Machine Operator, which was vacant, and did not involve any physical activity contrary to the medical restrictions. García also informed the new position involved a salary reduction according to the Company's salary scale. (Id. ¶20; Exhibit A, ¶20; Exhibit B-I, pp. 124-125; 130-131).
15. During the above meeting, Tejero informed García he had constant pain in his extremities, including his hands, had trouble handling and carrying heavy duty equipment and tools.  [*16] His doctor had told him the medical condition was degenerative and was going to get worse with time and his pain was to increase in magnitude. This information provided by plaintiff was beyond what had been included in the medical certificate. (Id. ¶21; Exhibit A, ¶21; Exhibit B-I, Tejero's depo., pp. 127-130, 132-133).

C. Plaintiff's New Job position as Machine Operator.
16. Plaintiff Tejero accepted the new position of Machine Operator, which transfer was effective on October 6, 2008. (Id. ¶¶22, 23; Exhibit A, ¶22; Exhibit B-I, p. 132).
17. Tejero's salary as Maintenance Mechanic II prior to the transfer was $14.08 per hour. The maximum pay for the Machine Operator position was $11.66 per the Company's salary scale. Tejero's pay rate was set at $12.00 per hour. García informed Tejero he was going to be paid above the top of the salary scale for the new position. (Id. ¶¶ 24-26; Exhibit A, ¶¶24-26; Exhibit B-I, pp. 131-132).
18. Tejero admitted he would not have had any objection to the transfer to the Machine Operator position if he had maintained the salary for the position of Maintenance Mechanic II. (Id. ¶27; Exhibit B-I, Tejero's depo., p. 132, Exhibit B-II, p. 63).
19. Tejero never  [*17] requested from his physician nor brought to the Company any subsequent medical certificate with modified physical restrictions, except for the initial one of September 15, 2008. (Id. ¶28; Exhibit A, ¶27; Exhibit B-I, p. 174).
20. Tejero admitted that, had he remained in the mechanic position, he would have had to continue climbing stairs, work in elevated surfaces, kneel, squat and do repetitive physical movement. In the mechanic position he would have needed permanently to use electrical stairs (platforms), which was not feasible since other employees also used the electrical platform for different functions and there are two (2) of them, one (1) for outdoor use and another for indoor use distributed between the operation of eight buildings. (Id. ¶¶29-31; Exhibit B-I, Tejero's depo., pp. 175-176, 179-180, 182-183).
21. Tejero itemized in filing his Social Security disability claim the time he spent regularly, on a daily basis, of physical activities as part of his functions of Maintenance Mechanic II; including walking, climbing and kneeling for four (4) hours; standing, stooping and crouching for two (2) hours; handling or grabbing heavy objects and reaching for six (6) hours; and  [*18] doing clerical work for two (2) hours. He spent most of his daily routine walking, climbing, kneeling and reaching for heavy objects. Plaintiff Tejero indicated he could spend two (2) to three (3) days carrying heavy objects, installing support and welding, while climbing stairs all the time whenever there was installation of pipes, tubing and air waterlines on schedule. (Id. ¶¶ 33-35; Exhibit B-I, pp. 194-198; Exhibit C, S.S. Disability Claim, Form SSA 3368).
22. Tejero admitted that, had he remained in the mechanic job position, his medical condition would have deteriorated at a much faster pace. (Id. ¶ 36; Exhibit B-II, p. 77).
23. Tejero was able to function as a Machine Operator from October 2008 until August 2009 and had excellent relationship with his supervisor Manuel Rodríguez. Tejero requested and was granted a short-term non-occupational disability leave for a psychiatric condition. (Id. ¶¶ 38-39; Exhibit A, ¶¶ 30-31; Exhibit B-I, pp. 136-137).

D. Defendant's Economic Measures due to Low Production and Volume of Orders.
24. During Tejero's tenure as Machine Operator, defendant Company implemented measures to alleviate the downturn in volume of orders as a result of the economic  [*19] recession. It reduced work hours for most of the plant employees called "low production" and dismissed more than one hundred (100) employees during the years 2008-2009. Tejero was not affected by these reductions. (Id. ¶¶40-41; Exhibit A, ¶32-33; Exhibit B-I, Tejero's depo., pp. 140-141, 143-145, and 154-156).
25. Tejero admitted none of these economic measures were related in any way to his medical condition and purported request for reasonable accommodation. His complaint as to his supervisor Manuel Rodríguez was mainly the way he coordinated the work schedules and low production hours. (Id. ¶¶ 42-43; Exhibit B-I, pp. 151, and 158-159).

E. Additional Uncontested Facts.
Defendant also submitted additional uncontested facts regarding plaintiff Tejero's non-occupational disability and Social Security disability claim for benefits and issues regarding requested short term disability under SINOT which plaintiff had requested because of an alleged psychiatric condition which developed after he was working as a Machine Operator for almost a year. The Amended Complaint does not contain any allegation from which it may be inferred a claim of retaliation or some discriminatory practice by defendant  [*20] when plaintiff Tejero's temporary sick leave while working as a Machine Operator had concluded due to the alleged mental condition and he had been receiving benefits under SINOT. The Amended Complaint simply states that "Tejero was never called back to work after this leave expired". (Docket No. 17 ¶6).
These events would become necessary as to any claim for damages had plaintiff established his claims under ADA for these transpired after the issues raised in the Amended Complaint regarding the initial disability and job reassignment had taken place. Similarly, discussion as to low production work time assignment and reduction of hours because of economic conditions at the Company is not subject of any disputed facts for plaintiff Tejero has not submitted an acceptable statement of contested facts and the explanation by the employer as the reasons for this action are uncontested. (Docket No. 23 ¶¶ 45-60).

LEGAL DISCUSSION

A. Prima Facie Case.
For a disability claim to prosper plaintiff must establish that he: (1) is disabled as defined by applicable provision; (2) with or without reasonable accommodation was a qualified individual able to perform the essential functions of the job; (3)  [*21] and the employer discharged him because of his disability. The burden of proof on these three prongs is on the employee. Lessard v. Osram Sylvania, Inc., 175 F.3d 193 (1st Cir. 1999). 5
It seems to be undisputed that plaintiff Tejero was an individual with a disability within the meaning of said provision or defendant Company considered him to be an individual with disability, for which the first prong of a prima facie case is considered to be met. As to the second prong, on the first item thereunder whether plaintiff is to be considered a qualified individual who satisfies the requisite skills, experience, education and job related requirements, there is no controversy plaintiff Tejero was a well qualified individual who had performed satisfactory for at least ten  [*22] (10) years in the position of Maintenance Mechanic.
On the above discussion "essential function" is a fundamental job duty of the employment position the individual with a disability holds or desires; the term does not include marginal functions of the position, but at the same time it may be more encompassing than such core job requirements as an employee's technical skills and experience even including such individual or idiosyncratic characteristics as scheduling flexibility. See William H. Danne, Jr., J.D., Who is "Qualified Individual" Under Americans with Disabilities Act Provisions Defining, and Extending Protection Against Employment Discrimination to Qualified Individuals with Disability, (42 U.S.C.A. §§12111(8), 12112(a), 146 ALR Fed. 1 (1998).
The position of Maintenance Mechanic required, from plaintiff's own averments as defendant established in the undisputed facts, for plaintiff Tejero to do preventive maintenance and repair of plant equipment, including pumps and vacuums; use of heavy tools; stoop, kneel and squat for a prolonged time. During the installation of air, gas, waterlines and pipes, mainly in the plant ceiling plaintiff Tejero was required to repeatedly climb  [*23] stairs, lift heavy objects, weld, use physical strength of the extremities, stoop, kneel and squat. Plaintiff indicated these installations could last for days or even weeks and were very physical in their nature. Hence, it is undisputed that, among the essential duties of the position of Maintenance Mechanic, were the need to continuous climbing of stairs, work in elevated surfaces, kneel, squat and do repetitive physical movement. Nevertheless, the medical restrictions by plaintiff's own physician, Dr. Derick Colón, were that Tejero could not climb stairs, could not sustain any prolonged walking or standing, was restricted to work at ground level, could not do any repetitive and/or prolonged kneeling, squatting or standing.
To be considered a qualified individual, under ADA provisions, the employee must not only bear the burden to show he possesses the skill, experience, education and job-related requirement for the position, but also that he is able to perform the position's essential functions, with or without reasonable accommodation.
Defendant Hamilton Sundstrand has presented undisputed facts as to the essential functions of said position of Maintenance Mechanic. Defendant also  [*24] presented undisputed facts as to plaintiff's medical limitations which were submitted to the employer Hamilton Sundstrand by plaintiff's own physician. These undisputed facts show plaintiff Tejero was unable to perform the essential duties of the position he held as Maintenance Mechanic. Thus, plaintiff was offered another position as Machine Operator, which he accepted and performed for at least one (1) year.
As such, plaintiff Tejero was unable to establish he is a qualified individual, that is, one who is able to perform the essential functions of his job, without or without the accommodation. Thus, it would have been sufficient to stop at this point any further legal analysis for once ADA provisions are held insufficient as applicable to establish being a qualified individual or not with a disability, reasonable accommodation contentions need not be examined. Gelabert-Ladenheim v. American Airlines, Inc., 252 F.3d 54 (1st Cir. 2001); see Valle-Arce v. Puerto Rico Ports Authority, 651 F.3d 190 (1st Cir. 2011) (plaintiff must show to prove her reasonable accommodation case that despite disability he/she was nevertheless able to perform the essential functions of the job, either with  [*25] or without reasonable accommodation); see also Tobin v Liberty Mutual Insurance Co., 433 F.3d 100, 104 (1st Cir. 2005). 6
However, plaintiff  [*26] avers in the Amended Complaint, without any proper opposition to above uncontested facts, that it was the lack of reasonable accommodations which prevented him from performing his position as Maintenance Mechanic in that he should have been allowed the use of the electrical platform and being accompanied by another employee as a team work when performing his functions. These averments are not part of the Amended Complaint but of the memorandum of law which the Court struck from the record, as well as plaintiff's statement of contested facts that should have supported a mere allegation. In an abundance of caution, we proceed to discuss in the alternative the reasonable accommodation at issue arguendo that plaintiff Tejero would be considered a qualified individual (matter we deny), its bearing on the alleged discriminatory animus and the legal components.

B. Reasonable Accommodation.
The provisions of the ADA bar discrimination based on disability and impose affirmative duties to employers to offer a reasonable accommodation to a disabled employee. Calero-Cerezo v. Dept. of Justice, 355 F.3d 6 (1st Cir. 2004). Plaintiff submits in his Amended Complaint that defendant Hamilton Sundstrand,  [*27] because of the restrictions as to not climbing stairs or ladders, would not offer him a full time job and transferred him to another job position with a salary decrease. (Docket No. 17 ¶¶ 2-5).
To survive summary judgment on a reasonable accommodation claim, plaintiff, who has the burden, must produce enough evidence to establish that: (1) he is disabled within the meaning of the provision; (2) he was able to perform the essential functions of the job with or without reasonable accommodation; and (3) defendant, despite knowing of the disability, did not reasonably accommodate it. Faiola v. APCO Graphics, Inc., 629 F.3d 43, 47 (1st Cir. 2010); Freadman v. Metropolitan Property and Cas. Ins. Co., 484 F.3d 91 (1st Cir. 2007).
As above discussed, plaintiff Tejero was unable to establish he is a qualified individual, that is, one who is able to perform the essential functions of his job, without or without the accommodation. Nevertheless, for the sake of the argument, assuming that plaintiff would be such a qualified individual and upon his claim that the Company failed to accommodate him, we herein below discuss if there are contested issues of material fact in controversy showing defendant  [*28] did not reasonably accommodate him. 7
It is defendant's undisputed facts that insofar as the limitations as to climbing ladders, plaintiff Tejero could not have been assigned permanently the use of the electrical stair (platform) for there were other employees who needed to use the same for the different tasks, there were only two (2) of such ladders in the Company, one (1) for outdoor use and another for indoor use, and were used in all the eight (8) building tasks of the Company.
Evidently, the requested accommodation, if indeed requested to defendant, was not only burdensome but definitely not a reasonable accommodation insofar as the exclusive use of the electric platform to avoid climbing ladders. A reasonable  [*29] accommodation is one which would enable the plaintiff to perform the essential functions of the job, at least on the face of things, is feasible for the employer under the circumstances. Mulloy v.Acushnet Co., 460 F.3d 141 (1st Cir. 2006) (citing Reed v. LePage Bakeries, Inc., 244 F.3d 254, 259 (1st Cir. 2001)). It is for plaintiff to establish that an employer failed to provide a reasonable accommodation, by first showing not only the proposed accommodation would enable performance of the essential functions of the job but also that, at least on the face of things, it is feasible for the employer. See Enica v. Principi, 544 F.3d 328 (1st Cir. 2008). Under the limited opposition to defendant's summary judgment and lack of specificity on the record as to this issue, plaintiff's lack of submission of any undisputed facts has been unable to rebut defendant s' submission as to the accommodations not being feasible for the employer. Besides, the use of ladder and climbing were not the only limitations the plaintiff's personal physician, Dr. Colón provided to defendant. Plaintiff was also precluded from prolonged walking or standing, was restricted to work at ground level, could not do any  [*30] repetitive and/or prolonged kneeling, squatting or standing. Plaintiff Tejero also acknowledged he had constant pain in his extremities, including his hands, had trouble handling and carrying heavy duty equipment and tools. Dr. Colón told plaintiff the medical condition was degenerative and was going to get worse with time and his pain was to increase in magnitude. 8 Had plaintiff continued to work as Maintenance Mechanic he would have also needed to spend two (2) to three (3) days carrying heavy objects, installing support and welding, while climbing stairs all the time whenever there was installation of pipes, tubing and air waterlines on schedule.
The ADA does not require an employer to carry out a job restructuring as reasonable accommodation so as to exempt an employer from essential functions of the job and/or to reallocate essential functions  [*31] to other employees. Kvorjak v. Maine, 259 F.3d 48 (1st Cir. 2001); Phelps v. Optima Health, Inc., 251 F.3d 21 (1st Cir. 2001).
Additionally, defendant Hamilton Sundstrand has further submitted it provided plaintiff Tejero a new vacant position as Machine Operator that plaintiff could perform within the limitations provided to the Company. Plaintiff Tejero was offered, accepted and performed the duties as Machine Operator for over a year and any complaints as to this action was to the fact the new position caused a reduction in his hourly rate pay as per the Company's salary scale.
Reasonable accommodation may include reassignment to a vacant position, although an employee bears the burden of proof in showing such vacant position exists. See U.S. Airways, Inc. v. Barnett, 535 U.S. 391, 122 S. Ct. 1516, 152 L. Ed. 2d 589 (2002); Phelps v. Optima Health, Inc., 251 F.3d at 27; Calero-Cerezo v. U.S. Dept. of Justice, 355 F.3d 6 (1st Cir. 2004) (reasonable accommodation may include reassignment to a vacant position). See also 42 U.S.C. § 12111(9)(B) (1994 ed.) (The ADA specifically lists reassignment to a vacant position as one example of reasonable accommodation). Defendant Hamilton Sundstrand indicated the  [*32] salary scale for the new vacant position offered to plaintiff Tejero was of $11.66 per hour, offering plaintiff payment over said cap to $12.00 per hour. Plaintiff Tejero would have never complained of said new position if not for the lower salary scale to his former position of Maintenance Mechanic. Still, under the ADA it will be ordinarily considered unreasonable in the run of cases for assignment of otherwise qualified disabled individual to a position that will trump over seniority rules or in violation of collective bargaining practices, although not following employment practices does not necessarily mean that an accommodation is not reasonable.
In the absence of an opposition as to the uncontested facts submitted by defendant, no special circumstances exception to the salary scale has been presented to rebut defendant's contention that plaintiff Tejero was offered pay at the top of the corresponding salary scale for the vacant position he was offered, accepted and performed. After all, a possible accommodation that may conflict with an employer's workplace rules and policies does not necessarily mean that such an accommodation is not reasonable for an employer is not automatically  [*33] exempted from compliance with ADA simply because of a conflict with the employer's established seniority system. U.S. Airways, 535 U.S. at 391, 122 S.Ct. 1516.
More so, upon lack of contested issues, plaintiff Tejero has failed to contest defendant's submission as to the reassignment to the vacant position not being a reasonable accommodation or even a showing of no discriminatory animus towards plaintiff's disability. The moving party bears the initial responsibility of informing the court the basis for its motion and identify those portions of the record which it believes demonstrate the absence of a genuine issue of material fact. Sensing v. Outback Steakhouse of Florida, LLC, 575 F.3d 145 (1st Cir. 2009) (citing DeNovellis v. Shalala, 124 F.3d 298, 306 (1st Cir. 1997)). Plaintiff Tejero has neither contested as reasonable accommodation being assigned to the position of Machine Operator solely because it provided a lower pay scale for there is no showing of another position comparable to the employee's former placement to which he would also be qualified within his medical limitations. 9 Once the moving party has pointed to the absence of adequate evidence supporting the nonmoving  [*34] party's case, the nonmoving party must come forward with facts that show a genuine issue for trial. Carroll v. Xerox Corp., 294 F.3d 231, 236 (1st Cir. 2002). At such stage, the nonmoving party may not rest upon mere allegations or denials but must set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue of material fact as to each issue upon which he would bear the ultimate burden of proof at trial. See Anderson, 477 U.S. at 256, 106 S.Ct. 2505.
In light of the above discussed, plaintiff has not properly disputed defendant's request for summary disposition of his claims for disability discrimination. In the absence of any genuine issue of material fact in controversy, we find plaintiff was not a qualified individual under ADA for he could not perform essential duties of the position he formerly held, 10 as well as in the alternative, that a reasonable accommodation was provided by the employer to transfer  [*35] plaintiff to an available vacant position. Accordingly, we opine defendant's request for summary disposition is warranted.

C. Supplemental Jurisdiction.
Plaintiff Tejero also filed supplemental jurisdiction claims under Law No. 44 and Law No. 80, which were not subject of the summary disposition request filed by defendant Hamilton Sundstrand. Still, having herein disposed of the federal claims, pendent state claims jurisdiction is based upon the federal ADA claim. When the fundamental federal questions claims are dismissed, a district court may reassess its jurisdiction over the supplemental claim, which ordinarily weigh strongly in favor of declining jurisdiction. See Roche v. John Hancock Mut. Life Ins. Co., 81 F.3d 249, 256-57 (1st Cir. 1996); see also Camelio v. American Fed'n, 137 F.3d 666, 672 (1st Cir. 1998).
If the Court would grant summary judgment on the ADA claim as recommended herein, it is also recommended it declines to exercise supplemental jurisdiction over the Commonwealth law claims in the Amended Complaint.

CONCLUSION
In  [*36] view of the above discussed, it is recommended that defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment be GRANTED. (Docket No. 22).
IT IS SO RECOMMENDED.
The parties have fourteen (14) days to file any objections to this report and recommendation. Failure to file same within the specified time waives the right to appeal this order. Henley Drilling Co. v. McGee, 36 F.3d 143,150-151 (1st Cir. 1994); United States v. Valencia, 792 F.2d 4 (1st Cir. 1986). See Paterson-Leitch Co. v. Mass. Mun. Wholesale Elec. Co., 840 F.2d 985, 991 (1st Cir. 1988) ("Systemic efficiencies would be frustrated and the magistrate's role reduced to that a mere dress rehearser if a party were allowed to feint and weave at the initial hearing, and save its knockout punch for the second round").
In San Juan, Puerto Rico, this 25th day of January of 2012.
/s/ CAMILLE L. VELEZ-RIVE
CAMILLE L. VELEZ-RIVE
UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE


End of Document

