Thomas v. Covance, Inc.
United States District Court for the Central District of California, Southern Division
September 14, 2015, Decided; September 14, 2015, Filed
Case No.: EDCV 14-01224-CJC(MRWx)

Reporter
2015 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 200644 *
MARK TYLER THOMAS, Plaintiff, v. COVANCE, INC., et al., Defendants.
Counsel:  [*1] For Mark Tyler Thomas, an individual, Plaintiff: Assaf Lichtash, LEAD ATTORNEY, Pershing Square Law Firm PC, Los Angeles, CA.
For Covance Inc, a corporation, Covance Labratories Inc, a corporation, Defendants: Daniel E Waldman, LEAD ATTORNEY, Waldman Law LLC, Palo Alto, CA; Jody Ann Landry, LEAD ATTORNEY, Peter Michael Perez, Liliya Stanik, Littler Mendelson PC, San Diego, CA.
Judges: CORMAC J. CARNEY, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: CORMAC J. CARNEY
Opinion



ORDER GRANTING DEFENDANTS' MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT

I. INTRODUCTION
Plaintiff Mark Tyler Thomas filed suit against his former employer, Covance, Inc., in California Superior Court, asserting seven causes of action under California law: (1) employment discrimination on the basis of disability; (2) failure to make reasonable accommodations for a known disability; (3) failure to engage in the interactive process; (4) constructive discharge in violation of public policy; (5) failure to prevent discrimination in the workplace; (6) intentional infliction of emotional distress (IIED); and (7) negligent infliction of emotional distress (NIED). Covance removed the case to federal court based on diversity jurisdiction and later moved for summary judgment on all [*2]  claims. For the following reasons, the Court GRANTS Covance's motion.

II. BACKGROUND
Thomas has worked in clinical operations since 1999. In early March 2013, Covance hired Thomas to work as a Senior Clinical Research Associate (CRA). (Dkt. 33-2, Thomas Dep. Ex. 3.) Thomas was living in the San Francisco Bay Area at the time. (Id.) His main duty as a Senior CRA was to provide on-site monitoring for clinical studies, which entailed spending 60% of his time traveling and working at monitoring study sites located in various locations in the United States. (Thomas Dep. Ex. 9.)
After working for Covance for about three weeks, Thomas sustained a non-work-related injury to his neck and shoulder. (Thomas Dep. 68:17-69:25.) He informed Covance of the injury and explained that his doctor had told him not to travel for two weeks. (Id. 69:16-70:11.) Despite the initial two-week estimate, Thomas's doctor did not release him to travel until September 2013. (Id. 81:13-25.) Covance had Thomas continue his job training from home during the first week following his injury, but his supervisor then insisted that he go on short-term disability until he was able to travel again. (Id. 71:3-72:1.) During this [*3]  time, in May 2013, Thomas moved from the Bay Area to Palm Springs. (Id. 66:15-16.) Before going on short-term disability, Thomas had never done a site visit for Covance—his work time was focused on training. (Id. 68:17-23, 71:3-22.) While on short-term disability, Thomas collected disability benefits from Covance and the State of California. (Id. 81:13-82:12.)
On September 6, 2013, a Human Resources Partner at Covance named Bonnie Ruch emailed Thomas and attempted to schedule a call to "engage in the interactive process to discuss potential reasonable accommodations that might be available to help [him] perform the essential functions of [his] job." (Id. 85:1-87:12, Ex. 15.) Thomas responded to Ruch on September 13, and explained at his deposition that he had not responded earlier because he was not familiar with the phrase "interactive process call," was having doctor visits during that period, and had not yet been cleared to return to work. (Id. 87:13-87:20.)
In a September 18, 2013 email, Thomas told Ruch that he had been released to work—with restrictions—as of that date. (Id. Ex. 19 at 3.) Thomas and Ruch held an interactive process call on September 20, during which Thomas indicated [*4]  that he was restricted to flights of one hour or less, but that he could perform unlimited driving because he could stop the car and stretch. (Id. 97:14-17, Ex. 19 at 1, Ex. 21.) Thomas noted that Ruch "seemed okay with it" when he notified her of his travel restrictions. (Id. 98:2-4.)
On September 23, 2013, Ruch sent an email to Thomas's supervisor, Clinical Operations Manager Dayna Hohmann, to set up a phone meeting to determine whether a reasonable accommodation could be found. (Id. at 88:4-14; Dkt. 33-2, Hohmann Decl. Ex. 1.) Ruch also emailed Thomas to let him know she was in the process of determining whether Covance could accommodate his travel restrictions. (Dkt. 33-2, Ruch Dep. Ex. 78.) The next day, Hohmann emailed Resource Manager Jeffrey Wilson, who was responsible for assigning Covance CRAs to studies, (Dkt. 33-2, Wilson Dep. 13:2-4), and asked Wilson to determine whether or not Covance could accommodate Thomas's travel restrictions. (Dkt. 33-2, Hohmann Decl. Ex. 3.) On October 1, Wilson reported that there were no suitable assignments at that time. (Dkt. 33-2, Wilson Decl. Ex. 1.) Hohmann relayed Wilson's message to Ruch that day. (Hohmann Decl. Ex. 4.)
On October 3, 2013, [*5]  Thomas informed Ruch that his doctor had taken him completely off work through November 1. (Thomas Dep. 107:15-24.) Thomas exhausted his Covance-provided short-term disability benefits in October 2013, (Thomas Dep. 122:2-122:19), and was then placed on an unpaid leave of absence, (Id. 140:14-18). Thomas's doctor released him to return to work effective November 1, with the restrictions that his flight time be limited to one hour and his driving time limited to two hours. (Id. Ex. 25.) Thomas and Ruch spoke on November 1, and Ruch informed Thomas that there was no CRA work available that could meet his travel restrictions. (Id. 139:22-140:18.) The following day, Ruch sent Thomas a letter memorializing the call and indicating that she would continue the interactive process, but that at that time the only reasonable accommodation Covance could make was continuing to provide him with an unpaid leave of absence. (Id. Ex 33.) Ruch further explained that:
As a Senior CRA, one of the essential functions of your job is traveling to client sites, many of which are located a great distance from your new home in Palm Springs. Many of these client sites are more than an hour's plane ride or two [*6]  hours by car away. The fact that your medical condition prevents you from flying on a plane for more than an hour or driving in a car for more than two hours makes it impossible for you to continue to perform your job as a Senior CRA as the job is ordinarily structured (where all CRAs in the region are available to monitor sites anywhere in the region). For that reason, we are working hard to explore whether we can reasonably adapt your job such that you may be able to continue to work. We hope to have an answer on this within the next few business days. In the meantime, we will continue to accommodate you by allowing you a leave of absence.
(Id. Ex. 33.) Ruch further advised Thomas to contact her if there was any change in his restrictions, and told him that in the meantime Covance was working to determine whether it could find him a reasonable accommodation that would allow him to work in light of his restrictions then in place. (Id.)
On November 5, Covance's Director of Clinical Operations, Beverly Buckingham sent a detailed email to Ruch indicating that given Thomas's location, travel restrictions and lack of experience monitoring for Covance, as well as Covance's policy of assigning [*7]  CRAs to only a small number of studies in order to foster their expertise in particular areas, the company had no monitoring duties suitable for him at that time. (Dkt. 33-2, Buckingham Dep. Ex. 118.) On November 18, Ruch sent another letter to Thomas explaining that there was still no work that would fit within his travel restrictions and mentioning Covance's policy of assigning CRAs to a limited number of studies at a time to ensure the high quality of their work. (Thomas Dep. Ex. 35.) Ruch explained that even if there had been more testing sites that met Thomas's travel restrictions, being exclusively assigned to those sites would have required him to learn too many different study protocols at once, which would violate of Covance's limited assignment policy. (Id.) She also advised Thomas that given the lack of availability of suitable work, Covance still could offer nothing more than a leave of absence. (Id.)
On December 6, 2013, Thomas sent Ruch a copy of her November 5 letter with his own written responses inserted in-line. (Id. Ex. 39.) There, he disputed Ruch's representation that there was insufficient work in Southern California and stated that he saw Covance job openings [*8]  for CRAs in Phoenix, San Diego, and San Francisco. (Id.) At his deposition, Thomas acknowledged that each job posting he mentioned stated that the job's monitoring sites could be in the North East, South East, South Central, or North Central regions. (Id. 178:3-22.) Thomas also acknowledged that he was not aware of any specific monitoring sites that fit his work restrictions from his home in Palm Springs as of November 2013. (Thomas Dep. 139:11-15.)
On December 11, 2013, Ruch sent Thomas a letter acknowledging receipt of his responses to her November 18 letter. (Id. Ex. 41.) She again asked Thomas to send Covance an update regarding his restrictions and information about what type of accommodation he and his doctors would propose that Covance consider. (Id.) Thomas did not send Covance any updated or changed restrictions at any time after receiving this letter. (Id. 184:23-185:2.)
Thomas admitted that he never heard anyone at Covance say anything negative to him about his back injury or restrictions caused by the back injury, and that he never heard anyone in Covance HR or management say anything about how they did not want someone with such an injury working for them. (Dkt. 195:11-20.) [*9] 
Thomas resigned from his job on May 16, 2014, (Id. 188:2-19, Ex. 43), and brought this action through counsel that same day. (Dkt. 1-1.)

III. LEGAL STANDARD
The Court may grant summary judgment on "each claim or defense—or the part of each claim or defense—on which summary judgment is sought." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). Summary judgment is proper where the pleadings, the discovery and disclosure materials on file, and any affidavits show that "there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Id.; see also Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). The party seeking summary judgment, Covance here, bears the initial burden of demonstrating the absence of a genuine issue of material fact. Celotex Corp., 477 U.S. at 325. A factual issue is "genuine" when there is sufficient evidence such that a reasonable trier of fact could resolve the issue in the nonmovant's favor. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). A fact is "material" when its resolution might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law, and is determined by looking to the substantive law. Id. "Factual disputes that are irrelevant or unnecessary will not be counted." Id. at 249.
Where, as here, the nonmovant will have the burden of proof at trial, the moving party may discharge its burden of production [*10]  by either (1) negating an essential element of the opposing party's claim or defense, Adickes v. S.H. Kress & Co., 398 U.S. 144, 158-60, 90 S. Ct. 1598, 26 L. Ed. 2d 142 (1970), or (2) showing that there is an absence of evidence to support the nonmoving party's case, Celotex Corp., 477 U.S. at 325. Once this burden is met, the party resisting the motion must set forth, by affidavit, or as otherwise provided under Rule 56, "specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 256. A party opposing summary judgment must support its assertion that a material fact is genuinely disputed by (i) citing to materials in the record, (ii) showing the moving party's materials are inadequate to establish an absence of genuine dispute, or (iii) showing that the moving party lacks admissible evidence to support its factual position. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(1)(A)-(B). The opposing party may also object to the material cited by the movant on the basis that it "cannot be presented in a form that would be admissible in evidence." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(2). But the opposing party must show more than the "mere existence of a scintilla of evidence"; rather, "there must be evidence on which the jury could reasonably find for the [opposing party]." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 252.
In considering a motion for summary judgment, the court must examine the evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving party, [*11]  and draw all justifiable inferences in its favor. Id.; United States v. Diebold, Inc., 369 U.S. 654, 655, 82 S. Ct. 993, 8 L. Ed. 2d 176 (1962); T.W. Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Pac. Elec. Contractors Ass'n, 809 F.2d 626, 630-31 (9th Cir. 1987). The court does not make credibility determinations, nor does it weigh conflicting evidence. Eastman Kodak Co. v. Image Tech. Servs., Inc., 504 U.S. 451, 456, 112 S. Ct. 2072, 119 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1992). But conclusory and speculative testimony in affidavits and moving papers is insufficient to raise triable issues of fact and defeat summary judgment. Thornhill Pub. Co., Inc. v. GTE Corp., 594 F.2d 730, 738 (9th Cir. 1979). The evidence the parties present must be admissible. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). "If the court does not grant all the relief requested by the motion, it may enter an order stating any material fact — including an item of damages or other relief — that is not genuinely in dispute and treating the fact as established in the case." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(g).

III. ANALYSIS

A. The Claim for Failure to Make a Reasonable Accommodation
California's Fair Employment and Housing Act (FEHA) requires an employer to provide a reasonable accommodation for an employee with a known physical disability, unless doing so would cause undue hardship. Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(m). To prevail on a claim for failure to accommodate under the FEHA, a plaintiff must prove that (1) he has a disability; (2) he is qualified to perform the essential job functions of his position with or without a reasonable accommodation; and (3) his employer failed to reasonably accommodate him. Wilson v. Cty. of Orange, 169 Cal. App. 4th 1185, 1192, 87 Cal. Rptr. 3d 439 (2009).
Essential functions [*12]  are "the fundamental job duties of the employment position the individual with a disability holds or desires." Cal. Gov't Code § 12926(f). Evidence of whether a given function is essential includes: (1) the employer's judgment as to which functions are essential, (2) written job descriptions prepared before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job, and (3) the amount of time spent on the job performing the function. Cal. Gov't Code § 12926(f)(2). Employers are not required to eliminate an essential job function in order to meet their obligation to provide reasonable accommodations. Nealy v. Santa Monica, 234 Cal. App. 4th 359, 375, 184 Cal. Rptr. 3d 9 (2015).1
The evidence overwhelmingly indicates that travel to distant clinical monitoring sites is an essential job function of Senior CRAs. Covance's Senior CRA job description lists on-site visits as an essential job function and further indicates that the job requires travel 60% of the time. (Thomas Dep. Ex. 9.) Ruch affirmed that travel was an essential element of Thomas's job duties in her November 1, 2013 letter to him, and noted that many job sites were a great distance from Thomas's home in Palm Springs. (Id. Ex. 33.) Thomas also acknowledged that his principal job duty as a Senior CRA was to provide on-site monitoring for clinical studies (Id. 67:10-13), [*13]  that this entailed travel up to 60% of the time (Id. 63:17-64:1), that his position required travel outside of California (Id. 53:3-54:16), and that extended travel far from California was a substantial part of his previous clinical-trial-related positions (Id. 20:17-21:13, 23:9-24:1, 26:4-8). Thus, the description of Covance's Senior CRA position, Thomas's understanding of that position, and Thomas's own past experience all indicate that long-distance travel is an essential function of the Senior CRA position. Accordingly, Covance was not required to eliminate that job function to accommodate Thomas. Nealy, 234 Cal. App. 4th at 375.
Thomas has also failed to cite any evidence that would enable a reasonable trier of fact to conclude that it was possible to implement some measure short of eliminating the travel requirement altogether in order to accommodate his disability. By November 1, 2013, Thomas was restricted to flights of no longer than one hour and two hours of driving. (Thomas Dep. Ex. 25.) Covance has cited internal correspondence demonstrating that after her initial interactive process phone call with Thomas on September 20, 2013, Ruch worked with Hohmann and Wilson to determine whether it would be possible [*14]  for Thomas to carry out his functions as a CRA with his travel restrictions. Wilson, who was responsible for assigning CRAs to job sites, assessed the issue and indicated that at that time there were no openings that Thomas could fill given his restrictions. (Wilson Decl. Ex. 1; Hohmann Decl. Ex. 4.) A month later, once Thomas was released from his October doctor-imposed full separation from work, Buckingham provided Ruch with a detailed assessment of Covance's staffing needs for CRAs at that time and concluded that Thomas was not suitable for any openings given his restrictions. (Buckingham Dep. Ex. 118.) Specifically, Buckingham noted that of the 38 CRAs in California, all but one monitored sites throughout the state and the southwest region as a whole. (Id.) The one CRA who did not was based in Los Angeles, but there was not enough work in that area to keep her fully occupied at the time. (Id.) Buckingham also indicated that Covance's business model was to assign CRAs to a small number of studies to ensure that they had adequate time to become experts on the protocols, and that limiting a CRA's range to study sites within a one-hour flight would raise quality concerns because the [*15]  CRA would have to learn a too many different protocols to render that feasible. (Id.)
Thomas failed to introduce any evidence that plausibly calls into question Covance's assertions about the nature of the Senior CRA job. He pointed to several Covance CRA positions he saw advertised on Monster.com and argued that they were possible accommodations, (Thomas Dep. 174:16-175:8), but each of those job postings clearly indicated that the monitoring sites connected to the job could be located in the North East, South East, South Central, or North Central regions, far beyond the range of Thomas's one-hour flight restriction. (Thomas Dep. Ex. 40.) Thomas acknowledges that the cities where the advertised jobs were based were not necessarily the areas where the monitoring would be based (Id. 178:10-22), and after his injury he never represented to Covance that he was capable of traveling to locations throughout the United States. Thomas did suggest that he could fly an hour and drive to a site, or that he could drive to Los Angeles and San Diego (Id. 174:16-175:8, Ex. 39), but he has introduced no evidence at all showing that Covance had an opening or could create an opening for a Senior CRA acting [*16]  within those geographic limits. He acknowledged that he was not aware of any studies that fit within his restrictions that were assigned to someone else as of November 2013. (Id. 139:11-15.) Additionally, Covance has represented—and Thomas has not refuted—that no CRAs were hired in California between November 25, 2013 and Thomas's May 2014 resignation. (Dkt. 33-2 Kapferer Decl. ¶ 2.)
Transfer to a suitable alternative open position that does not require performance of the restricted activities at issue can also be a reasonable accommodation, but here Thomas has marshalled no evidence that would suggest there was a suitable job to which he could be transferred. During his November 1, 2013 interactive process call with Ruch, Thomas proposed that he review Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) as an accommodation. (Thomas Dep. Ex. 33.) But Ruch explained that SOPs pertain to current clinical monitoring and are ordinarily done by active CRAs in the course of their clinical monitoring duties, not by employees with the sole purpose of monitoring SOPs. (Id.) Covance was not obligated to create such a position to accommodate Thomas. See Hastings v. Dept. of Corrections, 110 Cal. App. 4th 963, 972, 2 Cal. Rptr. 3d 329 (2003) (finding that the obligation to reassign a disabled employee [*17]  does not require the employer to create a new job).
Covance also informed Thomas that he was unqualified for a non-traveling position because those are assigned to "Senior CRAs who have proven monitoring skills and extensive Covance experience," (Thomas Dep. Ex. 35), whereas Thomas had only been working at Covance for three weeks at the time of his injury, and had never had a monitoring assignment through Covance. Ruch also represented that in any case there were no open non-traveling positions in Thomas's area, even for a qualified candidate. (Id.)
Given the dearth of traveling work that fit within Thomas's restrictions and both his lack of qualifications for and lack of availability of non-traveling work, there is nothing in the record indicating that Thomas's disability could have been reasonably accommodated by anything more than an extended leave of absence.
Thomas's briefing argues without citation that the evidence shows he was able to travel similar distances to those he traveled when first hired, but with some accommodations. (Dkt. 37, Pl.'s Opp'n to Defs.' Mot. Summ. J. (Pl. Opp'n) 18.) This appears to be unsupported by the record, as Thomas was sent to New Jersey for training [*18]  when first hired but acknowledged that such a trip would not be feasible post-injury. (Dkt. 37-3, Thomas Declaration Ex. 7, Transcription of Interactive Process Recording.) Thomas further represented in his brief that he could combine train, bus, car, and plane travel to reach distant trial sites, and that he would be able to work while traveling so he would not lose time. He provided no evidence of how this would work in practice, however, or that it would be feasible given a job description requiring travel up to 60% of the time and the potentially large distances involved.
Thomas also argues that Wilson and others at Covance who were responsible for finding work that would accommodate Thomas failed to do so because they had "no understanding of Thomas's functional limitations," and "all [he] had to do was stop and stretch." (Pl. Opp'n. 19.) There does not, however, appear to be any ambiguity in Thomas's restrictions. In her September 6, 2013 email, Ruch told Thomas that his medical provider needed to "identify, with specificity, the extent of your limitations . . . your medical care provider must identify all other requirements you may have." (Thomas Decl. Ex. 5.) Later, in her September [*19]  26 email to Thomas, Ruch attached a copy of Thomas's job description and asked that his doctor indicate what tasks he could and could not perform and what percentage of the time he was authorized to travel. (Dkt. 33-2, Ruch Decl. Ex. 1.) After receiving Thomas's job description, his doctor identified his restrictions, without elaboration, as no more than one hour flying and two hours driving. (Thomas Dep. Ex. 25.) Ruch also asked Thomas to update his travel restrictions in her November 1, November 10, and December 11 letters. (Ruch. Dep. Exs. 86, 88; Ruch Decl. Ex. 2.) In her December 11 letter, Ruch directly asked Thomas "what type of accommodation [he] and his health care provider would propose the Company consider that would allow [him] to perform the essential functions of [his] job." (Ruch Dep. Ex. 88.) Thomas acknowledged that he never responded to that inquiry. (Thomas Dep. 184:23-185:2.)
The restrictions provided by Thomas's doctor were perfectly simple and clear. And even if it were true that they failed to communicate the subtleties of his condition and the required accommodations, Thomas was given repeated opportunities to address the matter, yet took advantage of none of [*20]  them. In light of this record, no reasonable juror could conclude that Covance failed to accommodate Thomas as a result of its unwillingness to invest the effort required to understand his restrictions.
Additionally, Thomas argues that Covance erred by failing to examine the open positions that he requested as an accommodation and by treating his inability to perform the regular job as a foregone conclusion. (Pl. Opp'n 20.) But the record indicates that Buckingham, Wilson, and Hohmann all participated in a search for positions for Thomas, and that nothing was available. Thomas alleges that Wilson's search for open positions was deficient because he did not know Thomas's functional limitations, but the record indicates that Wilson and everyone else involved was well aware of Thomas's doctor's restriction concerning one hour of flight time and two hours of driving time. And if those restrictions did not adequately express the true nature of Thomas's disability, Thomas had numerous opportunities to amend his restrictions and set the record straight.
Thompson specifically points to Covance Senior CRA hires made between October 21, 2013 and November 1, 2013 that he learned about through discovery, [*21]  but Covance represented—and Thomas did not contest—that each one of those positions required substantial long distance travel: a Phoenix, Arizona-based position required travel to Tacoma, Washington and Dallas, Texas; a San Clemente, California-based position required travel to New Orleans, Chicago, and Houston; and a Phillips Ranch, California-based position required travel to San Antonio, Texas and Greeley, Colorado. (Dkt. 37-4, Lichtash Decl. Ex. 11.)
Ultimately, Thomas has not presented sufficient evidence for a reasonable trier of fact to determine that the accommodation provided to him—an unpaid leave of absence—was inadequate under the circumstances, or that Covance failed to provide him with an alternate accommodation that was reasonable. Accordingly, his failure to accommodate claim does not survive summary judgment.

B. The Claim for Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process
The FEHA imposes an additional duty on the employer "to engage in a timely, good faith, interactive process with the employee . . . to determine effective reasonable accommodations . . ." Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(n). An employer's failure to engage in this process is a separate FEHA violation. Wilson, 169 Cal. App. 4th at 1193. Liability for failure to engage in [*22]  the interactive process "hinges on the objective circumstances surrounding the parties' breakdown in communication, and responsibility for the breakdown lies with the party who fails to participate in good faith." Gelfo v. Lockheed Martin Co., 140 Cal. App. 4th 34, 62 n.22, 43 Cal. Rptr. 3d 874 (2006). Nonetheless, in order to prevail on a FEHA claim for failure to engage in the interactive process, a plaintiff must prove that a reasonable accommodation is possible. Nadaf-Rahrov v. Neiman Marcus Grp., Inc., 166 Cal. App. 4th 952, 981-82, 83 Cal. Rptr. 3d 190 (2008). The California Court of Appeal has explained,
[a]n employee cannot necessarily be expected to identify and request all possible accommodations during the interactive process itself because [e]mployees do not have at their disposal the extensive information concerning possible alternative positions or possible accommodations which employers have . . . . But the employee should be able to identify specific, available reasonable accommodations through the litigation process, and particularly by the time the parties have conducted discovery and reached the summary judgment stage.
Nealy v. Santa Monica, 234 Cal. App. 4th at 379 (internal quotation marks and citations omitted). Because Thomas has failed to identify a reasonable accommodation other than the one he was actually granted—an unpaid leave of absence—his claim for failure to participate in the interactive [*23]  process must fail as well.
Even assuming that Thomas had identified a reasonable accommodation, his interactive process claim fails because nothing in the record indicates that Covance failed to engage him or broke off the process. Ruch repeatedly asked Thomas to update and elaborate on his travel restrictions, and asked him what specific accommodations he and his health care provider would propose. (Ruch. Dep. Exs. 86, 88; Ruch Decl. Ex. 2.) Thomas never responded to Ruch's final December 11 inquiry. (Thomas Dep. 184:23-185:2.) Though Thomas's attorney included in a February 2014 demand letter the assertion that Thomas could be accommodated by flying in multiple segments of under an hour if necessary, nothing in the record indicates that that would be feasible in practice, and in his response, Covance's attorney advised Thomas's attorney to continue the interactive process and inform Covance of any changes in Thomas's restrictions. (Dkt. 37-7, Lichtash Decl. Ex 23.)

C. The Constructive Discharge in Violation of Public Policy Claim
To prevail on his constructive discharge claim, Thomas must show that he was subject to working conditions "so intolerable that any reasonable employee would [*24]  resign rather than endure such conditions." Turner v. Anheuser-Busch, Inc., 7 Cal. 4th 1238, 1246, 32 Cal. Rptr. 2d 223, 876 P.2d 1022 (1994). Thomas argues that Covance's conduct created working conditions rising to such a level because Covance "placed [him] on an indefinite unpaid leave, although [he] was able and willing to return to work." (Pl. Opp'n 22.) But as discussed above, Thomas has not presented sufficient evidence for a reasonable juror to conclude that he was able to return to work with reasonable accommodations, given his job requirements and the restrictions placed on his travel. Thomas has also admitted that no Covance employee made any derogatory remarks to him during their conversations (Thomas Dep. 195:11-20; 197:4-22:6). Because Thomas has failed to identify any condition that could reasonably be termed "intolerable," his constructive discharge claim fails.

D. The Disability Discrimination Claim
To establish a prima facie case of disability discrimination under the FEHA, Thomas must establish: (1) that he suffers from a disability; (2) that he is otherwise qualified to do his job with or without a reasonable accommodation; and (3) that he was subject to an adverse employment action because of the disability. Faust v. California Portland Cement Co., 150 Cal. App. 4th 864, 886, 58 Cal. Rptr. 3d 729 (2007). Because Thomas has failed to present sufficient [*25]  evidence for a reasonable trier of fact to find that he was qualified to do the job with a reasonable accommodation, this claim must fail.

E. The Failure to Prevent Discrimination Claim
Under the FEHA, it is unlawful for an employer to "fail to take all reasonable steps necessary to prevent discrimination and harassment from occurring." Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(k). But in order for an employer to have failed to prevent discrimination, a plaintiff must prove that discrimination actually occurred. Trujillo v. North Co. Transit Dist., 63 Cal. App. 4th 280, 289, 73 Cal. Rptr. 2d 596 (1998) ("[T]here's no logic that says an employee who has not been discriminated against can sue an employer for not preventing discrimination that didn't happen, for not having a policy to prevent discrimination when no discrimination occurred. . . ." ). Accordingly, absent sufficient evidence to sustain Thomas's discrimination claim, his failure to prevent discrimination claim must also fail.

F. The IIED and NIED Claims
Under California's Workers' Compensation Act (WCA), "emotional injuries sustained in the course of employment are preempted by the workers' compensation scheme and generally will not support an independent cause of action." Yau v. Santa Margarita Ford, Inc., 229 Cal. App. 4th 144, 161 (2014). When, however, an employers' misconduct exceeds the "normal risk of the employment relationship," California's workers' compensation [*26]  framework does not preempt IIED and NIED claims. Fedland v. Cty. of Humboldt, 69 Cal. App. 4th 1478, 1492 (1999). Because workplace discrimination is not such a normal risk, IIED and NIED claims rooted in discrimination are not preempted. See id.
But here Thomas's workplace discrimination claim cannot withstand Covance's motion for summary judgment. Though IIED and NIED tied to colorable claims of workplace discrimination are not preempted by the WCA, absent sufficient evidence to support a discrimination claim Thomas cannot demonstrate that his IIED and NIED claims are rooted in anything more than the "normal risk of the employment relationship." They are therefore preempted by California's WCA. See Yau, 229 Cal. App. 4th at 161.
Furthermore, even if Thomas's IIED claim were not preempted, proving that claim requires a showing that Covance engaged in "extreme and outrageous conduct [] with the intention of causing, or reckless disregard of the probability of causing, emotional distress." Hughes v. Pair, 46 Cal. 4th 1035, 1050, 95 Cal. Rptr. 3d 636, 209 P.3d 963 (2009). Rather than pointing to any particular conduct by a Covance employee, Thomas simply argues that Covance employees "abused their position" as his employer by discriminating against him due to his disability, and that "instead of using that power to make a good faith effort to accommodate" [*27]  him, they "presumed his incapacity, rebuffed his attempts to repair the situation, and ultimately left him on unpaid leave, causing severe financial and emotional distress." (Pl. Opp'n 25.) There is ample evidence, however, that Covance regularly checked in with Thomas to obtain updates about his condition, attempted to locate positions for him that would adhere to his travel restrictions, and asked him for his input about what type of accommodations he would propose. Thomas has also not identified any instance where a Covance employee treated him disrespectfully or expressed contempt for him or any other disabled person. On the facts in this case, it would be impossible for a trier of fact to reasonably conclude that Covance employees' conduct related to Thomas was "extreme or outrageous."

IV. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, Defendants' motion for summary judgment is GRANTED with respect to all claims.
DATED: September 14, 2015
/s/ Cormac J. Carney
CORMAC J. CARNEY
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

