Trythall v. Spencer
United States District Court for the Northern District of Florida, Panama City Division
March 27, 2019, Decided
CASE NO. 5:17cv44-MCR/MJF

Reporter
2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 250222 *; 2019 WL 13280180
JARRAD TRYTHALL, Plaintiff, v. RICHARD V. SPENCER, 1 IN HIS OFFICIAL CAPACITY AS SECRETARY OF THE UNITED STATES NAVY, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Ray Mabus, IN HIS OFFICIAL CAPACITY AS SECRETARY OF THE UNITED STATES NAVY, Richard V Spencer, SECRETARY OF THE NAVY, Defendants: KATHYRN WILBURN DREY, Pensacola, FL.
For JARRAD TRYTHALL, Plaintiff: KATHERINE LANIER VIKER, MARIE A MATTOX, MARIE A MATTOX PA - TALLAHASSEE FL, Tallahassee, FL.
Judges: M. CASEY RODGERS, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: M. CASEY RODGERS
Opinion



ORDER
Plaintiff Jarrad Trythall filed this disability discrimination suit under the Rehabilitation Act, 29 U.S.C. § 794, et seq., after he was terminated from his posias a civilian employee of the United States Navy. Now pending is Defendant Secretary of the Navy's Motion for Summary Judgment, ECF No. 15. Having fully reviewed the record and the parties' arguments, the Court finds that the motion is due to be granted.

Background2
There is no dispute that Trythall suffers a severe disability, he was qualified for his civilian job with the Navy, and he was terminated from his position without cause during a two-year probationary period on January 22, 2016. Trythall contends his termination was based on his disability, and that he filed an EEO complaint regarding his termination prior to bringing suit. The pertinent events include the following.
Through his previous employment with government [*2]  contractors at the Naval Surface Warfare Center in Panama City, Florida, Trythall became acquainted with Sandra Wicks, a civilian employee of the Navy in the position of Deputy for Corporate Operations at Panama City. She was aware of Trythall's disability and suggested that he apply for a Schedule A appointment for civilian employment with the Navy.3 On December 1, 2014, the Navy hired Trythall as an Admin/Tech Specialist NT 2010 (Inventory Management) through a Schedule A hiring authority appointment. Trythall understood that his first two years in this position were considered a trial or probationary period, during which he could be terminated with or without cause.4 According to Charlotte L. Lawson, Supervisory HR Advisor, under federal law and Navy regulations, there is no requirement that a probationary employee receive counseling or progressive discipline before dismissal. ECF No. 14-4, at 4.
Wicks was Trythall's supervisor. Three other Tech Specialists worked in the same department--James Dixon, who was hired as the lead, Wayne Taylor, and Jodie Hendrix--and are still employed. Each was hired as a Schedule A appointment with a disability, like Trythall. Each had the same job [*3]  title as Trythall, but not the same job "series." ECF No. 14-4. Trythall's job was a 2010 series (inventory management), Dixon's job is a 0346 series (logistics), and Taylor and Hendrix both have jobs in the 0301 series (general administrative). Consequently, their job duties were not the same.
In January 2015, Trythall requested a special therapeutic chair to accommodate his disability, for which he had a prescription. ECF No. 14-2, at 7-8 (Trythall's Depo.). Trythall made the request through Wicks' administrative assistant, Jodi Hendrix. Wicks denied the request. According to Trythall, she told him that because he was only an NT/3 Journeyman, he could not go around ordering what he wanted. There is no evidence that he made another request.
Also in early 2015, after his chair request was denied, Trythall was temporarily reassigned to another department. He testified that he felt he was transferred because Wicks was upset that he had submitted a chair request. However, he testified that he experienced no job-related problems during that assignment, he suffered no reduced pay, and he would have preferred to stay in the temporary position. Trythall did not ask for a different chair when [*4]  he was in this temporary assignment. Trythall was returned to his original department in April 2015. He said he felt anxious about returning because before he had been transferred, Wicks had denied his chair request, was "distant" towards him, and she had removed him from group emails. ECF No. 14-2, at 23.
In September 2015, Trythall was involved in an automobile accident. Due to resulting pain, he emailed Sandy Wicks and his co-worker Jim Dixon to inform them that he was not feeling well and would need to take the day off. He tried to work the next morning but had to leave early, and the following day when he needed to take off again due to pain, Wicks required a doctor's excuse for his absence. Trythall felt that she was discriminating against him by requiring a doctor's excuse because he did not take off three consecutive days and had tried to work. He admits that she made no disparaging remarks about his disability or his accident.
In November 2015, Trythall received a favorable end of year performance review, stating he was dependable, worked diligently, and was making progress towards his DAWIA Level 1 certification in logistics.5 ECF No. 20-7. Some areas for improvement were recommended, [*5]  however, including that Trythall should understand and use the chain of command and continue working towards a college degree.
On January 22, 2016, Trythall received a letter from Wicks notifying him of his termination, titled "Separation During the Trial Period." ECF No. 14-10. The notice informed him that he was being terminated because Wicks found him to be "definitely not a team player;" he showed "a lack of respect to co-workers and [his] supervisor;" and he portrayed himself "in a self-proclaimed role of significance which sets a bad example and decreases the morale of other team members and co-workers alike." Id. Department Head John Gebhart approved the termination based on Wicks' recommendation. The same day, Trythall made an initial contact with the Equal Employment Opportunity Office ("EEO"), stating his desire to file an EEO complaint of disability discrimination due to his termination.
Trythall complained during the EEO review that he was not counseled on any work-related deficiencies before being terminated and had been unaware his actions were perceived as not being a team player or as showing a lack of respect. Trythall also stated during the EEO investigation that [*6]  he believed Wicks' opinion of him was influenced by Paul Bannister, who had been a department lead and did not like Trythall or Trythall's father. ECF No. 20-1, at 9. He said he was never told that he had missed a deadline or displayed a lack of initiative in accomplishing tasks in a timely manner. Trythall felt that he did everything he was asked to do, including pursuing his certification training and helping to train others, so he did not understand how he could be accused of not being a team player. According to Trythall, he worked the requisite hours and was never disciplined for being away from his desk during core duty hours, whereas other Schedule A employees were permitted to take care of personal errands during work hours. Trythall admitted he was never denied authorization to leave to attend to a personal errand. He also complained that co-worker Wayne Taylor had been permitted to watch his daughter's softball game on his personal tablet, whereas Wicks told him (Trythall) not to use personal devices at work. Despite saying that he had been unaware of the proper chain of command procedures, Trythall acknowledged in his deposition that on one occasion in January 2015, Wicks [*7]  had informed him of the need to follow the proper chain of command when he had failed to follow it. ECF No. 14-2, at 39-40; ECF No. 21-10, at 207-214. Trythall admitted that he never heard anyone at work make disparaging comments about his disability or people with disabilities in general.
According to Wicks, she had numerous discussions with Trythall about his effort to be a part of the team and his lack of respect to co-workers, who had complained to her of decreases in morale based on his attitude. She also testified that she talked with him about portraying himself in a self-proclaimed role of significance. Dixon, who was the department lead, testified that he had some concerns about Trythall's productivity early on and had discussed this with Wicks when she inquired about it.

Discussion
Under Rule 56, courts may grant summary judgment if, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the nonmovant, "there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). The moving party has the initial burden of identifying the grounds and factual support for the motion and is entitled to judgment as a matter of law if the nonmoving party [*8]  fails to make a sufficient showing on an essential element of the case on which he has the burden of proof. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323 (1986). For the limited purpose of this summary judgment proceeding, the Court views "the evidence and all reasonable inferences drawn from it in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party," which in this case is the Plaintiff. Martin v. Brevard Cty. Pub. Sch., 543 F.3d 1261, 1265 (11th Cir. 2008) (internal marks omitted). A litigant's own self-serving statement can defeat summary judgment if it is based on personal knowledge and is not conclusory in nature. See United States v. Stein, 881 F.3d 853, 857 (11th Cir. 2018); Feliciano v. City of Miami Beach, 707 F.3d 1244, 1253 (11th Cir. 2013) (non-conclusory self-serving sworn statements are not to be disregarded at the summary judgment stage). On the other hand, "[s]peculation does not create a genuine issue of fact." Shiver v. Chertoff, 549 F.3d 1342, 1343 (11th Cir. 2008) (quoting Cordoba v. Dillard's, Inc., 419 F.3d 1169, 1181 (11th Cir. 2005)). Courts may not make credibility determinations when reviewing a summary judgment record or weigh conflicting evidence because these are functions properly left to a jury. See Frederick v. Sprint/United Mgm't Co., 246 F.3d 1305, 1311 (11th Cir. 2001).
The Rehabilitation Act prohibits federal agencies from discriminating in employment on the basis of disability. See Shiver v. Chertoff, 549 F.3d 1342, 1344 (11th Cir. 2008). The same procedures, rights, and remedies are available as under Title VII. Id. As a prerequisite to filing suit, a federal employee must seek administrative review of the alleged discriminatory conduct within 45 days of the [*9]  act. See id; see also 29 U.S.C. § 794a; 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-16; 29 C.F.R. § 1614.105(a)(1). Generally, if the employee does not initiate this process within 45 days of an unlawful practice, the claim is barred for a failure to exhaust administrative remedies, absent a waiver or exception. See Shiver, 549 F.3d at 1344; Brown v. Snow, 440 F.3d 1259, 1264-65 (11th Cir. 2006). Each discreet "incident of discrimination and each retaliatory adverse employment decision constitutes a separate actionable unlawful employment practice" and "starts a new clock for filing charges alleging that act." Nat'l R.R. Passenger Corp. v. Morgan, 536 U.S. 101, 113-15 (2002). Thus, discrete acts of discrimination occurring prior to a plaintiff's 45-day filing window are untimely and not actionable.
Trythall alleged in his one-count Complaint that that he was terminated because of his disability, that the Navy refused to reasonably accommodate him with a chair, that he was retaliated against when he was transferred, and that he was treated less favorably than similarly situated employees who were permitted to leave work to attend to personal errands and to use personal electronic devices at work. The chair incident and transfer occurred in January 2015, over a year before Trythall initiated contact with the EEO, and no firm dates are given for other instances of coworkers running personal errands or using electronic [*10]  devices. The only discrete action alleged within 45 days of the EEO contact, and thus the only action that is properly before the Court, is Trythall's termination.
Trythall has presented no direct evidence of discriminatory intent related to his termination. Also, the facts on this record do not demonstrate a "convincing mosaic" of circumstantial evidence warranting an inference of intentional discrimination, see Smith v. Lockheed-Martin Corp., 644 F.3d 1321, 1328 (11th Cir. 2011), and Trythall has not argued otherwise. Thus, Trythall must proceed under the McDonnell Douglas 6 burden-shifting framework.7 See Lewis v. City of Union City, No. 15-11362, 2019 WL 1285058WL, at *3 & n.6 (11th Cir. Mar. 21, 2019). Under this framework, the plaintiff must first demonstrate a prima facie case of discrimination by showing (1) that the plaintiff is in a protected class, (2) suffered an adverse employment action, (3) was qualified to perform the job, and (4) that "similarly situated" employees outside the protected class received more favorable treatment. Id. Rehabilitation Act claims are subject to the same standards applicable to the Americans with Disabilities Act, which similarly a prima facie case to establish (1) that the individual has a disability, (2) that he was qualified for the position, with or without reasonable accommodation, and (3) that the employer unlawfully discriminated against him because [*11]  of the disability. See Reed v. Heil Co., 206 F.3d 1055, 1061 (11th Cir. 2000). Retaliation claims are also subject to a similar framework. The plaintiff must establish a prima facie case of retaliation by showing: (1) that he engaged in protected activity; (2) that he suffered an adverse employment action; and (3) that some causal relationship link exists between his protected activity and the adverse employment action. Quigg v. Thomas Cty. Sch. Dist., 814 F.3d 1227, 1244 (11th Cir. 2016).
It is undisputed that Trythall is an individual with a disability and was qualified for his position, but he makes no attempt even to argue that the McDonnell Douglas prima facie case is satisfied. Trythall does not assert that he was treated less favorably than similarly situated employees outside the protected class. Instead, he acknowledges and asserts that his co-workers are not similar to him. He claims to be the only one who submitted a request for an accommodation and was subsequently terminated. But without more, this does not raise an inference of discrimination on this record. No evidence suggests that Wicks harbored a discriminatory intent based on Trythall's disability. Nor does the fact that he requested a chair and was terminated a year later show a causal link for purposes of establishing a  [*12] prima facie claim of retaliation. Although Wicks had knowledge of the chair request and denied it, the record reflects absolutely no causal connection between that incident and her termination of Trythall over a year later. He admitted that the transfer was not an adverse action. There is no evidence of suspicious timing, no ambiguous or derogatory statements, and no discriminatory behavior directed at others that could raise an inference of either discrimination or retaliation. The Court concludes that no question of fact exists on any material fact that could demonstrate a triable issue of causation or discriminatory intent. In the absence of a prima facie case raising an inference of discrimination, there is no reason to discuss Trythall's pretext arguments.8
Plaintiff also argues that the employer had an obligation under the Americans with Disabilities Act, which standards apply to the Rehabilitation Act, to engage in an interactive process and that there is no time limit for this obligation, citing Stewart v. Happy Herman's Cheshire Bridge, Inc., 117 F.3d 1278, 1286 (11th Cir. 1997) (recognizing that the ADA might require an employer to "engage in an 'interactive process" with an employee requesting an accommodation). However, the Eleventh Circuit has not recognized the failure to engage in the interactive [*13]  process as a stand-alone cause of action, see Willis v. Conopco, Inc., 108 F.3d 282, 285 (11th Cir. 1997), and in any event, there is no evidence that the Navy terminated Trythall to avoid having to discuss accommodations or a specific chair request. Even if this were a viable claim, the Court finds no persuasive reason articulated by Trythall to show why this claim would not be subject to the same exhaustion requirements as the alleged failure to accommodate. Moreover, this claim of failure to engage in the interactive process does not appear in the complaint. The Court will not permit Plaintiff to constructively amend the complaint in a response brief to a motion for summary judgment. See Gilmour v. Gates, McDonald and Co., 382 F.3d 1312, 1315 (11th Cir. 2004).
According, the Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment, ECF No. 15, is GRANTED. The Clerk is directed to enter judgment accordingly and tax costs against the Plaintiff.
DONE AND ORDERED this 27th day of March 2019.
/s/ M. Casey Rodgers
M. CASEY RODGERS
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

