Tully-Boone v. N. Shore-Long Island Jewish Hosp. Sys.
United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York
May 3, 2010, Decided; May 3, 2010, Filed
08-CV-2497 (ADS)(WDW)

Reporter
2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 165651 *
CAROLYN TULLY-BOONE, Plaintiff, -against- NORTH SHORE-LONG ISLAND JEWISH HOSPITAL SYSTEM, GLEN COVE HOSPITAL, BARBARA BACKUS, CAROLYN MUELLER and GLORIA COHEN, Defendants.
Prior History: Tully-Boone v. North Shore-Long Island Jewish Hosp. Sys., 588 F. Supp. 2d 419, 2008 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 101093 (E.D.N.Y., Dec. 6, 2008)
Counsel:  [*1] For Rick Ostrove, Esq., Plaintiff: Leeds Morelli & Brown, Carle Place, NY.
For Shaffin Abdul Datoo, Esq., Of Counsel, Defendants: Matthew Scott Porges, Esq., Of Counsel, Venable LLP, New York, NY.
Judges: ARTHUR D. SPATT, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: ARTHUR D. SPATT
Opinion



MEMORANDUM OF DECISION AND ORDER
SPATT, District Judge.
Carolyn Tully-Boone ("the Plaintiff") was employed by the North Shore-Long Island Jewish Hospital System ("North Shore") in various staff and management nursing positions from 1981 until December of 2006. After she was terminated from her most recent position as a Quality Management Coordinator at Glen Cove Hospital ("the Hospital"), the Plaintiff filed the instant lawsuit against North Shore, the Hospital, and several Hospital employees. Her complaint alleges discrimination and retaliation claims under the Family and Medical Leave Act ("FMLA"), 29 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq., the Americans With Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq., and New York Executive Law § 290, et seq. ("NYHRL").
Presently before the Court is the Defendants' motion for summary judgment. For the reasons set forth below, the Defendants' motion for summary judgment is largely denied. However, the Court finds that summary judgment is appropriate on the Plaintiff's FMLA interference claim and her retaliation claim under the ADA.

I. BACKGROUND
The Plaintiff, a registered [*2]  nurse, applied for a transfer to the Hospital in September of 2006 after experiencing some difficulties with her former supervisor at the North Shore Home Care Network. The Plaintiff interviewed with Defendant Barbara Backus and Backus's supervisor, Defendant Carolyn Mueller, and was hired as a Quality Management Coordinator ("QM Coordinator"). The Plaintiff was advised that, pursuant to Hospital policy, she would be subject to a six-month probationary period, including a three-week orientation, in this new position.
As a QM Coordinator, the Plaintiff's tasks included, among other things, reviewing patient medical records and insurance information, monitoring patient care, communicating with care providers, and entering patient data into an internal system. Shortly after she was transferred, the Plaintiff experienced a number of stressful personal incidents which affected her physical and mental health. In particular, the Plaintiff was in the process of obtaining a divorce and was also experiencing serious financial difficulties.
These personal issues and the stress from the new position caused her to suffer a relapse of depression; a condition that she had originally been diagnosed [*3]  with in either 2003 or 2004. The Plaintiff testified in her deposition that she believes she informed Backus and Mueller about her anxiety and depression at some point in October of 2006. According to the Plaintiff, Backus and Mueller inquired about what medications she was taking and whether she was being treated by a therapist.
At some point in late October or early November 2006, the Plaintiff claims that she told either Mueller or Backus that her depression was affecting her health. She claims that she reported to one or perhaps even both of them that she was suffering from headaches and elevated blood pressure. The Plaintiff alleges that in response, both Mueller and Backus told her that they had been through far worse situations, including their own divorces, and that the Plaintiff should move past her depression. Backus allegedly told the Plaintiff that she believed the Plaintiff was using her depression as an excuse for poor performance at work.
As early as October 31, 2006, Backus noticed that the Plaintiff was not grasping the job and sensed that her personal issues were preventing her from completing assigned tasks. In particular, Backus expressed concern about the Plaintiff's [*4]  lateness. Backus noted that during the Plaintiff's first three weeks on the job, she arrived twenty to forty minutes late on four occasions. On one occasion, after the Plaintiff was absent from work, Backus informed the Plaintiff that her job was in jeopardy because her lack of focus was preventing her from meeting expectations. It is undisputed that the Plaintiff "nodded off" at work on two occasions and missed at least three scheduled meetings with Backus.
On November 9, 2006, Backus had another discussion with the Plaintiff about her punctuality. The Plaintiff explained that complications from the medication she was taking for the depression made it difficult for her to arrive at work on time at 8:00 a.m. Backus agreed to push the Plaintiff's start time back to 8:30 until the Plaintiff's medication could be adjusted. During this discussion, Backus encouraged the Plaintiff to seek help for her condition but warned her that her performance would have to improve if she expected to pass the probationary period.
On November 24, 2006, the Plaintiff arrived fifteen minutes late for work. Backus issued the Plaintiff a written warning and advised her that another lateness could result in disciplinary [*5]  action, including termination. According to Backus's notes from a meeting with the Plaintiff that same day, Backus told her that she was still not grasping the job and that because of her lack of progress she had learned only a small fraction of what she needed to know to do the job successfully. On November 27, 2006, the Plaintiff arrived to work ten minutes late because of traffic.
Two days later, the Plaintiff met with Mueller and Backus to request a leave of absence. Although the Plaintiff contends that she requested only a temporary leave, the Defendants claim that her request was for an indefinite leave of absence. The Hospital's FMLA leave policies are set forth in the Personnel Policy and Procedures Manual ("the Manual"). The Plaintiff does not dispute that the Manual was located in each department at the hospital and available to all employees. In addition to the Manual, the Defendants also made available in the Human Resources Department and on their website a pamphlet that explained how employees could request a leave under the FMLA. It is clear from the terms of that policy that North Shore requires an employee requesting a leave of absence under the FMLA to first notify [*6]  their supervisor and then contact the Hartford Life Insurance Company. The Plaintiff concedes that she never contacted the Hartford to determine her eligibility for a leave under the FMLA.
The Plaintiff was apparently under the impression that she needed her supervisor's approval before contacting the Hartford. The parties agree that, at the November 29, 2006 meeting, Mueller told the Plaintiff that she was unaware of whether probationary employees could take a leave of absence. Mueller claims that she advised the Plaintiff to contact Defendant Gloria Cohen, the Executive Director of Human Resources, to inquire about her eligibility. According to the Plaintiff, Mueller told her that she would contact Cohen on the Plaintiff's behalf to determine whether the Plaintiff was eligible for a leave of absence. Although Cohen eventually informed Mueller that the Plaintiff was eligible for a leave of absence, this determination was apparently never conveyed to the Plaintiff.
As a result of her lateness on November 27, 2006, the Plaintiff was suspended for one day. In a written warning, the Plaintiff was counseled that she needed to show immediate improvement if she wanted to avoid further disciplinary [*7]  action or termination. The Plaintiff was given an opportunity to insert her own comments on this form and noted that she was requesting reconsideration of her one-day suspension. She further noted that Backus was aware of her circumstances and medical treatment and pointed out that she was waiting for a response from Mueller regarding her request for a leave of absence.
On December 4, 2006, Backus met with the Plaintiff to go over her most recent performance evaluation. Backus noted several areas where the Plaintiff required improvement and decided to extend her orientation period by one week. In particular, Backus noted that the Plaintiff was not prioritizing her review of patient charts and needed work using the Hospital's data entry system. According to both Backus and Mueller, the Plaintiff was the first QM Coordinator to ever have their orientation period extended.
At the conclusion of her extended orientation period on December 19, 2006, the Plaintiff again met with Backus to discuss her work performance. Backus presented the Plaintiff with another performance review that noted a number of additional deficiencies in her work. The review stated, among other things, that the Plaintiff [*8]  was unable to complete her assigned work in a timely fashion; did not interact well with colleagues and was disrespectful at times with managers and other employees; and did not express an eagerness to learn and required reinforcement of tasks and concepts that were covered multiple times. At this meeting, Backus informed the Plaintiff that, based on her performance and chronic lateness, she had decided to terminate the Plaintiff's employment.
After she was terminated, the Plaintiff was escorted to Human Resources, where she met with Cohen. The Plaintiff reminded Cohen that she was still waiting for approval for her leave of absence. According to the Plaintiff, Cohen then angrily picked up a brochure from the Hartford, threw it at her and said "[t]his is all you have to do, everybody knows you just fill this out." Carolyn Tully-Boone, Deposition at 175-76. Cohen also informed the Plaintiff that she needed to speak with Rosemary Milano, the Executive Director of Human Resources.
The Plaintiff eventually spoke to Milano on January 24, 2007. During this conversation, the two discussed the Plaintiff's termination, benefits package, and the process for obtaining unemployment benefits. They [*9]  also discussed the Plaintiff's request for a leave of absence. Milano told the Plaintiff that she was unaware of the request but assured her that she would investigate the issue.
After her termination, the Plaintiff started looking for other positions within the North Shore system. The Plaintiff was assisted in that search by Roseanne Vertichio, a North Shore recruiter. The Plaintiff was instructed to search for available positions on North Shore's website and then advise Vertichio of the positions in which she had an interest. Vertichio in turn would decide whether the Plaintiff was eligible to apply for these positions. There were several positions for which Vertichio found the Plaintiff unqualified in light of the fact that she had failed her orientation period as a QM Coordinator. The Plaintiff did interview for two other positions within the North Shore System but has not been rehired.
The Plaintiff now alleges that: (1) she was discriminated against in violation of the ADA and NYHRL; (2) the Defendants violated the ADA by denying her requests for reasonable accommodation (3) Mueller, Backus, and Cohen aided and abetted the unlawful discrimination in violation of NYHRL § 296(6); (4) she was retaliated [*10]  against in violation of the ADA, NYHRL, and FMLA; and (5) the Defendants interfered with her rights under the FMLA. The Defendants contend that they are entitled to summary judgment on each of these claims.

II. DISCUSSION

A. Standard - Rule 56
Pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56(c), a court may not grant a motion for summary judgment unless "the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions on file, together with affidavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c); Globecon Group, LLC v. Hartford Fire Ins. Co., 434 F.3d 165, 170 (2d Cir. 2006). In determining whether an issue is genuine, "[t]he inferences to be drawn from the underlying affidavits, exhibits, interrogatory answers, and depositions must be viewed in the light most favorable to the party opposing the motion." Cronin v. Aetna Life Ins. Co., 46 F.3d 196, 202 (2d Cir.1995) (citing United States v. Diebold, Inc., 369 U.S. 654, 655, 82 S. Ct. 993, 8 L. Ed. 2d 176 (1962) (per curiam), and Ramseur v. Chase Manhattan Bank, 865 F.2d 460, 465 (2d Cir. 1989)).
If the moving party meets its initial burden of demonstrating the absence of a disputed issue of material fact, the burden shifts to the nonmoving party to present "specific facts showing a genuine issue for trial." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e). The nonmoving party may not then rely solely on "conclusory allegations or unsubstantiated speculation" in order to defeat a motion for summary judgment. Scotto v. Almenas, 143 F.3d 105, 114 (2d Cir. 1998). If the [*11]  evidence favoring the nonmoving party is "merely colorable . . . or is not significantly probative, summary judgment may be granted." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249-50 (internal citations omitted).

B. Disability Discrimination: ADA and NYHRL
The Plaintiff alleges that the Defendants discriminated against her because of her depression in violation of the ADA and NYHRL by: (1) suspending her for one day; (2) extending her orientation period; (3) terminating her; and (4) refusing to rehire her in a different position.
To establish a prima facie of discrimination under the ADA and NYHRL, the Plaintiff must show that: (1) her employer is subject to both statutes; (2) she suffers from a disability within the meaning of both statutes; (3) she was otherwise qualified to perform the essential functions of her job, with or without reasonable accommodation; and (4) she suffered adverse employment action because of her disability. Shannon v. New York City Transit Auth., 332 F.3d 95, 99 (2d Cir. 2003) (citing Ryan v. Grae & Rybicki, P.C., 135 F.3d 867, 869-70 (2d Cir. 1998)); see also Parker v. Columbia Pictures Indus., 204 F.3d 326, 332 n.1 (2d Cir. 2000) (observing that discrimination claims under the ADA and NYHRL are analyzed according to the same burden-shifting framework).
Once a plaintiff has established the prima facie case, the burden then falls upon the defendant to articulate a legitimate, non discriminatory reason for the [*12]  adverse employment action. McPherson v. N.Y.C. Dep't of Educ., 457 F.3d 211, 215 (2d Cir. 2006). The defendant satisfies this burden if the reason given, "taken as true, would permit the conclusion that there was a nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse action." St. Mary's Honor Ctr. v. Hicks, 509 U.S. 502, 509, 113 S. Ct. 2742, 125 L. Ed. 2d 407 (1993). In order to survive summary judgment once the defendant has produced a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the adverse employment action, the plaintiff must offer evidence that suggests that it is more likely than not that the reasons offered are mere pretext designed to cover up the employer's actual discriminatory intent. Roge v. NYP Holdings, Inc., 257 F.3d 164, 168 (2d Cir. 2001) (citing Reeves v. Sanderson Plumbing Prods., Inc., 530 U.S. 133, 143, 120 S. Ct. 2097, 147 L. Ed. 2d 105 (2000)). The plaintiff does not have to show that the employer's reasons are false or that they played no role in the decision; rather, she must show merely that the proffered reasons were not the only reasons and that discriminatory animus was at least one of the motivating factors for the adverse employment action. Cronin, 46 F.3d at 203.

1. The Plaintiff's Prima Facie Case
The Defendants contend that the Plaintiff: (1) is not disabled within the meaning of the ADA or NYHRL; (2) was not "otherwise qualified" to perform the essential functions of the QM Coordinator position; and (3) did not suffer an adverse employment action because of her disability. The Court will address each [*13]  of these contested elements in turn.

a. Disability
The Plaintiff contends that her depression qualifies as a disability within the meaning of the ADA and NYHRL. Although disability discrimination claims under these statutes are analyzed under the same burden-shifting framework, "the definition of a disability under New York law is not coterminous with the ADA definition." Giordano v. City of New York, 274 F.3d 740, 754 (2d Cir. 2001) (citations omitted). The ADA defines a disability as "a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities." 42 U.S.C. § 12102(2). However, the NYHRL takes a broader view of what it means to be disabled. See Reeves v. Johnson Controls World Services, Inc., 140 F.3d 144, 154-56 (2d Cir. 1998) (citing State Division of Human Rights v. Xerox Corp., 65 N.Y.2d 213, 491 N.Y.S.2d 106, 480 N.E.2d 695 (1985)). NYHRL defines a disability as "a physical, mental or medical impairment resulting from anatomical, physiological, genetic or neurological conditions which prevents the exercise of a normal bodily function or is demonstrable by medically accepted clinical or laboratory diagnostic techniques . . ." N.Y. Exec. Law § 292(21). The Defendants contend that the Plaintiff is unable to show that she was disabled within the meaning of either statute.
The Plaintiff alleges that her depression substantially limited her ability to sleep, socialize, and care for herself. Under federal law, an impairment "'substantially [*14]  limits' a major life activity if it renders a person either (i) 'unable' to perform a major life 'activity that the average person in the general population can perform'; or (ii) '[s]ignificantly restricted as to the condition, manner or duration under which an individual can perform [that] activity in comparison to 'the average person in the general population.'" Giordano, 274 F.3d at 747 (quoting 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(1)).
With respect to sleeping, the Plaintiff testified that her depression left her able to get four hours of sleep per night. In light of the fact that many adults have difficulty sleeping, various courts have held that this degree of limitation in sleeping is not substantial. See Burks v. Wisconsin Dept. of Transp., 464 F.3d 744, 757 (7th Cir. 2006) (finding that plaintiff's inability to sleep for more than 3 hours per night was not substantially limiting); Boerst v. General Mills Operations, Inc., 25 Fed. Appx. 403, 407 (6th Cir. 2002) ("Getting between two and four hours of sleep a night, while inconvenient, simply lacks the kind of severity we require of an ailment before we will say that the ailment qualifies as a substantial limitation under the ADA."); Pack v. Kmart Corp., 166 F.3d 1300, 1306 (affirming district court's holding that the plaintiff was not substantially limited in her ability to sleep where she was getting 2-4 hours of sleep per night). On this record, the Court is not persuaded [*15]  that the Plaintiff was substantially limited in her ability to sleep.
The Plaintiff further alleges that she was substantially limited in her ability to interact with others. In the Second Circuit, a person is "'substantially limited in 'interacting with others' when the mental or physical impairment severely limits the fundamental ability to communicate with others." Jacques v. DiMarzio, Inc., 386 F.3d 192, 203 (2d Cir. 2004). Here, there is no evidence that the Plaintiff's depression substantially limited her from interacting with others. In fact, the record reflects that the Plaintiff met and communicated with various Hospital employees, her ex-husband, and her children and even attended the Hospital's holiday party.
The Plaintiff also claims that her depression limited her ability to care for herself. It has been observed that caring for oneself "encompasses normal activities of daily living; including feeding oneself, driving, grooming, and cleaning the home." Ryan, 135 F.3d at 871 (citing Dutcher v. Ingalls Shipbuilding, 53 F.3d 723, 726 (5th Cir. 1995)). Here, the Plaintiff claims that she has substantial difficulty in driving and had to be driven to work almost every day from September of 2006 through her termination in December of 2006. In the Court's view, this degree of limitation in her ability to drive reflects that [*16]  the Plaintiff may not have been able to care for herself. It follows, then, that there is a triable dispute as to whether the Plaintiff is disabled within the meaning of the ADA.
Not surprisingly, she also can demonstrate that she was disabled under the NYHRL's broader definition. For an impairment to qualify as a disability under NYHRL, "the condition may manifest itself in one of two ways: (1) by preventing the exercise of a normal bodily function or (2) by being 'demonstrable by medically accepted clinical or laboratory diagnostic techniques.'" Xerox Corp., 65 N.Y.2d at 219 (quoting N.Y. Exec. Law § 292(21)). Here, the Defendants do not dispute that the Plaintiff was diagnosed as suffering from depression, a recognized mental impairment. Nor do they challenge the accuracy or reliability of this diagnosis. Even if they did, this would do no more than create a triable issue of fact as to whether the Plaintiff suffered from depression. Therefore, drawing all inferences in the Plaintiff's favor, the Court finds that the Plaintiff's medically diagnosed depression constitutes a disability within the meaning of the NYHRL.
These findings does not end the Court's analysis. The Defendants have also challenged whether she was "otherwise qualified" [*17]  to perform the essential functions of her job and whether she suffered the alleged adverse employment actions because of her disability.

b. Otherwise Qualified
The Plaintiff claims that her continuous employment in the North Shore system since 1981 demonstrates that she was qualified for the QM Coordinator position. She further argues that even if her depression left her unable to perform the essential functions of the job, there were reasonable accommodations available that would have enabled her to do the work. In particular, the Plaintiff contends that she could have carried out the essential functions of the job if the Hospital allowed her to stay late or take a leave of absence to restore her health.
As noted above, "an individual is otherwise qualified for a job if she is able to perform the essential functions of that job, either with or without a reasonable accommodation." Shannon, 332 F.3d at 99-100. In this context, "essential functions" are defined as the "fundamental" duties to be performed in the position in question. Id. at 100; see also 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(1). "In approaching this inquiry, '[a] court must give considerable deference to an employer's judgment regarding what functions are essential for service in a particular position.'" [*18]  Id. (quoting D'Amico v. City of New York, 132 F.3d 145, 151 (2d Cir. 1998)).
The fact that the Plaintiff previously held other positions with different job responsibilities in the North Shore system does not mean that she was able to perform the essential functions demanded of her in the QM Coordinator position. The record reflects that arriving at work on time for her scheduled shift was an essential requirement in this position. The record also reflects that during her orientation period, the Plaintiff was frequently unable to arrive on time for her shift at 8:00 a.m. This remained true even when Backus agreed to extend the Plaintiff's start time to 8:30 a.m. Under the circumstances, it is clear that without some form of additional accommodation, the Plaintiff could not arrive at work on time.
The Plaintiff points out that she offered to stay late in order to complete assigned tasks and that the Defendants should have accommodated her request. However, Mueller testified—and the Plaintiff does not dispute—that "there are duties that need to be performed first thing in the morning," so that coming in later would "defeat[] the purpose [of] having floors [in the hospital] covered." Carolyn Mueller, Deposition at 51. Obviously, if arriving on time [*19]  in the morning for a shift is critical then the Plaintiff's proposed accommodation to arrive late but work past normal shift hours would not enable her to perform one of the essential functions of her job.
The Plaintiff also suggests that the Defendants could have accommodated her by granting her a leave of absence. The Court interprets this to mean that with some time away from work the Plaintiff's health would be restored and she would then be capable of arriving at the Hospital on time for her scheduled shift. It is to some extent unusual to find that allowing a disabled employee to leave a job would enable her to perform that job's essential functions. See Graves v. Finch Pruyn & Co., Inc., 457 F.3d 181, 185 n.5 (2d Cir. 2006) (recognizing the "troublesome problem" presented by viewing leaves of absence as a reasonable accommodation). Although the Second Circuit has never addressed the issue, many other circuit courts have found that a period of leave can in some circumstances be a reasonable accommodation required of an employer under the ADA. Graves, 457 F.3d at 185 n.5 (collecting cases).
Given the doctrinal uncertainty, the Court is unwilling to find, as a matter of law, that a leave of absence can never be viewed as a reasonable accommodation that would enable an employee [*20]  to perform the essential functions of her job. Nevertheless, the Defendants claim that the proposed accommodation in this case was unreasonable because the Plaintiff sought an indefinite leave of absence. It is well settled that the ADA does not require an employer to grant an indefinite leave of absence where there is no expectation that the employee will be able to return to work. Mitchell v. Washingtonville Cent. Sch. Dist., 190 F.3d 1, 9 (2d Cir. 1999). However, the Plaintiff disputes that she requested an indefinite leave. Moreover, even if she did not specify the proposed duration of her leave request, unlike the plaintiff in Mitchell, there was no indication here that the Plaintiff would be unable to return to work after her proposed leave of absence.
Accordingly, the Court finds that there are triable issues of fact concerning whether the Plaintiff can establish the "otherwise qualified" element of the prima facie case. In particular, the Court believes that a trier-of-fact must determine: (1) the proposed duration of the Plaintiff's leave request; and (2) whether the leave request was reasonable under the circumstances.

c. Whether the Plaintiff Was Mistreated Because of Her Disability
The Plaintiff has alleged four adverse employment actions: (1) her [*21]  one-day suspension; (2) the extension of her orientation period; (3) her termination; and (4) the Defendants' refusal to rehire her in a different position. To prove this element of the prima facie case, the Plaintiff must show that these adverse actions occurred under circumstances that give rise to an inference that the Defendants harbored a discriminatory intent. Chertkova v. Connecticut General Life Ins. Co., 92 F.3d 81, 91 (2d Cir. 1996). The Plaintiff can meet this burden in a variety of ways. To raise an inference of discrimination, a plaintiff may, among other things, rely upon the timing or sequence of the events leading up to her termination or point to actions or remarks by decisionmakers that reflect discriminatory animus. Chertkova, 92 F.3d at 91 (citing Chambers v. TRM Copy Ctrs. Corp., 43 F.3d 29, 37 (2d Cir. 1994), and Ostrowski v. Atlantic Mut. Ins. Cos., 968 F.2d 171, 182 (2d Cir. 1992)).
The Plaintiff points out that Backus's concerns about her lateness and the cited deficiencies in her performance were only raised after she told Mueller and Backus about her depression. The Plaintiff also highlights several comments from Mueller, and Backus that she claims give rise to an inference of discriminatory intent. In particular, she notes that both Mueller and Backus told her that they had been through far worse situations, including their own divorces, and that the Plaintiff should move past her depression. [*22]  Backus allegedly told the Plaintiff that she believed the Plaintiff was using her depression as an excuse for poor performance at work.
The Plaintiff further emphasizes that the second performance evaluation made no mention of her lateness but did list a host of problems that were never addressed in her earlier review. The Plaintiff also asks the Court to draw an inference from the fact that Vertichio only allowed her to apply for two other positions within the North Shore system after she was terminated. Finally, the Plaintiff claims that other Hospital employees arrived late for work without being disciplined. On this record, the Court finds that the Plaintiff has met her de minimis burden to raise the inference that the adverse employment actions may have been motivated by discriminatory animus.

2. The Defendants' Legitimate Non-Discriminatory Reasons
With the Plaintiff having established a prima facie case of discrimination, the burden shifts to the Defendants to offer a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for the alleged adverse employment actions. Here, the Defendants have no difficulty in meeting this burden.
In the Court's view, the Defendants have offered legitimate and non-discriminatory [*23]  reasons for each of the alleged adverse employment actions. The Defendants claim that the Plaintiff was suspended for one-day because, despite repeated warnings about her punctuality, she arrived late to work on November 27, 2006. The Defendants further contend that the Plaintiff's orientation period was extended one week not as a punishment but to give her some time to work on the deficiencies cited in her first performance review. The Plaintiff was terminated, according to the Defendants, because of well-documented performance deficiencies and her chronic lateness. Finally, the Defendants explain that the Plaintiff was not permitted to apply for four of the six positions she was interested in because she was not qualified for those positions after having been terminated from the QM Coordinator job.

3. The Defendants' Discriminatory Intent
The Defendants have produced various non-discriminatory justifications for the alleged adverse employment actions. In order to survive summary judgment, the Plaintiff must point to evidence that suggests that it is more likely than not that the reasons offered are mere pretext designed to cover up the Defendants' actual discriminatory intent. Roge, 257 F.3d at 168 (citing [*24]  Reeves, 530 U.S. at 143).
There is certainly strong evidence that could lead a trier-of-fact to credit the Defendants' story. The Plaintiff's performance during her probationary period was apparently unsatisfactory and there is no dispute that she had a problem with lateness. However, on the other hand, there is also at least some evidence to suggest that a discriminatory motive played a role in the alleged adverse employment actions.
First, a jury could draw such an inference from the fact the Plaintiff's revelation of her condition was followed closely in time by the alleged discriminatory treatment. In particular, it is noteworthy that Backus's concerns about the Plaintiff's lateness and the cited deficiencies in her performance were only raised after she told Mueller and Backus about her depression. Second, although a jury could find the comments made by Mueller and Backus to be innocuous, they are at least capable of being interpreted as an indication that they harbored some animus toward the Plaintiff based on her condition. The fact that the comments were made by Mueller and Backus—the two supervisors who essentially carried out the alleged discriminatory conduct—bolsters the Plaintiff's evidence.
Accordingly, [*25]  because the Plaintiff's discrimination claim under the ADA and NYHRL raises triable issues of fact, the Defendants' motion to dismiss these causes of action is denied.

C. Failure to Provide Reasonable Accommodation: ADA
The Plaintiff contends that the Defendants also violated the ADA by failing to accommodate her requests for: (1) a more flexible start time; and (2) a leave of absence.
"[A] plaintiff can state a claim for discrimination based upon her employer's failure to accommodate her handicap by alleging facts showing (1) that the employer is subject to the statute under which the claim is brought, (2) that she is an individual with a disability within the meaning of the statute in question, (3) that, with or without reasonable accommodation, she could perform the essential functions of the job, and (4) that the employer had notice of the plaintiff's disability and failed to provide such accommodation." Lyons v. Legal Aid Soc., 68 F.3d 1512, 1515 (2d Cir. 1995). "If the plaintiff succeeds in establishing a prima facie case . . . the burden shifts to the employer to demonstrate that the employee's proposed accommodation would have resulted in undue hardship." Parker, 204 F.3d at 332 (citing Stone v. City of Mount Vernon, 118 F.3d 92, 97 (2d Cir. 1997), cert. denied, 522 U.S. 1112, 118 S. Ct. 1044, 140 L. Ed. 2d 109 (1998)).
The Defendants do not dispute the first and fourth elements [*26]  of the prima facie case. Moreover, the Court has already determined that the Plaintiff is disabled withing the meaning of the ADA and that, without some form of reasonable accommodation, the Plaintiff could not perform the essential functions of her job. The only remaining question is whether the Plaintiff's proposed accommodations were reasonable as a matter of law.
The Court has already found that, given the importance of arriving on time for her shift in the morning, the Plaintiff's request for a more flexible start time would not have been a reasonable accommodation. However the Court has also observed that there remains a triable issue of fact as to whether: (1) the Plaintiff requested a temporary or indefinite leave of absence; and (2) the leave request was reasonable under the circumstances. If the jury finds the Plaintiff's request for a leave of absence was reasonable, it will also have to decide whether such a leave of absence would impose an indue hardship upon the Defendants. These factual issues preclude summary judgment on the Plaintiff's reasonable accommodation claim.

D. Retaliation: ADA and NYHRL
The Plaintiff claims that the Defendants retaliated against her after she [*27]  requested reasonable accommodations by: (1) suspending her for one day; (2) extending her orientation period; (3) terminating her; and (4) refusing to rehire her for a position in the North Shore system.
The Defendants contend, as a threshold matter, that the Plaintiff's claim under the ADA must be dismissed because she failed to allege retaliation in the charge she filed with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ("EEOC"). The Court agrees. In order to bring an employment related ADA claim in federal court, a plaintiff must first exhaust her administrative remedies by filing a charge with the EEOC. McInerney v. Rensselaer Polytechnic Inst., 505 F.3d 135, 138 (2d Cir. 2007). The Plaintiff concedes that she did not allege retaliation in her EEOC complaint but argues that her retaliation claim should be considered because it is "reasonably related" to the allegations of discrimination she did raise before the EEOC.
The Plaintiff correctly points out that the Court has jurisdiction to hear a claim not expressly pursued before the EEOC if that claim is reasonably related "to those that the plaintiff did assert before the agency." Fitzgerald v. Henderson, 251 F.3d 345, 359 (2d Cir. 2001). However, it is well-established that the reasonably related doctrine does not allow a plaintiff to bring a suit based on alleged [*28]  acts occurring before the EEOC complaint was filed that could have been, but were not, alleged in the complaint. Butts v. City of New York Dept. of Housing Preservation and Dev., 990 F.2d 1397, 1401 (2d Cir. 1993).
Here, all of the acts forming the basis for her retaliation claim occurred before the Plaintiff filed a complaint with the EEOC on July 17, 2007. It follows that she could have included all of these allegations in her EEOC complaint. However, because the Plaintiff did not do so, the Court finds that she is unable to avail herself of the reasonably related doctrine. Accordingly, because the Plaintiff failed to exhaust her administrative remedies with respect to her ADA retaliation claim, the Defendants' motion for summary judgment is granted as to this cause of action. Because the NYHRL's retaliation provision has no such exhaustion requirement, the Court must turn to whether the Plaintiff has a viable retaliation claim under New York law.
Retaliation claims alleged pursuant to the NYHRL are analyzed under the McDonnell-Douglas burden shifting framework. Treglia v. Town of Manlius, 313 F.3d 713, 719 (2d Cir. 2002) (citing McDonnell-Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973)). To establish a prima facie case of retaliation in this context, a plaintiff must demonstrate that: (1) she engaged in a protected activity; (2) her employer was aware of the protected activity; (3) the employer [*29]  took adverse action against her; and (4) a causal connection exists between the protected activity and the adverse action. Sista v. CDC Ixis North America, Inc., 445 F.d 161, 177 (2d Cir. 2006). As noted above, a plaintiff's burden at the prima facie stage of the analysis is minimal. St. Mary's Honor Ctr., 509 U.S. at 506.
If the plaintiff meets this de minimis showing, the burden of production shifts to the defendant to articulate a legitimate, non-retaliatory reason for the termination. Farias v. Instructional Sys., 259 F.3d 91, 98 (2d Cir. 2001) (citing McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802-03). If the employer does so, the burden then shifts back to the plaintiff to show that more likely than not the employer's decision was motivated, at least in part, by a retaliatory reason. Forde v. Beth Israel Med. Center, 546 F. Supp. 2d 142, 149 (S.D.N.Y. 2008) (citing Fields v. N.Y. State Office of Mental Retardation & Developmental Disabilities, 115 F.3d 116, 120-21 (2d Cir. 1997)).
The Plaintiff contends that she engaged in a protected activity when she requested a more flexible start time and a leave of absence. It is settled law that a request for a reasonable accommodation is a protected activity. See Weixel v. Board of Educ. of City of New York, 287 F.3d 138, 149 (2d Cir. 2002) (citing Muller v. Costello, 187 F.3d 298, 311 (2d Cir. 1999) (observing that a request for a reasonable accommodation is a protected activity within the meaning of the ADA). Nevertheless, the Defendants argue that the Plaintiff did not engage in a protected activity because these requests for accommodation were not reasonable. However, a plaintiff need not actually request a reasonable accommodation in order to have engaged in [*30]  a protected activity. The law protects an employee from retaliation provided that the request for an accommodation was made in good faith even if it is ultimately determined that the proposed accommodation was unreasonable. Kessler v. Westchester County Dep't of Soc. Servs., 461 F.3d 199, 210 (2d Cir. 2006); see also Conley v. United Parcel Service, 88 F. Supp.2d 16, 20 (E.D.N.Y. 2000) (collecting cases and observing that even non-disabled plaintiffs are protected against retaliation if the plaintiff made a good faith request for an accommodation).
The Defendants cannot dispute that they were aware of the Plaintiff's protected activities. Nor can they plausibly challenge that the Plaintiff suffered various adverse employment actions. They do, however, contend that there is no causal connection between the Plaintiff's requests for accommodation and these adverse employment actions.
"The causal connection needed for proof of a retaliation claim can be established indirectly by showing that the protected activity was closely followed in time by the adverse action." Cifra v. Gen. Elec. Co., 252 F.3d 205, 217 (2d Cir. 2001) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Here, the temporal proximity between the Plaintiff's protected activities and the alleged adverse actions is sufficient to establish a causal connection.
During a meeting with Backus on November 9, 2006, the Plaintiff requested [*31]  that her start time be extended in light of the fact that complications from the medication she was taking made it difficult for her to arrive at work on time at 8:00 a.m. The Plaintiff requested a leave of absence on November 29, 2006 during a meeting with Mueller and Backus. The following day she was suspended, within a few days her orientation period was extended and by December 19, 2006—a little over one month from her request for a later start time and three weeks after the request for a leave of absence—she was terminated by the Defendants. On this record, the Court finds that the Plaintiff has offered sufficient circumstantial evidence to show a causal connection between her requests for accommodation and the alleged adverse employment actions.
The burden therefore shifts to the Defendants to offer legitimate, non-retaliatory reasons for the challenged employment decisions. There is no question that the Defendants have met this burden here. According to the Defendants, the Plaintiff was suspended, her orientation was extended and she was ultimately terminated because of her lateness and poor performance. She was only interviewed for two positions in the North Shore system because [*32]  those were the only positions for which she was qualified after having been terminated as a QM Coordinator.
With the Defendants having carried their burden at the second stage of the analysis, the Plaintiff must point to evidence that would be sufficient to permit a rational fact-finder to conclude that the Defendants' explanations are merely pretexts for impermissible retaliation. The Plaintiff relies heavily in this case on the temporal connection between her requests for accommodation and the alleged employment actions. However, to cast doubt on the Defendants' primary justification—namely that she was a poor performer—she also takes issues with the contents of Backus's employment review. In other words, the Plaintiff claims that Backus authored two negative reviews in order to provide cover for the Defendants' retaliatory decisions.
The Court finds that a juror presented with the close temporal connection of these events and the Plaintiff's testimony regarding Backus's reviews, could conclude that the Defendants retaliated against the Plaintiff after she requested accommodations. Accordingly, the Defendants' motion for summary judgment dismissing the Plaintiff's retaliation claim [*33]  under the NYHRL is denied.

E. FMLA
The Plaintiff contends that the Defendants interfered with her rights under the FMLA by failing: (1) to apprise her of her rights under the statute; and (2) to follow-up with her regarding her eligibility for a leave of absence. The Plaintiff also claims that the Defendants violated the FMLA's retaliation provision. As the Plaintiff's FMLA claims are governed by distinct standards, the Court will address them separately. See Potenza v. City of New York, 365 F.3d 165, 168 (2d Cir.2004) (per curiam) (recognizing distinct claims for interference and retaliation under the FMLA).

1. FMLA Interference
Congress enacted the FMLA in 1993 in order to provide enhanced "job security for employees who have serious health conditions that prevent them from working for temporary periods." 29 U.S.C. § 2601(a)(4). The statute requires that employers permit eligible employees, 28 U.S.C. § 2611(2), unpaid leave of up to twelve weeks per year if the employee suffers from a serious health condition that prevents the employee from performing her job. 28 U.S.C. § 2612(a)(1)(D). The FMLA also requires employers to provide posted notices to employees of the pertinent provisions of the law and information about the filing of charges. 29 U.S.C. § 2619.
To prevail on an interference claim under the FMLA, the employee must [*34]  show that the employer interfered with, restrained, or denied her exercise of her FMLA rights. Ragsdale v. Wolverine World Wide, Inc., 535 U.S. 81, 89, 122 S. Ct. 1155, 152 L. Ed. 2d 167 (2002) (citing 28 U.S.C. § 2615). Here, the Plaintiff contends that the Defendants violated the FMLA by not apprising her of her rights under the statute and in not following up with her regarding her request for a leave. The record reflects otherwise.
It is undisputed that the Hospital's FMLA policies are set forth in the Manual. The Plaintiff also does not dispute that the Manual was located in each department at the Hospital and available to all employees. In addition to the Manual, the Hospital also made available in the Human Resources Department and on its website a pamphlet that explained the process for requesting a leave under the FMLA. Under the circumstances, the Court does not credit the Plaintiff's contention that the Defendants failed to adequately notify her of the Hospital's FMLA policy.
Nevertheless, the Plaintiff points out that none of these documents addressed whether an employee is eligible for leave under the FMLA during their orientation or probationary period. She further points out that even Mueller and Backus were unaware of whether probationary employees were entitled to avail themselves [*35]  of the FMLA. The Plaintiff's argument appears to be that because neither her supervisors nor the relevant policies furnished an answer to this question, the Defendants effectively interfered with her right to take a leave under the FMLA. However, this argument ignores the terms of the Hospital's FMLA policy.
The Plaintiff appears to conflate the Hospital's reasonable accommodation policy with its FMLA policy. Although a Hospital employee is ordinarily required to approach their supervisor in requesting a reasonable accommodation, the Manual clarifies that where the proposed accommodation is a leave under the FMLA, the procedure is different. According to the Manual, to request a leave under the FMLA, an employee is required to notify her supervisor and then contact the Hartford. Ultimately, the Hartford—not the employee's supervisor—determines whether the employee is entitled to a leave under the FMLA. Significantly, there is no requirement that the employee obtain her supervisor's permission to take a leave under the FMLA before contacting the Hartford.
The fact that the Plaintiff's supervisors did not follow up with her on the issue of whether probationary employees are eligible for [*36]  a leave under the FMLA is irrelevant. If there was some uncertainty as to the Plaintiff's eligibility for a leave, she was free to contact the Hartford for a determination. The Court will not hold the Defendants liable for interfering with the Plaintiff's rights under the FMLA where her own failure to follow the appropriate procedure prevented her from properly seeking a leave under the statute. Accordingly, the Defendants' motion for summary judgment dismissing the Plaintiff's FMLA interference claim is granted.

2. FMLA Retaliation
FMLA retaliation claims are also analyzed under the McDonnell-Douglas burden shifting framework. Potenza v. City of New York, 365 F.3d 165, 168 (2d Cir. 2004).
In order to establish a prima facie case of retaliation under the FMLA, a plaintiff must show that: "1) [she] exercised rights protected under the FMLA; 2) [she] was qualified for [her] position; 3) [she] suffered an adverse employment action; and 4) the adverse employment action occurred under circumstances giving rise to an inference of retaliatory intent." Potenza, 365 F.3d at 168.
The Defendants do not appear to dispute the first two elements of the prima facie case. With respect to the third and fourth elements, their arguments mirror the challenges they made to the Plaintiff's [*37]  retaliation claims under the NYHRL. However, as with her NYHRL retaliation claim, the Plaintiff's retaliation claim under the FMLA raises triable issues of fact that preclude summary judgment.
Drawing all inferences in favor of the Plaintiff, the Court finds that a juror presented with the temporal connection between the Plaintiff's request for FMLA leave and the adverse employment actions could conclude that the Defendants retaliated against her. The Plaintiff can also point to the incident, just after her termination, where Cohen angrily picked up a brochure from the Hartford, threw it at her and said "[t]his is all you have to do, everybody knows you just fill this out." Carolyn Tully-Boone, Deposition at 175-76. Although this behavior may simply reflect frustration with the Plaintiff's misconceptions about the Hospital's FMLA policies, a reasonable juror could also view the conduct as reflecting a hostility towards employees who request leaves of absence.
Accordingly, the Defendants' motion for summary judgment dismissing the Plaintiff's retaliation claim under the FMLA is denied.

III. CONCLUSION
The Defendants' motion for summary judgment is denied as to the Plaintiff's: (1) discrimination [*38]  claim under the ADA and NYHRL; (2) reasonable accommodation claim under the ADA; and (3) retaliation claims under the NYHRL and the FMLA. The Defendants' motion for summary judgment is granted as to the Plaintiff's ADA retaliation claim and her FMLA interference claim. The parties in this case are directed to appear for jury selection on September 7, 2010.
SO ORDERED.
Dated: Central Islip, New York
May 3, 2010
/s/ Arthur D. Spatt
ARTHUR D. SPATT
United States District Judge


End of Document

