Tye v. Wells Fargo Capital Fin.
United States District Court for the Central District of California
February 3, 2017, Decided
CV 16-02418-SJO (Ex)

Reporter
2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 234983 *
Hannah L. Tye v. Wells Fargo Capital Finance
Counsel:  [*1] COUNSEL PRESENT FOR PLAINTIFF: Not Present.
COUNSEL PRESENT FOR DEFENDANT: Not Present.
Judges: S. JAMES OTERO, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: S. JAMES OTERO
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES - GENERAL

PROCEEDINGS (in chambers): ORDER GRANTING DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT [Docket No. 18]
This matter is before the Court on Defendant Wells Fargo Capital Finance's ("Wells Fargo" or "Defendant") Motion for Summary Judgment ("Motion") filed December 8, 2016. Plaintiff Hannah L. Tye ("Tye" or "Plaintiff") filed an Opposition to the Motion ("Opposition") on January 9, 2017, to which Defendant filed a Reply on January 16, 2017. The Court found this matter suitable for disposition without oral argument and vacated the hearing set for January 30, 2017. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 78(b). For the following reasons, the Court GRANTS Defendant's Motion.
I. FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
A. Factual Background
This case is an action for unlawful acts, omissions, and violations of the California Fair Employment & Housing Act ("FEHA"). Plaintiff's claims center on allegations that Defendant continuously discriminated and harassed her because of her disability, resulting in her constructive termination. (Notice of Removal ("Notice"), Ex. A, Complaint ("Compl.") ¶¶ 6-20, ECF No.1-1.) The following [*2]  facts are not disputed or have not been refuted by the evidence.
1. Plaintiff Hannah Tye's Medical History
Plaintiff has suffered from numerous ailments since 2003, and continuing to the present day. (Decl. of Hannah L. Tye in Opp'n to Def.'s Mot. For Summary J. ("Tye Decl.") ¶ 4, ECF No. 19-3.) Prior to 2011, she had previously been diagnosed with fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue syndrome, attention deficit disorder, bi-polar disorder, and anxiety. (Tye Decl. ¶ 4.) In 2011, she was diagnosed with Lyme Disease, and suffered from various symptoms including flu-like symptoms, muscle and joint pain, weakness, nausea, dizziness, and anxiety. (Pl.'s Separate Statement of Material Facts in Supp. of Opp'n. to Def's Mot. for Summary J. ("Pl.'s Facts") ¶ 1, ECF No. 19-2.)
2. Tye Career at Wells Fargo
Prior to January 2012, Plaintiff worked intermittently at Wells Fargo in Santa Monica in various jobs, including as a receptionist in the mail room. (Def. Wells Fargo's Separate Statement of Undisputed Facts in Supp. of Mot. for Summary J. ("Def.'s Facts") ¶ 1, ECF No. 18-2.) During the summer of 2011, her conditioned worsened, making it impossible to perform her regular duties at work. (Tye Decl. ¶ 4.) [*3]  She sought treatment for her illness, and requested and obtained a medical leave of absence from Wells Fargo between October 2011 and December 2011. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 2; Tye Decl. ¶ 4.) On November 21, 2011, Plaintiff's medical provider, Dr. Steven Harris, wrote a letter to Wells Fargo confirming that she had been diagnosed with Lyme Disease, and suffers on a daily basis from "a vast array of maladies that debilitate her health condition.' (Tye Decl. ¶ 4.) In early 2012, Plaintiff's doctor released her to return to work with no restrictions. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 3.) Wells Fargo was aware of Plaintiff's condition, and Plaintiff did not request any special accommodation. (Def.'s Fact ¶ 10; Tye Decl. ¶ 4; Dep. of Hannah Tye ("Pl.'s Dep.") 123:12-19, Ex. A, ECF 19-3.) In January 2012, Plaintiff was promoted to Compliance Consultant 1, a salaried position in the Specialty Finance group; and, during her three years of employment in that position, her annual salary increased from $46,000 to $64,500. (Def.'s Facts ¶¶ 2, 5, 8.) No one at Wells Fargo ever complained about Plaintiff's work performance. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 30.) For the first two years in this position, Plaintiff reported directly to senior [*4]  Vice President Kelley Thatcher ("Thatcher"), and was also under the supervision of senior Vice Presidents Rhonda Noell ("Noell") and Stacy Hopkins ("Hopkins"). (Def.'s Facts ¶ 6; Tye Decl. ¶ 3.)
3. Tye's Tenure Under Thatcher
During the two years Plaintiff spent under Thatcher's supervision, she was Thatcher's only direct report. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 6.) While Thatcher directly supervised Plaintiff, Thatcher had her own medical issues, including what appeared to be a dependence on pain medication and depression. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 13.) Thatcher frequently appeared intoxicated at work, would slur her words, forget things, have trouble walking, and once even ran into a wall.1 (Def.'s Facts ¶ 14.) Plaintiff was informed of some these behaviors by Thatcher's previous direct reports prior to commencing her position. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 15.)
Although the two "got along great" initially, Plaintiff alleges that she began to have issues with Thatcher after the first month. (Pl.'s Dep. 74:15-17; Def.'s Facts ¶ 19.) Thatcher's issues with alcohol abuse and over medication would often result in an inability to function at work, and she would require Plaintiff to perform her most basic tasks such as typing, e-mails, [*5]  and document review. (Pl.'s Facts ¶ 9.) Furthermore, Thatcher would frequently miss days of work, resulting in an increase in Plaintiff's workload; and, would tell Plaintiff that she "couldn't be sick... [that she] had to be strong for [Thatcher]." (Pl.'s Facts ¶ 4; Pl.'s Dep. 50:1-2.) Plaintiff would often protest to Thatcher that the increased workload was overwhelming her. (Pl.'s Facts ¶ 4.) Plaintiff also alleges that despite her worsening symptoms, Thatcher instructed her to stay at work, causing her to miss appointments with her doctor. (Pl.'s Facts ¶ 10.)
Plaintiff further contends that Thatcher's treatment of her devolved from difficult and overbearing, into offensive and abusive. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 17; Pl.'s Facts ¶ 7.) Plaintiff avers that Thatcher would frequently call Plaintiff into her office and tell her personal stories, some of which were of a sexual nature, while crying. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 17; Pl.'s Facts ¶¶ 7-8.) Moreover, Thatcher would touch Plaintiff in an unwelcome and offensive manner, including hugging Plaintiff. (Pl.'s Facts ¶¶ 7-8.) When Thatcher was out of the office, which was often, she would call Plaintiff multiple times a day crying or assigning more work, and [*6]  frequently demanded that Plaintiff stay on the phone with her. (Pl.'s Facts ¶ 9; Def.'s Facts ¶ 17.) While at lunch on one occasion, Plaintiff received an email from Thatcher demanding she return immediately to the office; however, upon Plaintiff's arrival, Thatcher informed her that she did not need her assistance, and did not even remember sending the email. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 17.) Although Plaintiff often protested, Thatcher did not stop these behaviors. (Pl.'s Facts ¶ 7.) The resulting stress from the increased workload and Thatcher's erratic behavior caused Plaintiff's symptoms to exacerbate, and her overall condition to worsen. (Pl.'s Facts ¶ 7.)
4. Tye Reports Thatcher's Behavior to Noell and Hopkins
Plaintiff reported Thatcher's behavior to her other supervisors, Noell and Hopkins. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 20.) Plaintiff alleges that in response to this report, Hopkins told her that if Plaintiff reported Thatcher's behavior to Wells Fargo's Human Resources Department ("HR"), "it would be like stabbing [Hopkins and Noell] in the back." (Pl.'s Dep. 140:16-18.) Furthermore, Hopkins told Plaintiff that Thatcher was her supervisor, and could give her any work that needed to be done; and, that [*7]  it was Plaintiff's responsibility to keep Thatcher focused on work. (Pl.'s Facts ¶ 13; Pl.'s Dep. 84:2-7.) Plaintiff alleges that after complaining to Noell about Thatcher's behavior and Plaintiff's workload, Noell told Plaintiff that they were "taking care of everything on the HR side." (Pl.'s Dep. 140:18-20.) During this time, Plaintiff told Thatcher and Noell about her symptoms and how they were worsening. (Pl.'s Dep. 123:15-17.) Further, Noell had noticed that Plaintiff was resting in her car when she felt sick, so she gave her a key to a quiet room in the office. (Pl.'s Dep. 123:22-24.) Plaintiff initially used the quiet room, but stopped doing so after she felt reluctant to have co-workers see her exiting the room. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 12.) None of Plaintiff's co-workers made any comments about her use of the quiet room. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 12.)
At times, Plaintiff would email Hopkins and Noell about Thatcher, telling them that Thatcher was over-medicated or could not function. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 23.) She would explain that she was stressed and overloaded with work because Thatcher could not do her own work. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 23.) According to Plaintiff, both Noell and Hopkins spoke to Thatcher [*8]  and told her not to come to work over-medicated. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 24.) Finally, Plaintiff informed Noell that she no longer wanted Thatcher to supervise her, and the two of them discussed possible positions that Plaintiff could transfer to. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 25.)
5. Transfer to Steve Scott's Supervision
Ultimately, Plaintiff and Noell decided that it would be best for Plaintiff to work full-time under the supervision of Steve Scott ("Scott"). (Def.'s Facts ¶ 26.) Plaintiff believed this to be the best option because she did not want to leave the Specialty Finance group, and was not qualified for any other positions within that group. (Def.'s Facts ¶¶ 26-27.) After transferring to the supervision of Scott, Thatcher's behavior did not change, as she continued to call Plaintiff to her office, and would seek out Plaintiff at her new cubicle. (Pl.'s Depo 102:2-7.) Furthermore, when Thatcher was out sick, Plaintiff would be responsible for her work in addition to her new duties for Scott. (Pl.'s Facts ¶ 24.) In fact, while Thatcher was on a brief leave of absence during the Summer of 2014, Plaintiff was responsible for a portion of her work. (Pl.'s Facts ¶ 25.) In November 2014, Thatcher returned [*9]  from her leave of absence, and continued her offensive behavior towards Plaintiff. (Tye Decl. ¶ 14.)
6. Tye's Resignation and Exit Interview
In late November 2014, after Plaintiff worked directly for Scott for about ten months, she contacted Noell and Scott by email to inform them that she was resigning from her position at Wells Fargo in order to "get [her] health on track." (Def.'s Facts ¶¶ 31-32.) At a subsequent meeting with Noell and Scott, Plaintiff informed them that, in addition to her health issues, she wished to resign because the workload was getting worse, and that Thatcher's treatment over the last three years had left her "mentally, physically, and emotionally distressed." (Def.'s Facts ¶ 35; Pl.'s Dep. 45:10-19.) Plaintiff alleges that in response, Scott and Noell told her that "everyone has a [Thatcher]" at work. (Pl.'s Facts ¶ 33.) Furthermore, Scott and Noell told Plaintiff to go home and take care of her health, and that she was not required to have an exit interview. (Pl.'s Dep. 116:5-12.)
On her last day, however, Plaintiff requested to have an exit interview with Mary Jo Gagliardi ("Gagliardi"),an HR manager at Wells Fargo. (Pl.'s Facts ¶ 35.) At this meeting, Plaintiff [*10]  told Gagliardi about Thatcher's behavior over the past three years, and the responses of Noell, Hopkins, and Scott to her frequent complaints. (Pl.'s Facts ¶ 35.) Furthermore, Plaintiff told Gagliardi that as a result of Thatcher's behavior, she was mentally exhausted, stressed, and "sicker than [she] had ever been." (Pl.'s Facts ¶ 35; Pl.'s Dep. 149: 9-10.) Gagliardi appeared shocked, and condemned Thatcher's behavior. (Pl.'s Facts ¶ 36.) She also asked Plaintiff if she was interested in a different position at Wells Fargo, but Plaintiff declined. (Pl.'s Dep. 151:1-10.) Plaintiff did not seek another position at Wells Fargo after she resigned. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 41.)
B. Procedural Background
On March 8, 2016, Plaintiff initiated this action in Los Angeles County Superior Court. (See Compl.) Plaintiff alleged disability discrimination, harassment, failure to engage, failure to accommodate, retaliation, negligent retention, intentional infliction of emotional distress, and wrongful (constructive) discharge in violation of public policy. (See Compl.) Wells Fargo filed its answer on April 7, 2016. (See Notice, Ex. C, Answer, ECF No. 1-3.) On April 8, 2016, Wells Fargo removed the action to [*11]  this Court based on diversity jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. §§ 1332, 1441, & 1446. (See Notice.)
Wells Fargo moves for summary judgment on the grounds that: (1) Plaintiff's disability discrimination and retaliation claims fail because Plaintiff did not suffer an adverse employment action during her employment, and cannot establish a causal link between any action taken against her and her alleged disability; (2) Plaintiff's claim for harassment fails because Plaintiff cannot establish that she was subjected to verbal or physical conduct of a harassing nature based on her disability or that the conduct was sufficiently severe or pervasive as to alter the condition of her employment and create an abusive working environment; (3) Plaintiff's constructive discharge claim fails because she was not able to demonstrate that her work conditions were so intolerable that a reasonable person would have been compelled to resign, or that Wells Fargo violated public policy; (4) Plaintiff's claims for failure to engage in the interactive process and failure to accommodate fail because Plaintiff never sought an accommodation, and never put Wells Fargo on notice that she was in need of an accommodation; (5) Plaintiff's claims [*12]  for intentional infliction of emotional distress and negligent retention are barred because they are preempted by California's Worker Compensation Act; and (6) Plaintiff has no basis to recover punitive damages because she cannot show that anyone at Wells Fargo committed acts of oppression, fraud, or malice. (See generally Mot.)
II. DISCUSSION
A. Summary Judgment Standard
Rule 56(a) mandates that "the court shall grant summary judgment if the movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). The moving party bears the initial burden of establishing the absence of a genuine issue of material fact. See Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). But if the nonmoving party bears the burden of proving the claim or defense, the moving party need not produce any evidence or prove the absence of a genuine issue of material fact. See id. at 325. Rather, the moving party's initial burden "may be discharged by showing—that is, point out to the district court—that there is an absence of evidence to support the nonmoving party's case." Id. (internal quotations omitted).
Once the moving party meets its initial burden, the "party asserting that a fact cannot be or is genuinely disputed [*13]  must support the assertion." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(1). "The mere existence of a scintilla of evidence in support of the plaintiff's position will be insufficient; there must be evidence on which the jury could reasonably find for the plaintiff." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 252, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986); accord Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986) ("[O]pponent must do more than simply show that there is some metaphysical doubt as to the material facts."). Further, "[o]nly disputes over facts that might affect the outcome of the suit . . . will properly preclude the entry of summary judgment [and] [f]actual disputes that are irrelevant or unnecessary will not be counted." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248; see also Sanders v. Douglas, 565 F. Supp. 78, 80 (C.D. Cal. 1983) (disregarding conclusory allegations of affidavit because "legal conclusions are totally ineffectual, and are not to be given consideration or weight whatsoever" on summary judgment). At the summary judgment stage, a court does not make credibility determinations or weigh conflicting evidence. See Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249. A court is required to draw all inferences in a light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Matsushita, 475 U.S. at 587.
B. Related Motions and Evidentiary Objections
Wells Fargo has lodged procedural and evidentiary objections with regard to the Declaration of Hannah L. Tye in Support of Plaintiff's Opposition to Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment. [*14]  The Court examines each in turn.
1. Procedural Objections
Wells Fargo objects to Plaintiff's declaration on the basis that she failed to hand-sign the document in violation of Local Rule 5-4.3.4(a)(3). Under the Local Rules, a document "requiring signatures other than those of registered CM/ECF filers (such as declarations)" must be hand-signed, scanned into PDF form, and submitted electronically. L.R. 5-4.3.4(a)(3). The Court acknowledges that Plaintiff's Declaration was improperly signed according to the Local Rules; however, to deem the Declaration inadmissible on procedural grounds, particularly given that Plaintiff was able to remedy this issue in a timely manner, would not be in the interest of judicial fairness. Accordingly, the Court DENIES Defendant's request to strike Plaintiff's Declaration on these grounds.
2. Evidentiary Objections
Wells Fargo also makes numerous substantive objections to Plaintiff's Declaration, the bulk of which allege that Plaintiff's Declaration contradicts her deposition testimony. (See Def.'s Objections to Evid. Submitted ("Obj.") by Pl. in Opp'n to Mot., ECF No. 20-2.) In the interest of efficiency, however, these objections will be ruled upon generally. See Capitol Records, LLC v. BlueBeat, Inc., 765 F. Supp. 2d 1198, 1200 n.1 (C.D. Cal. 2010) (quotation omitted) (noting that [*15]  "in motions for summary judgment with numerous objections, it is often unnecessary and impractical for a court to methodically scrutinize each objection and give a full analysis of each argument raised.") To the extent that any of the assertions made in Plaintiff's Declaration were contradicted by her deposition testimony, the Court relied exclusively on the deposition testimony, or facts corroborated by deposition testimony, in making factual determinations. Furthermore, all factual determinations were based on admissible evidence, and therefore, the objections are OVERRULED.
III. Analysis
Having disposed of these evidentiary issues, the Court now addresses the merits of Defendant's Motion.
A. Disability Discrimination
Defendant contends that Plaintiff's claim for disability discrimination fails because Plaintiff did not suffer an adverse employment action during her employment, and cannot establish a causal link between any action taken against her and her alleged disability. (See generally Mot.)
Under FEHA, it is unlawful for an employer " because of medical condition... to discharge... or to discriminate against the person in compensation or in terms, conditions, or privileges of employment." [*16]  Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(a). FEHA proscribes two types of disability discrimination: (1) disparate treatment discrimination, which arises from an employer's intentionally discriminatory act against an employee because of her disability; and, (2) disparate impact discrimination, which results from an employer's facially neutral practice or policy that has a disproportionate effect on employees suffering from a disability. Avila v. Cont'l Airlines, Inc., 165 Cal. App. 4th 1237, 1246, 82 Cal. Rptr. 3d 440 (2008). Here, both in pleading and opposing summary judgment, Plaintiff alleges only disparate treatment discrimination.
1. Direct Evidence
In employment discrimination cases under FEHA, a plaintiff can prove a claim of disparate treatment discrimination through the use of either direct or circumstantial evidence. DeJung v. Super. Ct., 169 Cal. App. 4th 533, 549, 87 Cal. Rptr. 3d 99. "Direct evidence is evidence which, if believed, proves the fact of discriminatory animus without inference or presumption. Comments demonstrating discriminatory animus may be found to be direct evidence if there is evidence of a causal relationship between the comments and the adverse job action at issue." Id. at 550. Here, Plaintiff alleges that she was discriminated against by her employer because of her disability, or perceived disability. (Compl. ¶ 22.) In support, Plaintiff offers the following [*17]  evidence of discrimination she experienced at Wells Fargo. First, Plaintiff describes how she perceived that Thatcher was targeting her because of her disability, but is not able to recall any direct comments made by Thatcher with regard to her disability. (Pl.'s Dep. 75:5-11.) Further, Plaintiff recalls feeling embarrassed when co-workers would see her exiting the quiet room after resting, but could not recall anyone ever making a comment about her use of that quiet room. (Pl.'s Dep. 127:2-4.) Lastly, she recalls a former co-worker occasionally asking how she was feeling. (Pl.'s Dep. 210:1-18.) This evidence certainly does not "prove the fact of discriminatory animus without inference or presumption," as demanded by the standard set forth in DeJung; and therefore, is not direct evidence of disparate treatment discrimination. 169 Cal. App. 4th at 550; see also Trop v. Sony Pictures Entm't, Inc., 129 Cal. App. 4th 1133, 1147, 29 Cal. Rptr. 3d 144 (2005).
2. Circumstantial Evidence
The evidence proffered by Plaintiff is, at best, circumstantial. Where a plaintiff relies on circumstantial evidence (i.e., is not able to obtain direct evidence of discriminatory animus), California employs a three-part burden shifting test known as the McDonnell Douglas test. Moore v. Regents of the Univ. of California, 248 Cal. App. 4th 216, 234, 206 Cal. Rptr. 3d 841 (2016). At trial, the McDonnell Douglas test places [*18]  the burden on the plaintiff to establish a prima facie case of discrimination. Id. If successful, a presumption of discrimination is presumed, and the burden shifts to the defendant to rebut that presumption by demonstrating that the action was taken for "a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason." Id. at 235 (quoting Guz v. Bechtel Nat. Inc., 24 Cal. 4th 317, 355-56, 100 Cal. Rptr. 2d 352, 8 P.3d 1089 (2000)). "If the employer sustains this burden, then the burden shifts back to the plaintiff who must show that the employer's proffered nondiscriminatory reason is false or pretextual." Id. (quoting Guz, supra, 24 Cal. 4th at 356). However, the McDonnell-Douglas framework was developed originally for trial, not summary judgment. Id. at 236. In the summary judgment context, California requires that the McDonnell-Douglas burdens are reversed. Id. Under this view, the employer must present evidence either that plaintiff has failed to establish one or more of the prima facie elements, or that the adverse action was based on legitimate, nondiscriminatory factors. Id. In this case, the employer will be entitled to summary judgment "unless the plaintiff produces admissible evidence which raises a triable issue of fact material to the defendant's showing." Id.
To establish a prima facie case of disability discrimination under FEHA, a [*19]  Plaintiff must demonstrate, even circumstantially, that she (1) suffered from a disability, or was perceived as suffering from a disability; (2) could perform the essential duties of the job with or without reasonable accommodations, and (3) was subjected to an adverse employment action because of her disability or perceived disability. Moore, 284 Cal. App. 4th at 234-35 (citing Jensen v. Wells Fargo Bank, 85 Cal. App. 4th 245, 254, 102 Cal. Rptr. 2d 55 (2000)). The burden lies with Wells Fargo to show that Plaintiff cannot prove one or more of these elements, or that there was a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its actions. Id. at 236. Here, the first two elements are not at issue. It is undisputed that Plaintiff's medical condition is a disability within the meaning of the FEHA2 , and that Wells Fargo was aware of that condition.3 Further, Plaintiff was able to perform the essential duties of the job, as evidenced by her annual salary increasing from $43,000 to $64,500 during her three years as a Compliance Consultant; and, by the fact that no one at Wells Fargo ever complained about her work. (Def.'s Facts ¶¶ 8, 30.) Defendant contends, however, that Plaintiff cannot establish the third element of her case because: (1) she did not suffer an adverse employment action; and (2) there is no evidence [*20]  that she suffered any adverse employment action because of her disability. The Court addresses each in turn.
a. Adverse Employment Action
An adverse employment action is one which materially affects "the terms, conditions, or privileges of employment." Cal. Gov't. Code §§ 12940(a); Yanowitz v. L'Oreal USA, Inc., 26 Cal. 4th 1028, 1054 (2005). "The phrase 'terms, conditions, or privileges of employment' must be interpreted liberally and with a reasonable appreciation of the realities of the workplace in order to afford employees the appropriate and generous protection against employment discrimination that the FEHA was intended to provide." Yanowitz, 26. Cal. 4th at 1054. Not every employment decision, however, amounts to an adverse employment action. Strother v. Southern California Permanente Med. Grp, 79 F.3d 859, 869 (9th Cir. 1996). Further, the FEHA does "not guarantee employees a stress-free working environment.'' Arteaga v. Brink's, Inc., 163 Cal. App. 4th 327, 344, 77 Cal. Rptr. 3d 654 (2008) (quoting Wehunt v. R.W. Page Corp., 352 F.Supp.2d 1342, 1354 (M.D. Ga. 2004)). Naturally, "ultimate employment actions" such as termination or demotion, are considered adverse employment actions; however, that is not an exhaustive list of qualifying adverse actions. Yanowitz, 26. Cal. 4th at 1054. While "a mere offensive utterance or even a pattern of social slights" by the employer or co-workers cannot be viewed as an adverse employment action, an abusive or hostile work environment "can detract from employees' job performance, discourage employees [*21]  from remaining on the job, or keep them from advancing in their careers." Id. at 1053. Here, while suffering from debilitating symptoms of Lyme Disease, was subject to strange, abusive, and harassing behavior by her supervisor, Thatcher, for nearly three years. (Tye Decl. ¶ 4; Pl.'s Facts ¶¶ 1, 7-9; Def.'s Facts ¶ 17.) This treatment led to an exacerbation of her symptoms. (Pl.'s Facts ¶ 7.) Moreover, Plaintiff's other supervisors were aware of, but did not prevent, the abuse. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 35; Pl.'s Dep. 45:10-19.) Thatcher's treatment of Plaintiff, in conjunction with her disability, created a hostile working environment, which ultimately led to her resigning from a position she both excelled at, and enjoyed. Accordingly, Plaintiff has raised a triable issue of fact as to her suffering an adverse employment action.
b. Causal Relation Between Adverse Action and Disability
In order to fully satisfy the third element of disability discrimination under FEHA § 12940(a), Plaintiff's disability must have been "a substantial motivating factor" behind the adverse employment action. Harris v. City of Santa Monica, 56 Cal. 4th 203, 232, 152 Cal. Rptr. 3d 392, 294 P.3d 49 (2013). Recalling the facts from the discussion above, Plaintiff offered sparse proof that she was adversely treated because of her disability. [*22]  Although she alleged that Thatcher targeted her because of her disability, she was unable to corroborate that claim with any evidence. Moreover, she claimed to have felt embarrassed being seen leaving the quiet room by co-workers, although did not provide evidence of any comments made by her co-workers with regard to her use of the room. Lastly, she suspected a former co-worker of harboring discriminatory attitudes against her, because he had occasionally asked her how she was feeling. Based on this evidence, Plaintiff has not raised a triable issue of fact with respect to the claim that she was discriminated because of her disability. Accordingly, Wells Fargo's Motion as it pertains to Plaintiff's claim for disability discrimination is GRANTED.
B. Harassment
Plaintiff alleges that she was subjected to a concerted, routine and repeated pattern of offensive and abusive conduct, directly because of her disabilities, need for accommodations, and complaints. (Compl. ¶ 27.)
Under FEHA, it is unlawful for an employer "because of ... physical disability, mental disability, [or] medical condition ... to harass an employee. An entity shall take all reasonable steps to prevent harassment from occurring." [*23]  Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(j)(1). In order to prove a claim for disability harassment, the employee must show: (1) that the conduct was "sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of the victim's employment and create an abusive working environment;' and (2) the employee is subjected to the conduct because of her disability. Rehmani v. Super. Ct., 204 Cal. App. 4th 945, 951, 139 Cal. Rptr. 3d 464 (2012). "Harassment focuses on situations in which the social environment of the workplace becomes intolerable because the harassment (whether verbal, physical, or visual) communicates an offensive message to the harassed employee." Roby. v. McKesson Corp., 47 Cal. 4th 686, 706, 101 Cal. Rptr. 3d 773, 219 P.3d 749 (2009) (emphasis omitted). A hostile working environment exists "when the incidents of harassment occur in concert or with a regularity that can reasonably be termed pervasive." Etter v. Veriflo Corp., 67 Cal. App. 4th 457, 463, 79 Cal. Rptr. 2d 33 (1998). When the employee is harassed by a supervisor, the employer is strictly liable for the supervisor's actions. Roby, 47 Cal. 4th at 707.
Based on Plaintiff's deposition testimony and the totality of the evidence, Plaintiff has produced sufficient evidence to show a pattern of abuse and harassment towards her by Thatcher; and, that Thatcher's conduct altered the conditions of Plaintiff's employment and created an hostile working environment. Like the disability discrimination claim, however, Plaintiff's case for [*24]  harassment hinges on the second element of the claim: that she was subjected to the harassing conduct because of her disability. Plaintiff baselessly contends that Thatcher targeted her because of her disability, but did not corroborate that claim with any evidence other than Thatcher's knowledge of her condition. She also claimed to have felt embarrassed being seen leaving the quiet room, but was unable to produce evidence showing, or even recall any instances of, any comments made by her co-workers with regard to her use of the room. Finally, although she suspected a former co-worker of harboring discriminatory attitudes against her, this suspicion was based only on the co-worker occasionally asking her how she was feeling.
Take for comparison the facts of Roby, a disability harassment claim before the California Supreme Court.4 47 Cal. 4th at 692. The Court determined that the employee had produced evidence that her supervisor, who knew about her medical condition, intentionally harassed her because of that condition. Id. at 710-11. The harassing conduct included: demeaningly reprimanding her in front of her co-workers; belittling her contribution to the company; ridiculing her for being absent as a result of her [*25]  condition; overtly ignoring the employee when handing out specialty food items, holiday gifts, and travel trinkets to all of the other members of the team; refusing to respond to her greetings and turning away from her when she tried to ask questions; and, calling her "disgusting" because of sores on her arms and her body odor, both of which were caused by her medication. Id. at 695. The Court found that a jury could infer from this evidence that the supervisor harassed the employee because of her condition. Id. at 710-11. Unlike in Roby, Plaintiff here has not produced evidence showing that she was harassed because of her disability, and therefore, has not raised a triable issue of fact to that end. Accordingly, Wells Fargo's Motion as it pertains to Plaintiff's claim for harassment is GRANTED.
C. Constructive Wrongful Discharge in Violation of Public Policy
Plaintiff claims that she was wrongfully, and constructively, discharged in violation of the public policy set forth in FEHA. (See generally Compl.)
In order to sustain a claim of wrongful termination in violation of fundamental public policy, the plaintiff must prove that her dismissal violated a policy that is (1) fundamental, (2) beneficial for the [*26]  public, and (3) embodied in a statute or constitutional provision. Turner v. Anheuser-Busch, Inc., 7 Cal. App. 4th 1238, 1251 (1994). The FEHA clearly delineates a policy against disability discrimination in employment, thereby making wrongful termination on that basis a violation of California public policy. Moorpark v. Super. Ct., 18 Cal. 4th 1143, 1159-60, 77 Cal. Rptr. 2d 445, 959 P.2d 752 (1998); see also Stevenson v. Super. Ct. of Los Angeles Cnty., 16. Cal. 4th 880, 895, 66 Cal. Rptr. 2d 888, 941 P.2d 1157 (1997). Moreover, it is in the public interest to prevent disability discrimination in employment because "(1) any member of the public may develop a disability and become the victim of disability discrimination, (2) the public at large benefits from the productivity of disabled employees, and (3) any type of invidious discrimination foments ... strife and unrest.'' Id. at 1160 (quoting Stevenson, 16. Cal. 4th at 895) (internal quotations omitted).
Here, however, Plaintiff's claim for wrongful termination relies on a theory of constructive discharge. At the heart of the theory of constructive discharge is the claim that an employer, in an attempt to avoid liability for wrongfully terminating an employee, engages in conduct that would compel a reasonable employee to quit. Colores v. Bd. of Tr., 105 Cal. App. 4th 1293, 1305, 130 Cal. Rptr. 2d 347 (2003). Essentially, constructive discharge is a doctrine that transforms a resignation into a wrongful termination. Id. at 1306. The doctrine is applicable to employment discrimination cases. Turner, 7 Cal. App. 4th at 1245. Under California law, a constructive [*27]  discharge occurs when, looking at the totality of circumstances: (1) an employee's working conditions were so intolerable and discriminatory at the time of her resignation; (2) that a reasonable person in the employee's position would have been compelled to resign; and (3) that her employer intentionally created or knowingly permitted such conditions. Id. at 1246-51. In order to obtain damages, the employee must connect the wrongful discharge with a violation of public policy. Colores, 105 Cal. App. 4th at 1306.
It is self-evident that Plaintiff's constructive discharge claim, if proven, would be in direct violation of the public policy set forth in FEHA. What is at issue, however, is whether or not Plaintiff's claim meets the high standard demanded by Turner. It is well documented that Plaintiff suffered from a wide array of maladies and ailments, including Lyme Disease, which had terrible symptoms and caused Plaintiff immense pain and discomfort. (Tye Decl. ¶ 4; Pl.'s Facts ¶ 1.) Further, it is undisputed that Thatcher subjected Plaintiff to a continuous pattern of offensive and abusive treatment over the course of nearly three years. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 17; Pl.'s Facts ¶¶ 7-9.) Despite Plaintiff lodging complaints with Thatcher and [*28]  her other supervisors, the abusive treatment did not cease until Plaintiff had resigned from Wells Fargo. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 35; Pl.'s Dep. 45:10-19.) With these facts in mind, a legitimate argument can certainly be made that Plaintiff's work environment was intolerable, especially in conjunction with the worsening symptoms of her Lyme Disease. Plaintiff has not, however, shown that her work environment was both intolerable and discriminatory as prescribed by Turner. Plaintiff has produced no evidence that demonstrates any discriminatory actions taken against her because of her disability, instead offering only baseless and conclusory allegations in support of her claim. Accordingly, Wells Fargo's Motion as it pertains to Plaintiff's claim for constructive discharge in violation of public policy is GRANTED.
D. Retaliation
Plaintiff alleges that shortly after she complained about "discriminatory conduct," Wells Fargo unlawfully terminated her based upon pretext. (See generally Compl.)
FEHA makes it unlawful for an employer to "discharge ... or otherwise discrimination against any person because the person has opposed any practices forbidden under [FEHA] or because the person has filed a complaint." [*29]  Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(h). "A violation of this prohibition occurs when the employer takes harmful action against an employee in retaliation for the latter's engaging in protected activity." McCaskey v. California State Auto. Assn., 189 Cal. App. 4th 947, at 987, 118 Cal. Rptr. 3d 34 (2010). At summary judgment, a claim for retaliation under FEHA requires the same McDonnell Douglas burden shifting analysis used in discrimination claims. Yanowitz, supra, 36 Cal. 4th at 1130. To establish a prima facie case of retaliation under FEHA, an employee must show that: (1) she engaged in a "protected activity," (2) the employer subjected her to an adverse employment action, and (3) a causal link existed between the protected activity and the employer's action. Id.
With respect to the first element, Plaintiff contends that she was engaged in a protected activity because she complained to her supervisors about her increased workload and Thatcher's mistreatment of her. Under FEHA, an employee's conduct may constitute a protected activity not only when she "opposes conduct that ultimately is determined to be unlawfully discriminatory ... but also when the employee opposes conduct that the employee reasonably and in good faith believes to be discriminatory, whether or not the challenged conduct is ultimately found to violate the FEHA." Yanowitz, 36 Cal. 4th at 1130-31. Although Plaintiff [*30]  certainly complained about her treatment and workload to her supervisors, it is not evident that she reasonably believed she was complaining about discriminatory conduct. Plaintiff testified that Thatcher's treatment toward her was motivated because "there was something about me, and I often portrayed it as having my disability, that she seemed to be harassing me more [than her previous direct reports]." (Pl.'s Dep. 75:5-11.) Plaintiff did not, however, produce any evidence of disparaging comments made by Thatcher in regard to Plaintiff's disability. Nor did Plaintiff produce any circumstantial evidence that she was treated worse than Thatcher's previous direct reports because of her disability. Plaintiff only proffers baseless feelings, not reasonable belief; and therefore, has not provided sufficient evidence to meet the first element of her claim. Even if Plaintiff was able to show that she engaged in a protected activity, she failed to show both that she suffered an adverse employment action (in this case, termination) and a causal link between the protected activity and an adverse employment action. Accordingly, the Court need not address the other elements of the claim, and  [*31] GRANTS Wells Fargo's Motion as it pertains to Plaintiff's claim for retaliation.
E. Failure to Accommodate and Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process
Plaintiff alleges that Wells Fargo both failed to reasonably accommodate her medical condition, and failed to engage in the interactive process by which a reasonable accommodation could have been found. The Court addresses each claim in turn.
1. Failure to Accommodate
Under FEHA, it is unlawful "for an employer ... to fail to make reasonable accommodation for the known ... disability of an applicant or employee." Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(m). To establish a prima facie claim for failure to make reasonable accommodations, the plaintiff must show that: (1) she has a disability covered by FEHA; (2) she is qualified to perform the essential functions of the position; and (3) the employer failed to reasonably accommodate the plaintiff's disability. Furtado v. State Pers. Bd., 212 Cal. App. 4th 729, 744, 151 Cal. Rptr. 3d 292 (2013) (citing Jensen v. Wells Fargo Bank, 85 Cal. App. 4th 245, 255-56, 102 Cal. Rptr. 2d 55 (2000). "Reasonable accommodation may include either of the following: (1) Making existing facilities used by employees readily accessible to, and usable by, individuals with disabilities. (2) Job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, [and] reassignment to a vacant position." Cal. Gov't Code § 12926(p). The reasonableness of an accommodation [*32]  is generally a question of fact. Hanson v. Lucky Stores, Inc., 74 Cal. App. 4th 215, 228 n. 11, 87 Cal. Rptr. 2d 487 (1999). The employer is not obligated to choose the best accommodation or the accommodation the employee seeks; but rather, may choose the accommodation that is easiest to furnish, provided it is still reasonable. Id. If the employee cannot be accommodated in her existing position, the employer has an affirmative duty to determine whether a position is available for reassignment. Furtado, 212 Cal. App. 4th at 745. A reassignment is not required if "there is no vacant position for which the employee is qualified." Id. (citing Raine v. City of Burbank, 135 Cal. App. 4th 1215, 1223, 37 Cal. Rptr. 3d 899 (2006)). This affirmative duty to find a vacant position for the employee does not include the creation of a new job, moving another employee, promoting the disabled employee to a position for which she is not qualified, or violating another employee's rights. Id.
In this case, it is undisputed that Plaintiff both suffered from a disability covered by FEHA, and was qualified to perform the essential function of the position.5 The key inquiry is whether or not Plaintiff was afforded accommodations as a result of her disability, and if so, whether those accommodations were reasonable. At issue is the contention that the symptoms of Plaintiff's Lyme Disease were exacerbated because [*33]  of an overwhelming workload, and that Wells Fargo failed to make reasonable accommodations to alleviate this stress. The Court does not include Wells Fargo's efforts to prevent Thatcher's abusive treatment of Plaintiff in this section, because it will be addressed in conjunction with Plaintiff's claim for negligent retention.
Concurrent with her being hired as a Compliance Consultant in January 2012, Plaintiff was released back to work at Wells Fargo without any restrictions by her doctor. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 3.) Wells Fargo was aware of her condition. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 10; Pl.'s Dep. 123:12-19.) During the two years that Plaintiff worked as Thatcher's direct report, Thatcher would frequently miss work due to her own problems with depression and substance abuse. (Pl.'s Facts ¶¶ 4, 9.) This resulted in an increase in Plaintiff's workload, as she had to pick up the slack for Thatcher. (Pl.'s Facts ¶ 4.) Plaintiff reported her increased workload and the symptomatic exacerbation it was causing her to Thatcher, Noell, and Hopkins. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 20.) Hopkins responded by telling Plaintiff that Thatcher, as her supervisor, could give her any work that needed to be done. (Pl.'s Facts ¶ 13.) Noell, [*34]  on the other hand, encouraged Plaintiff to take as many breaks to rest as she needed while at work, and gave her a key to a private quiet room. (Pl.'s Dep. 123:15-25, 124:5-10.) Noell also offered Plaintiff a part-time position as her personal assistant, which Plaintiff declined because she wanted to remain in her role as a Compliance Consultant. (Def.'s Facts ¶¶ 26-27.) Noell and Plaintiff ultimately decided the best option was for Plaintiff to keep her position, and transfer to Scott's supervision. (Def.'s Facts ¶¶ 24-25.) After transferring from Thatcher to Scott, Plaintiff actually saw an increase in her workload, as she was still responsible for a portion of Thatcher's work in addition to her new responsibilities for Scott. (Pl.'s Facts ¶¶ 24-25.) Finally, Plaintiff turned down Wells Fargo's offer of a new position during her exit interview with Gagliardi, and did not seek another position at Wells Fargo after her resignation. (Pl.'s Dep. 151:1-10; Def.'s Facts ¶ 41.)
Plaintiff argues that the part-time position as Noell's assistant was not a reasonable accommodation because it was essentially a demotion from her position as a compliance consultant. This offer, however, was just [*35]  one of many attempts by Wells Fargo to accommodate Plaintiff's disability. Moreover, Wells Fargo was not obligated to provide Plaintiff with the best accommodation, but rather was entitled to choose the accommodation that was easiest to furnish, provided it was still reasonable. Hanson, 74 Cal. App. 4th at 228. Based on the facts before the Court, although Plaintiff did not have any medical restrictions, Wells Fargo provided her with a quiet place to rest when her symptoms were flaring up. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 3; Pl.'s Dep. 123:15-25, 124:5-10.) Furthermore, Wells Fargo offered her both a reassignment to a different supervisor, and an offer for a different position within the company. (Def.'s Facts ¶¶ 24-25, 41.) While Noell's offer for a part-time position as her assistant may not have constituted a reasonable accommodation, the same cannot be said of the other accommodations. See Cal. Gov't Code § 12926(p)(2). Therefore, the Court finds no issue of triable fact as to whether or not Wells Fargo provided reasonable accommodations to Plaintiff.
2. Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process
FEHA prohibits an employer from failing "to engage in a timely, good faith, interactive process with the employee ... to determine effective reasonable accommodations [*36]  ... in response to a request for a reasonable accommodation by an employee ... with a known medical condition." Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(n). The interactive process imposes burdens and obligations on both the employer and the employee. Scotch v. Art Inst, of California-Orange Cnty., Inc., 173 Cal. App. 4th 986, 1013, 93 Cal. Rptr. 3d 338 (2009). First, the employee must initiate the process unless the disability and resulting limitations are obvious. Id. Once the interactive process is initiated, the employer has a mandatory obligation to engage with the employee to identify and implement appropriate reasonable accommodations. Humphrey v. Mem'l Hosp. Ass'n, 239 F.3d 1128, 1137 (9th Cir. 2001). This is a continuous obligation for the employer, and must be done in good faith. Scotch, 173 Cal. App. 4th at 1013. Both the employer and employee have the obligation "to keep communications open" and neither has "a right to obstruct the process." Id. at 1014 (quoting Jensen, 85 Cal. App. 4th at 266). Once the litigation process has commenced, "to prevail, the employee must be able to identify an available accommodation the interactive process should have produced." Id. at 1018 (citing Nadar-Rahrov, 166 Cal. App. 4th at 984). The employer may only be assigned liability for failure to engage in the interactive process if it was responsible for the breakdown of good faith communication and participation. Id. at 1014.
It is evident that Plaintiff fulfilled her obligation of initiating the interactive process when she informed [*37]  Noell and Hopkins that her symptoms were being exacerbated as a result of her increased workload, and Thatcher's ongoing mistreatment of her. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 20.) Hopkins met Plaintiff's complaints with a rebuke that if Plaintiff reported the matter to HR it "would be like stabbing [Hopkins and Noell] in the back." (Pl.'s Dep. 140:16-18.) On the other hand, most of Plaintiff's dealings were not with Hopkins, but with Noell, who took the matter seriously. (Pl.'s Dep. 123:15-25.) Noell gave Plaintiff a key to a quiet room where she could rest as needed, and assured Plaintiff that she was "taking care of everything on the HR side."6 (Pl.'s Dep. 123:15-25, 140:18-20.) Based on this evidence, Wells Fargo fulfilled its mandatory obligation to initially engage with Plaintiff in order to identify and implement appropriate reasonable accommodations.
Wells Fargo's obligation did not end there. Rather it had a continuous obligation to keep communication open and ensure that Plaintiff had any necessary reasonable accommodations. Scotch, 173 Cal. App. 4th at 1013. Plaintiff informed Noell that because of Thatcher's behavior, the workload, and her worsening symptoms, she no longer wanted Thatcher to supervise her. (Def.'s Facts ¶25.) [*38]  Plaintiff and Noell had a conversation in which they discussed possible positions that Plaintiff could transfer to. (Def.'s Facts ¶ 24.) She was offered a position as a part time assistant to Noell, but because Plaintiff wanted to remain in the Specialty Finance group, she declined. (Def's Facts ¶¶ 26-27.) Therefore, Noell and Plaintiff ultimately agreed that the best option was for Plaintiff to transfer to Scott's supervision. (Def.'s Facts ¶¶ 24-25.) Finally, when Plaintiff decided to resign, she was asked if she was interested in a different position at Wells Fargo during an exit interview with an HR manager, but she declined citing health concerns. (Pl.'s Dep. 151:1-10.)
The unrefuted evidence establishes that Wells Fargo made continuous, good faith efforts at trying to identify a reasonable accommodation for Plaintiff. Furthermore, it was Plaintiff, not Wells Fargo, that was responsible for the breakdown in communications when she resigned from her position at Wells Fargo, and declined the company's offer for a new position.
Accordingly, the Court GRANTS Wells Fargo's Motion with respect to the claims for both failure to make reasonable accommodation, and failure to engage in the [*39]  interactive process.
F. Intentional Infliction of Emotion Distress and Negligent Retention
Defendant contends that Plaintiff's claims for intentional infliction of emotional distress and negligent retention are completely preempted by the California Worker's Compensation Act ("WCA"). For the following reasons, the Court agrees.
Under California law, intentional infliction of emotional distress which results in either physical or purely emotional disability are exclusively covered by the WCA. Livitsanos v. Super. Ct., 2 Cal. 4th 744, 755, 7 Cal. Rptr. 2d 808, 828 P.2d 1195 (1992); see also Miklosy v. Regents of Univ. of California, 44 Cal. 4th 876, 80 Cal. Rptr. 3d 690, 188 P.3d 629 (2008). Even if the injuries sustained are non-compensable, the WCA remains the exclusive remedy for workplace injury. Id. The exception being conduct that either contravenes fundamental public policy or exceeds the inherent risks of the employment. Id. Here, although Thatcher's treatment toward Plaintiff may seem to exceed the risks of employment, it does not meet the high bar set by the California Supreme Court in Miklosy and Shoemaker v. Myers, 52 Cal. 3d 1, 276 Cal. Rptr. 303, 801 P.2d 1054 (1990).
Similarly, Plaintiff's claim for negligent retention fails, because claims for negligence are within the exclusive remedy provisions of the WCA. Coit Drapery Cleaners, Inc., v. Sequoia Ins. Co., 14 Cal. App. 4th 1595, 1606, 18 Cal. Rptr. 2d 692 (1993) (noting that an employee cannot sue its employer for its negligent behavior on the job). Accordingly, the Court GRANTS Wells Fargo's Motion as it pertains to Plaintiff's [*40]  claims for intentional infliction of emotional distress, and negligent retention.
G. Punitive Damages
Defendant's final argument is that Plaintiff's request for punitive damages fails because no officer, manager, or directing agent (1) took any adverse action against Plaintiff; or (2) acted with oppression, fraud, malice, or reckless indifference to Plaintiff's rights. Under California law, a plaintiff is entitled to punitive damages where she can show by "clear and convincing evidence[ ] that the defendant has been guilty of oppression, fraud, or malice." Cal. Civ. Code § 3294. The law does not favor punitive damages, granting them only in the most outrageous cases. Egan v. Mut. of Omaha Ins. Co., 24 Cal. 3d 809, 828 (1979). They are only allowed in the clearest of cases; and, spite, ill will, negligence, or even gross negligence are not sufficient grounds to justify such an award. Id.
Here, while Plaintiff has shown evidence of negligence on the part of her supervisors, she has not produced evidence sufficient to support a finding of an intentionally adverse action done with oppression, fraud, or malice. Accordingly, the Court GRANTS Wells Fargo's Motion with respect to Plaintiff's claims for punitive damages.
IV. RULING
For the foregoing reasons, the Court GRANTS [*41]  Wells Fargo's Motion for Summary Judgment with respect to all claims.
IT IS SO ORDERED.


End of Document

