United States EEOC v. Autozone, Inc.
United States District Court for the Central District of Illinois
June 16, 2009, Decided; June 16, 2009, E-Filed
Case No. 07-1154

Reporter
2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 138098 *
UNITED STATES EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION, Plaintiff v. AUTOZONE, INC., Defendant
Prior History: EEOC v. Autozone, Inc., 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 70918 (C.D. Ill., Sept. 25, 2007)
Counsel:  [*1] For United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Plaintiff: Justin Mulaire, LEAD ATTORNEY, EEOC, New York, NY, USA; Aaron Rutledge DeCamp, UNITED STATES EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION, Chicago, IL, USA; Gregory M Gochanour, John C Hendrickson, EEOC, Chicago, IL, USA.
For Autozone, Inc, Defendant: Christopher J Carlos, Eydie R Glassman, H Patrick Morris, Joseph F Spitzzeri, LEAD ATTORNEYS, Gabriel R Judd, JOHNSON & BELL LTD, Chicago, IL, USA.
Judges: JOHN A. GORMAN, UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE.
Opinion by: JOHN A. GORMAN
Opinion



ORDER
The parties have consented to have this case heard to judgment by a United States Magistrate Judge pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 636(c), and the District Judge has referred the case to me. Now before the Court are the defendant's motion for summary judgment. (Doc. #65) and the defendant's motion to strike (Doc.#78). The motions are fully briefed, and I have carefully considered the arguments and evidence of the parties. As explained herein, the motions are denied.

JURISDICTION AND VENUE
This dispute arises under the Americans with Disabilities Act. This Court has jurisdiction over the dispute raised in Plaintiff's complaint pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § § 451, 1331, 1337, 1343, and 1345.
Venue is proper in the Central District of [*2]  Illinois, Peoria Division, because the employment discrimination that allegedly occurred took place at Defendant's business location in Macomb, Illinois, which is within the Central District of Illinois, Peoria Division.

SUMMARY JUDGMENT GENERALLY
The purpose of summary judgment is to "pierce the pleadings and to assess the proof in order to see whether there is a genuine need for trial." Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co., Ltd. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 587, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986). Under Rule 56(c) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, summary judgment should be entered if and only if there is no genuine issue as to any material fact, and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. See Jay v. Intermet Wagner Inc., 233 F.3d 1014, 1016 (7th Cir.2000); Cox v. Acme Health Servs., 55 F.3d 1304, 1308 (7th Cir. 1995).
In ruling on a summary judgment motion, the court may not weigh the evidence or resolve issues of fact; disputed facts must be left for resolution at trial. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). The court's role in deciding the motion is not to sift through the evidence, pondering the nuances and inconsistencies, and decide whom to believe. Waldridge v. American Hoechst Corp., 24 F.3d 918, 922 (7th Cir.1994). The court has one task and one task only: to decide, based on the evidence of record, whether there is any material dispute of fact that requires a trial.
The court is to examine all admissible facts, viewing the entirety of the record and accepting all facts and drawing all reasonable inferences in favor of the non-movant, [*3]  Erdman v. City of Ft. Atkinson, 84 F.3d 960, 961 (7th Cir. 1996); Vukadinovich v. Bd. of Sch. Trustees, 978 F.2d 403, 408 (7th Cir. 1992), cert. denied, 510 U.S. 844, 114 S. Ct. 133, 126 L. Ed. 2d 97 (1993); Lohorn v. Michal, 913 F.2d 327, 331 (7th Cir. 1990); De Valk Lincoln Mercury, Inc. v. Ford Motor Co., 811 F.2d 326, 329 (7th Cir. 1987); Bartman v. Allis-Chalmers Corp., 799 F.2d 311, 312 (7th Cir. 1986), cert. denied, 479 U.S. 1092, 107 S. Ct. 1304, 94 L. Ed. 2d 160 (1987), and construing any doubts against the moving party. Adickes v. S.H. Kress & Co., 398 U.S. 144, 90 S. Ct. 1598, 26 L. Ed. 2d 142 (1970); Trotter v. Anderson, 417 F.2d 1191 (7th Cir. 1969); Haefling v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 169 F.3d 494, 497 (7th Cir.1999).
The existence of "some alleged factual dispute between the parties," or "some metaphysical doubt," however, does not create a genuine issue of fact. Piscione v. Ernst & Young, L.L.P., 171 F.3d 527, 532 (7th Cir.1999). "Inferences that are supported by only speculation or conjecture will not defeat a summary judgment motion." McDonald v. Village of Winnetka, 371 F.3d 992, 1001 (7th Cir. 2004); Petts v. Rockledge Furniture, 534 F.3d 715 (2008) (7th Cir.). The proper inquiry is whether a rational trier of fact could reasonably find for the party opposing the motion with respect to the particular issue. See, e.g., Jordan v. Summers, 205 F.3d 337, 342 (7th Cir.2000). Inferences supported only by speculation or conjecture do not suffice to create a triable issue.
If the undisputed facts indicate that no reasonable jury could find for the party opposing the motion, then summary judgment must be granted. Hedberg v. Indiana Bell Tel. Co., 47 F.3d 928, 931 (7th Cir. 1995), citing Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248. If the non-moving party fails to make a showing sufficient to establish the existence of an element essential to that party and on which that party will bear the burden of proof at trial, then summary judgment is proper. Celotex, 477 U.S. at 322; Waldridge, 24 F.3d at 920.
While intent and credibility are often critical issues in employment discrimination cases, there is no special version of Rule 56 that applies [*4]  only to them. See, e.g., Alexander v. Wis. Dep't of Health & Family Servs., 263 F.3d 673, 681 (7th Cir.2001); Wallace v. SMC Pneumatics, Inc., 103 F.3d 1394, 1396 (7th Cir.1997); Haugerud v. Amery School Dist., 259 F.3d 678, 689 (7th Cir.2001). Summary judgment is not a substitute for a jury's determination about credibility. Paz v. Wauconda Healthcare and Rehabilitations Centre, 464 F.3d 659, 664 (7th Cir. 2006).

AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT
The Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA") protects "qualified individuals with a disability" from discrimination in their employment. 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a); see also Hoffman v. Caterpillar, Inc., 256 F.3d 568, 571-72 (7th Cir.2001). Discrimination includes (a) not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical limitations of a qualified individual with a disability, 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A); or (b) denying employment opportunities to a qualified individual with a disability either because of the disability or because of the need to accommodate the disability. 42 U.S.C. § § 12112(b)(1), (b)(5)(B).
The statute defines a "qualified individual with a disability" as "an individual with a disability who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position that such individual holds or desires." 42 U.S. § 12111(8); see Mobley v. Allstate Ins. Co., 531 F.3d 539, 545 (7th Cir. 2008). Proof that an individual is a "qualified individual with a disability" who can perform "essential functions" of his job, with or without accommodation requires a two part showing: first, that a medical condition rendered the employee disabled, and second that the employee is still able to meet the employer's legitimate [*5]  expectations of performance. Id. In order to constitute a "disability" under the ADA, an impairment's impact must be permanent or long-term. Mobley, 531 F.3d at 545, citing Toyota Motor Mfg. v. Williams, 534 U.S. 184, 198, 122 S. Ct. 681, 151 L. Ed. 2d 615 (2002).
As is the case in other civil rights actions, a plaintiff can, of course, prove his case with direct evidence of discrimination or discriminatory intent. Where, however, a plaintiff lacks direct evidence of discriminatory motive or intent, he may rely on the familiar burden-shifting method outlined in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 802, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973), in pursuing his claims. See also Timmons v. GMC, 469 F.3d 1122, 1126 (7th Cir. 2006); DeLuca v. Winer Indus., Inc., 53 F.3d 793, 797 (7th Cir.1995). At the summary judgment stage, a plaintiff must satisfy four requirements for a prima facie case by submitting evidence that, if believed, would show that: (1) he is disabled within the meaning of the ADA; (2) he was meeting his employer's legitimate employment expectations, with or without accommodations; (3) he suffered an adverse employment action; and (4) similarly situated employees received more favorable treatment. Amadio v. Ford Motor Co., 238 F.3d 919, 924 (7th Cir.2001). The fourth element can be satisfied by a showing that the "circumstances surrounding the adverse action support the inference that his disability was a determining factor behind the adverse action." Germano v. Internat'l Profit Ass'n Inc., 544 F.3d 798, 806 (7th Cir. 2008), citing Lawson v. CSX Transp. Inc., 245 F.3d 916 (7th Cir. 2001).
If an ADA plaintiff establishes a prima facie case, the burden shifts [*6]  to the employer to offer a legitimate nondiscriminatory reason for the employment decision. If the employer succeeds, then the burden reverts to the plaintiff to show that there is a genuine dispute of material fact that the proffered reason for the employment action is pretextual. DeLuca, 53 F.3d at 797.
Determining whether a plaintiff's condition constitutes a disability under the ADA entails a three step inquiry: (1) does the condition constitute an impairment? (2) does the activity constitute a major life activity? and (3) does the impairment substantially limit the performance of that major life activity? Bragdon v. Abbott, 524 U.S. 624, 631, 118 S. Ct. 2196, 141 L. Ed. 2d 540 (1998).
"Disability" means a "physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities" of an individual. A physical impairment includes physiological disorders, work condition, or other conditions that affect body systems including neurological, musculoskeletal, and reproductive. 29 C.F.R. §1630.2(h)(1). A mental impairment includes any mental or psychological disorder. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(h)(2). Major depression may be a disability within the meaning of the ADA, depending on its severity and its impact on the life of the individual. Cassimy v. Bd. of Educ., 461 F.3d 932 (7th Cir. 2006)(citing cases).
Not every impairment is a substantially limiting one. The key is [*7]  the extent to which it restricts a major life activity: the limitation must be substantial. "Substantially limit" means either that the plaintiff is unable to perform a major life activity that the average person in the general population can perform; or that he is significantly restricted as to the condition, manner or duration under which an individual can perform a particular major life activity as compared to the condition, manner, or duration under which the average person in the general population can perform that same major life activity. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(j)(1); see, Toyota Motor Mfg. v. Williams, 534 U.S. 184, 199, 122 S. Ct. 681, 151 L. Ed. 2d 615 (2002). The court must consider the impact of the impairment on all tasks that are central to most people's daily lives; the analysis is not limited to the effects of an impairment in the workplace alone. Id. at 201-02.
"Major life activity" has been defined as including functions such as caring for oneself, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, and working. Roth v. Lutheran General Hospital, 57 F.3d 1446, 1454 (7th Cir. 1995). The ability to reproduce is also a major life activity. The inquiry is individualized, however, and must be determined on a case-by-case basis.
Discrimination under the ADA is not limited to differential treatment. The statute also prohibits "not making reasonable [*8]  accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who is an applicant or employee" unless the employer "can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business." § 12112(b)(5)(A); EEOC v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 417 F.3d 789, 796-97 (7th Cir. 2005).
In a failure to accommodate claim, unlike disparate treatment claims, the burden-shifting approach of McDonnell Douglas is not appropriate. Hoffman, 256 F.3d at 572, citing Weigel v. Target Stores, 122 F.3d 461, 464 (7th Cir. 1997). Instead, the plaintiff must show (1) that he is a qualified individual with a disability, (2) that the employer was aware of the disability, and (3) that the employer failed to reasonably accommodate it. Hoffman, 256 F.3d at 572; see also, Foster v. Arthur Andersen, LLP, 168 F.3d 1029, 1032 (7th Cir. 1999).
The initial duty to inform the employer of a disability rests with the employee. Sears Roebuck, 417 F.3d at 803. At most, this requires the employee to indicate to the employer that he has a disability and desires an accommodation. Id. at 804. If the nature of the disability or the requested accommodation is not clear, the employer has the burden to ask for clarification. Id.
Reasonable accommodations may include:
(A) making existing facilities used by employees readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities; and
job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, reassignment [*9]  to a vacant position, acquisition or modification of equipment or devices, appropriate adjustment or modifications of examinations, training materials or policies, and other similar accommodations. (B)
42 U.S.C. §12111(9). A reasonable accommodation need not be the accommodation requested or preferred by the employee so long as it is reasonable. Mobley, 531 F.3d at 546; Gile v. United Airlines, 95 F.3d 492, 499 (7th Cir. 1996). The burden of showing that a reasonable accommodation existed rests with the employee. Mobley, 531 F.3d at 546, citing Mays v. Principi, 301 F.3d 866, 871 (7th Cir. 2002).
What constitutes a reasonable accommodation is determined through an "interactive process" between the employer and the employee. Hoffman, 256 F.3d at 572; Mobley, 531 F.3d at 545. Failure to engage in this interactive process is by itself insufficient to establish a failure to accommodate claim when the employee is ultimately provided with a reasonable accommodation. Mobley, 531 F.3d at 545; see also Sieberns v. Wal-Mart Stores, 125 F.3d 1019, 1023 (7th Cir. 1997)(interactive process not an end but a means for determining a reasonable accommodation); Rehling v. Chicago, 207 F.3d 1009, 1016 (7th Cir. 2000)(to state a claim, plaintiff must allege that the failure to engage in the interactive process resulted in a failure to identify a reasonable accommodation).
If the employer can show that no reasonable accommodation was possible, then failure to engage in the interactive process does not give rise to a claim for relief. Sears Roebuck, 417 F.3d at 805, citing Hansen v. Henderson, 233 F.3d 521, 523 (7th Cir. 2000). If a disabled employee [*10]  shows that the disability was not reasonably accommodated, the employer will be liable only if it bears responsibility for the breakdown of the interactive process. Sears, Roebuck, 417 F.3d at 797, citing Beck v. University of Wisconsin Bd. of Regents, 75 F.3d 1130, 1137 (7th Cir. 1996).
The ADA also includes a prohibition of retaliation against employees who have exercised their rights under the ADA. This part of the Act provides:
No person shall discriminate against any individual because such individual has opposed any act or practice made unlawful by this chapter or because such individual made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this chapter.
42 U.S.C. § 12203(a). To prove retaliation, a plaintiff must show that (1) he engaged in protected activity; (2) he suffered an adverse employment action; and (3) there is a causal link between the two. Steffes v. Stepan Co., 144 F.3d 1070, 1074 (7th Cir. 1998).

FACTS
The following facts are taken from the parties' Statements of Undisputed Facts, the responses and replies thereto, and the documentary evidence in the record. Many of the so-called "undisputed" facts are in fact hotly disputed, and those disputes are noted in this recitation of facts. Whether those disputes are material is considered in the Discussion portion of this [*11]  Order.
John Shepherd is a 52 year old man with less than a high school education. He sustained a back and neck injury in 1996 while employed by an employer not a party to this case. His condition was diagnosed as degenerative disc disease of the cervical vertebra and/or disc herniation of the cervical vertebra.
In 1998, he was hired by AutoZone as a salesperson in Fort Madison, Iowa. The parties dispute whether, and, if so, the extent to which and when, Shepherd disclosed his medical condition to AutoZone. There is no information about it on his application, which included a health survey. Shepherd testified that he believed the survey was asking him about his conditions on the date he filled out the form and that he was having no problems on that day. Shepherd also testified that he talked about his injury to the district manager who interviewed him, and that manager had to obtain medical information before he could actually hire Shepherd. At the very latest, AutoZone was aware of Shepherd's disability by March of 2002, when he provided to AutoZone1 a copy of the decision in his worker's compensation case against his former employer. An earlier date is possible, as there is evidence [*12]  that he provided a medical evaluation form to his store manager in November of 2001.
The AutoZone district manager over the stores in Iowa was Steve Smith. Shepherd requested a transfer to the AutoZone store in Macomb, Illinois. The parties dispute whether Smith assisted, resisted or merely acquiesced in this transfer. Regardless, however, Shepherd was ultimately transferred to the Macomb store. At some point in time thereafter, Smith became district manager over the area encompassing the Macomb store.
In April of 1999, Shepherd was promoted to Parts Service Manager ("PSM"). Based on the testimony of Shepherd and other witnesses2, the duties of a PSM included maintaining signs, pricing, maintaining inventory, stocking shelves, unloading trucks, cleaning the store, and assisting customers. The PSM also supervised other employees in the department. The parties dispute, however, which if any of these duties were "essential functions" of a PSM.
In 2000, when Shepherd was promoted to PSM, the Macomb store manager was Terry Wilmot, who had been with AutoZone for about 9 years, five years as a store manager. In 2002 Wilmot resigned as store manager (the reasons are apparently not pertinent to [*13]  the case before the Court) but he remained employed at AutoZone. In 2004, Wilmot suffered an injury, leading to a medical leave from around Thanksgiving in 2004 until early 2005. When he returned to work, lifting restrictions were imposed, and he was prohibited from climbing stairs or ladders. Wilmot resigned in 2005, and was replaced by Steve Thompson.
At various times during his employment, Shepherd's neck and back problems caused him to be placed on medical leaves by his doctors. Prior to the incident giving rise to this lawsuit, the record shows that Shepherd was on medical leave on four occasions: from 1/31/01 - 2/6/01; 10/30/01 - 11/23/01; 6/21/02 - 7/5/02; and 3/18/03 - 4/18/03. The leave involved in this case began on 9/13/03.
Each time, he was allowed to return to work. When he returned to work in July of 2002, Dr. Katchen noted for the first time that there were some restrictions on his physical capacity. These restrictions were not absolute but rather were based on how Shepherd was feeling, which varied from day to day. The restrictions included inter alia a limit on lifting to less than 20 pounds and a limit to upper body twisting. Shepherd understood these restrictions as [*14]  applying primarily to repetitive movements.
On April 9, 2003, after another leave for work-related aggravation of his back problem caused by mopping, Dr. Katchen prepared another physical capacity form. Dr. Katchen noted that "re-aggravating injuries caused by mopping" had led to "an even more serious condition" and that "similar activities as operating a floor buffer should be avoided totally." Smith told Shepherd that the restrictions would have to be reduced before Shepherd would be allowed to return to work, so Dr. Katchen changed the "never" to "occasional". After some back-and-forth between Human Resources and Benefits, Shepherd was allowed to return to work. There was no clearly-communicated decision from those departments with respect to any accommodation of the restrictions noted on the return to work form; Shepherd claims, however, that Smith told him that, if he could not perform his assigned duties, he needed to find another job.
During the course of his employment, Shepherd received "corrective-action-reviews" on March 8, 2002; June 6, 2002; Sept. 23, 2002; Oct. 21, 2002; Feb. 10, 2003; May 13, 2003; July 24, 2003; and Sept. 1, 2003. During that same period of time, other [*15]  employees received corrective-action-reviews as well; he was not the only one. As pertinent to the case before this Court is the fact that one of the employees who received such reviews was Terry Wilmot, who was cited on March 7, 2002; June 3, 2002; July 9, 2002; February 2, 2003; July 3, 2003; and May 11, 2004.
The events giving rise to this lawsuit began on September 13, 2003, when Shepherd asserts he was instructed by Thompson to mop the floor. He injured himself while wringing out the mop. This injury limited his ability to lift and to engage in activities that required rotation of the upper body. He was again placed on a medical leave where he remained until January 16, 2004. At that time, his doctor, Marc Katchen, authorized his return to work with increased medical restrictions, namely an absolute lifting limit of 10-19 pounds and a prohibition on upper body twisting, which Dr. Katchen expressly stated meant that Shepherd was not to engage in mopping or buffing of floors. Shepherd was to be limited to 6 hours standing per day. Other activities - such as climbing, kneeling and lifting - were only to be performed "occasionally." Unlike earlier return to work forms prepared by Dr. [*16]  Katchen, the January 16, 2004 form indicated that the injury was permanent in nature. See Exhibit 57 to AutoZone's Motion for Summary Judgment.
At AutoZone stores, the store manager would enter into a computer program the names of all employees (including the PSM) who were scheduled to work on a particular date. The computer would automatically assign to each of the scheduled employees particular duties that needed to be completed on that day. The computer then generated a report that was provided to the PSM on a daily basis. As a general rule, PSM's had the flexibility to delegate particular tasks assigned to them to other employees in the store.
There is a dispute, however, about how this rule was applied to John Shepherd. He testified that Smith and Thompson continued to assign him to mopping assignments because "nobody was going to be given any preference" and that sweeping in a straight line was not sufficient; he must mop. Requests to Smith and Thompson that he be assigned other tasks were met with threats of discipline or discharge, according to Shepherd. Terry Wilmot states in his Affidavit that he tried to assign mopping, buffing and washing windows to an employee other than [*17]  Shepherd, stating that those tasks were "a very small part" of Shepherd's job duties as PSM, but that he was pressured by Smith to discipline Shepherd any time he did not do these tasks when was assigned to him. In fact, if Wilmot did not discipline Shepherd, Wilmot stated that Smith would discipline Wilmot.
Smith and Thompson each testified, however, that Shepherd was orally told not to do anything "outside of his medical restrictions" and that they did nothing to prevent him from re-assigning mopping tasks to other employees. Thompson states in his Declaration (Doc. #75 Exh. E) that, during his tenure as store manager from July 2002 until June 2004, he became aware of the lifting restriction applied to Shepherd. He allowed Shepherd to use a cart to transport merchandise and allowed him to delegate some lifting to other employees. "With these accommodations," states Thompson, "Shepherd was capable of doing the lifting and carrying work expected of a Parts Sales Manager by AutoZone, despite his lifting restriction."
On September 15, 2003, 2 days after Shepherd's injury, Steven Smith sent him a letter (see Exhibit 10 to Shepherd Deposition, which is Exhibit 11 to the motion) that reads [*18]  in its entirety:
It has come to our attention that you are performing certain tasks that you should not be performing, such as, scrubbing, buffing, and sweeping. Moving forward, if you are scheduled to do any of these tasks, the manager will draw a line through the task and initial it, even though the scheduling system may schedule you to perform that task. It is just as much your responsibility as it is ours, to make sure you are not performing tasks that you are restricted from doing. Should this become a problem in the future, please notify your DM, Steven Smith, or your regional manager, Dennis LeRiche.
Shortly before Dr. Katchen completed the return to work form in January 2004, Shepherd underwent an independent medical examination ("IME") in connection with his pending worker's compensation claim against AutoZone. The IME report concluded that Shepherd's September 2003 injury had fully resolved and that he could return to work with whatever work restrictions were in place prior to the 2003 injury. See Karen Miller's deposition transcript, Exh. 13.
AutoZone did not allow Shepherd to return to work, instead keeping him involuntarily on medical leave of absence. This decision was conveyed [*19]  to him by Steven Smith and Steve Thompson. In January of 2004, Thompson left Shepherd a voice mail message that said he could return to work when he could do his job "one hundred percent."
There followed a series of letters from AutoZone to Shepherd relating to the length of his leave. Shepherd responded to the first such letter with a letter of his own, dated October 9, 2004, stating in no uncertain terms that he was not resigning. He captioned his letter as follows:
RE: Confirmation I have complied with all requested and or required rules, procedures and regulations, and I have NO!! Intention of quitting my position and/or employment voluntarily
[emphasis in original]. In this letter he also refers to voice mails he had "continuously" left with the Benefits Department and Moore in particular, with no response. This letter also referred to another communication, dated October 1, 2004, apparently asking for more information from Shepherd. He also forwarded enclosed forms to his doctor. In response to that letter, his leave was extended to September 14, 2004.
In February of 2005, AutoZone's benefits manager Teresa James administratively discharged Shepherd because he had been on medical [*20]  leave longer than was allowed by the company's leave policy. A form letter dated February 23, 2005 was sent to Shepherd indicating that his employment "will be terminated effective 9/14/2004."
The parties dispute which AutoZone employee initially made the decision to keep Shepherd on medical leave involuntarily. AutoZone contends that its "lead disability coordinator" Jacquelyn Moore made the decision, based on her belief that there were inconsistencies between Dr. Katchen's release and the IME. AutoZone also contends that Moore considered the restrictions imposed by Dr. Katchen to be "severe" in comparison to essential functions of the job of a Parts Service Manager.
Moore testified at her deposition that she had no recollection3 of making the decision to keep Shepherd on medical leave. Specifically, the question she was asked and the answer she gave were as follows:
Q: {D]o you remember at any point in your tenure at AutoZone making a determination that Mr. Shepherd's medical restrictions were such that he could not return to work?
A: I don't recall making a decision that Mr. Shepherd could not work.
Moore transcript p.21 line 17-22. She also testified that she did not "recall making a [*21]  decision that would have totally removed Mr. Shepherd from the work environment" or that "would have not allowed him to work in some other capacity." Id. at p.26 line 15 - p.27 line 2. No one asked her if making such a decision was part of her job or if someone else was responsible for making or participated in making those types of decisions.
Later in her deposition, Moore stated that she recalled having a number of conversations with Shepherd. She recalled having seen the physical capacity form and the IME report and having conversations about those documents with the store manager or regional HR staff. She did not recall "whether either of these would have been the basis for determining that he could not return to work." Moore transcript p. 23 line7-10. In fact, she stated her opinion that after she read the IME, she thought that Shepherd should be returned to work. She testified that there were many times when "we got others involved to try and find accommodation or a resolve to Mr. Shepherd's case, so it could have been a number of people that I may have discussed this with." Finally, Moore stated that at the times of her interactions with Shepherd, she was not aware that he had filed discrimination [*22]  charges with the EEOC.
AutoZone's information about Moore's involvement in the decision to keep Shepherd on medical leave comes from two sources: LeJuene Rose and Dr. Karen Miller4. LeJuene Rose, who has been an AutoZone staff attorney since 1999 and the company's employee relations managing attorney since 2007. In her capacity as staff attorney, she prepared the company's "position statements" in response to several of the EEOC charges filed by Shepherd.
In responding to Shepherd's EEOC charge, Rose prepared a letter dated May 10, 2004, in which she asserted that Moore made the decision "to not allow the Complainant to return to work." Rose testified that this statement was based on her interviews with various individuals, including Moore. In a footnote in the letter, Rose also stated that Moore informed her that "she was not aware that a charge of discrimination had been filed by Shepherd when she suggested that Shepherd remain on leave."
At her deposition (Exhibit 14 to AutoZone's motion), Rose also testified that she had no independent recollection of the substance of any of her conversations leading to the position statements, except for one conversation with Moore. That conversation [*23]  dealt with her concern that Shepherd was not being allowed to return to work. She recalled Moore's statement that there was a discrepancy between Dr. Katchen's return to work form and the IME about Shepherd's restrictions.
The remaining information about the decision making process came from Dr. Karen Miller, the regional human resources manager for AutoZone's Kansas City Region since 2006 and the designated Rule 30(b)(6) corporate representative. Miller testified that the decision not to allow an employee to return to work because of physical restrictions would as a rule be made by consensus of the appropriate regional human resources manager and someone in the benefits department. If there were a disagreement between these two officers, the divisional human resources manager would be consulted.
Miller herself had no personal involvement in the decision regarding Shepherd. In preparation for her Rule 30(b)(6) deposition, Miller reviewed Ms. Moore's files and ascertained that Moore had access to several documents: Dr. Katchen's return to work form, the IME report, and a faxed letter from store manager Steve Thompson. Thompson's letter to Ms. Moore, dated January 19, 2004, raises 5 "concerns" Thompson had about [*24]  the Physical Capability Form filled out by Dr. Katchen. The letter concluded: "I truly believe that in this small store environment, these restrictions will be difficult to work with. I think it unfair to ask the other employees to work under these conditions." (See Exh. 2 to Moore deposition, Exh. 11). Based on those documents, Miller testified that she believed Moore made the decision that AutoZone could not accommodate Shepherd with the restrictions imposed by Dr. Katchen.
AutoZone's leave of absence policy placed a cap of 12 months on medical leaves. On September 17, 2004, Shepherd was sent a Notice that his Leave "will expire" on September 14, 2004. The Notice went on to state that if he did not intend to return to work by the expiration date (which, of course, had already passed), he could apply for an extension. The letter reminded him that it was his responsibility to maintain contact with the Benefits Department about his leave.
On May 18, 2005, Shepherd filed an Application for Social Security Disability Benefits as well as an Application for Supplemental Security and Income. In both applications, he stated that he suffered from a disability beginning on September 13, 2003. [*25]  His applications were initially denied, and he filed a request for hearing, which was held on May 4, 2007. Both Shepherd and his wife testified before the ALJ at that hearing. Shepherd testified that he suffered pain in his back and neck and weakness in his arms and legs. He experienced headaches 4 or 5 times a week. He stated that he could no longer help with housework because he would tighten up or swell up. His wife no longer allowed him to cook because he would leave the stove on and burn things. She assisted him with bathing and dressing. He was accompanied by family when he shopped because he would get lost or lose the checkbook or keys. A psychiatric examination was conducted, and Shepherd was diagnosed with major depressive disorder, single episode, severe without psychotic features. The psychiatrist concluded that Shepherd would have "marked difficulties' in maintaining social functioning and in responding to every-day work pressures in a satisfactory way.
The ALJ concluded that Shepherd had been disabled since September 13, 2007. Engaging in the analysis required by the Social Security Act, the ALJ first found that Shepherd suffered from "severe impairments" of degenerative [*26]  disc disease of the spine, myofascial pain, depression, obesity, and obstructive sleep apnea. The ALJ found that these impairments significantly limited Shepherd's ability to perform basic work activities. In the next step of the analysis, the ALJ concluded that the severity of Shepherd's depression met the criteria required under the Act and that he therefore was disabled under the Act. Specifically, the ALJ noted Shepherd's physical problems and concluded:
However, it is his sub-optimally controlled depression which appears to have the greatest impact on his overall functioning and which effectively renders him disabled. Even though the claimant has routinely reported that his depression is better with Zoloft, the evidence indicates that the claimant still has quite significant functional limitations secondary to his depression.
On December 30, 2002; October 8, 2003; July 2, 2004; and March 4, 2005, Shepherd filed charges of discrimination against AutoZone on the basis of disability. Moore testified that she did not know of these charges when she was working with Shepherd during 2003 and 2004, and James testified that she did not know of these charges when she administratively discharged [*27]  Shepherd in 2005. The parties dispute when Smith and Thompson learned that the earlier charges had been filed, but it was no later than April of 2003. ( Doc. #75 Exh. C).
Prior to Shepherd's filing of the charges arising out of the September 13, 2003, injury, he had filed charges arising out a dispute about vacation time. Rose prepared a position statement dated May 10, 2005. After acknowledging that Dr. Katchen's medical documentation had been received, the statement continued:
This documentation was taken into consideration by Ms. Moore prior to returning the Complainant to his Leave of absence status. The decision to not allow the Complainant to return to work was made by Ms. Moore. Ms. Moore stated that the reason for her denial was due to the conflicting medical documentation which was received from the [IME]. Moreover, Ms. Moore stated that her denial was also based on the fact that the Respondent could no longer accommodate the Complainant's restrictions due to the nature his job duties [sic]. Therefore, Ms. Moore was of the opinion that the Complainant should remain off work until his physical restrictions were upgraded. This decision was made in an effort to prevent further [*28]  exacerbation of the Complainant's injury particularly since aggravation had previously been an issue.
Rose transcript Exh. 2. In a footnote, Rose added: "Ms. Moore stated that she was not aware that a charge of discrimination had been filed by the Complainant when she suggested that he remain on a Leave of absence. Thus, retaliation could not have been an issue when this recommendation was administered."
Shepherd then filed the March 4, 2005 charges, which arose out of the September 13, 2003, injury, and which form the basis for the suit now before the Court. LaJuene Rose responded to the EEOC's request for the employer's position on that charge as well. In pertinent part, the May 27, 2005 position statement reads:
Lead disability coordinator, Jackie Moore, reviewed the Complainants [sic] Physical Capability form dated January 16, 2004. After carefully examining the Complainant's physical limitations, coupled with his job requirements, a decision was made to allow the Complainant to remain on a medical leave of absence until such time that his condition was upgraded. ... Ms. Moore strongly felt that from a benefits perspective, exacerbation would have been inevitable had the Complainant [*29]  been allowed to resume his regular job duties."
Exhibit 2 to Rose deposition, Exh. 15.
The EEOC then filed this lawsuit, alleging that AutoZone had violated the ADA by failing to provide him with a reasonable accommodation; by keeping him on involuntary leave rather than accommodating his disability; and by discharging him rather than accommodating his disability. The Complaint also includes claims that AutoZone violated that ADA by retaliating against Shepherd for filing charges with the EEOC; the acts of retaliation are keeping him on involuntary leave and discharging him.
AutoZone has filed its motion for summary judgment, attacking all aspects of the complaint. First, AutoZone argues that prior to September 2003, Shepherd was not disabled within the meaning of the ADA, and after September 2003, he was no longer capable of performing the essential functions of the job of Parts Service Manager with or without a reasonable accommodation. In addition, AutoZone raises the issue of whether the EEOC is judicially estopped from claiming that Shepherd was capable of performing the essential functions of his job because of the record created when he filed for and received Social Security disability [*30]  benefits. Finally, AutoZone argues that there is insufficient evidence to infer retaliation. AutoZone also attacks the EEOC's ability to recover, monetarily or otherwise, for any period of time when Shepherd was on a medical leave ordered by his physicians.

DISCUSSION

PRELIMINARY MATTERS

Motion to Strike
In this motion, AutoZone asks the court to strike exhibit B to Plaintiff's Response to the motion for summary judgment. This exhibit is John Shepherd's Affidavit in which he explains his inability to engage in sexual activity with his wife and to reproduce, both due to his back and neck impairments. According to AutoZone, this information was disclosed for the first time after the close of discovery.
That is not accurate. In addition to disclosing Shepherd as person with knowledge about his disability, the EEOC responded to an interrogatory that "Shepherd's impairments also substantially limit his ability to engage in sexual reproduction; he is unable to engage in sexual intercourse, rendering him entirely and permanently unable to engage in sexual reproduction." Exhibit C to motion, at p.3. Shepherd was not asked about this issue at his deposition, as AutoZone concedes.
Contrary to AutoZone's [*31]  criticism, it is entirely proper for a party to supplement discovery with affidavits. Fed.R.Civ.P. 56(c), unless the affidavit constitutes unfair surprise. See, Gutierrez v. AT&T Broadband LLC, 382 F.3d 725, 732-33 (7th Cir. 2004). There was no surprise here, just a failure to follow up a disclosure with further questioning. The motion to strike is denied.

Evidentiary rulings
EEOC argues that neither Rose's position statements themselves nor Rose's testimony about those statements is admissible, because both are inadmissible hearsay.
Hearsay is "a statement, other than one made by the declarant while testifying at the trial or hearing, offered in evidence to prove the truth of the matter asserted." Fed.R.Evid. 801. With respect to the position statements prepared by LeJeune Rose, the sections quoted above clearly contain hearsay. Rose is repeating statements made to her by Moore, and they are offered in this case for the truth of the matters asserted: namely, that Moore herself made the decision to keep Shepherd on leave, and she did so for the reasons stated. Likewise, Rose's deposition testimony about other statements made by Moore to her about Shepherd's situation are hearsay.
Excluded from the definition of hearsay are admissions by party-opponents, and AutoZone asserts that Rose's [*32]  written and oral statements are such admissions. An admission by a party opponent is a statement "offered against a party and is the party's own statement" [or a statement by someone with the party's authorization or approval). Fed.R.Evid. 801(d)(2)(A). The statements in question are not being offered against AutoZone as required by the definition. They are instead offered by AutoZone to support AutoZone's own case. They do not, therefore, fall within that exception to the hearsay definition. Other hearsay exceptions are set out in Fed.R.Evid. 803, but none of them apply to this situation.
In its Sur-Surreply, AutoZone raises other arguments in support of its position that Rose's testimony and position statements are admissible. First, it argues that "evidence of Rose's position statements" are admissible pursuant to Fed.R.Evid. 106, which codified the common law Rule of Completeness. Rule 106 provides:
When a writing or recorded statement or part thereof is introduced by a party, an adverse party may require the introduction at that time of any other part or any other writing or recorded statement which ought in fairness to be considered contemporaneously with it.
That Rule is of no assistance to AutoZone. It is AutoZone itself that wants Rose's [*33]  position statements and testimony admitted. No adverse party is involved; the EEOC does not rely on these documents in whole or in part, except to argue against their admissibility. Moreover, no authority is cited for the proposition that Rule 106 provides an exception to the hearsay rule. If the first document is inadmissible, there is no justification for allowing admission of another document - or part of a document - to clarify it. Finally, it is important to note that the Rule does not, according to the Committee Notes, apply to conversations, so it would in no event cover Moore's conversations with Rose.
Next AutoZone argues that Rose's deposition testimony about the position statements fall within the "residual exception" to hearsay articulated in Fed.R.Evid. 807. This Rule provides that hearsay not falling within one of the articulated exceptions might still be admissible if it has "equivalent circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness" and it is offered as evidence of a material fact; it is more probative on that fact than any other evidence that has been produced, and the general purposes of the rules and the interests of justice will best be served by admission of the statement. Fed.R.Evid. 807.
According to [*34]  AutoZone, these requirements are met. The statements Rose made about Moore's decision-making are material. They were made at a depositions when Rose was under oath. Other evidence is not available because Moore does not recall making the decision or the statements.
AutoZone's reliance on this exception is misplaced. The trustworthiness concerns do not relate to Rose's recollection of the statements but rather to Moore's statements themselves. Moore was not under oath at the time she made the statements. She was being interviewed by her employer's attorney about a decision she made or participated in making, a decision that had become the subject of legal action against her employer. There was, therefore, an incentive for Moore to be less than forthright. Her statements were not subject to cross examination, and they are not now subject to cross examination because she does not recall them. There is no corroborating evidence. There being no indicia of reliability as to Moore's statements, Rose's recollection of those statements are not admissible under the residual exception.
Miller's conclusion that Moore made the decision to keep Shepherd on involuntary medical leave is problematic. [*35]  In light of the fact that no one asked Moore at her deposition whether she would have been the one to make such a decision, the weight to give to Miller's testimony on this question is minimal, even assuming it is admissible. Moreover, Miller's testimony that Moore alone5 made the decision is inconsistent with her earlier testimony that it would have been made by consensus between at least two people. Neither of these problems makes Miller's testimony inadmissible; Miller was the designated Rule 30(b)(6) witness so she could testify about matters outside her personal ken. But the apparent inconsistency between her conclusion, her testimony, and Shepherd's testimony surely leaves an issue of fact about whether someone in addition to Moore was involved in the decisions made about Shepherd.

Judicial Estoppel
AutoZone raised the argument that the EEOC should be judicially estopped from claiming that Shepherd is a qualified individual with a disability, due to statements made during the process of obtaining Social Security disability benefits and supplemental income benefits. That argument has been rejected. See Order entered February 23, 2009 (Doc. #69). That Order held: "The EEOC is not a proxy for Alan [*36]  Shepherd. Its interest in pursuing relief on Shepherd's behalf is a public interest in eliminating discrimination, and that interest is not as narrow as is Shepherd's interest." Hence, estoppel did not apply to bar EEOC from proceeding under the ADA, even if Shepherd himself might have been estopped.
AutoZone cannot be faulted for including this argument in its motion. AutoZone's Motion for Summary Judgment was filed on February 19, 2009, 4 days before that Order was entered. The cases discussing judicial estoppel and how that concept applies to the EEOC were thoroughly discussed in the February Order, and the issue will not be revisited here.

DISCRIMINATION
AutoZone does not contest that Shepherd suffers from an impairment throughout the relevant time frame. Instead, AutoZone divides Shepherd's employment into two time frames. The first is the period of time between March of 2003 (when he returned from a leave of absence) and September of 2003, which the injury at issue in this case occurred. The second time period began on the date of his injury. During the earlier period, AutoZone argues that Shepherd did not suffer from an impairment because he was not substantially limited in a major [*37]  life activity. After the accident, AutoZone does not dispute that Shepherd was disabled but instead argues that Shepherd was not qualified because he was no longer able to perform the essential functions of the job with or without accommodation.
EEOC has not objected to this division of the pertinent time. The complaint alleges that some of the discrimination and some of the retaliation occurred before the accident, the rest after. That is the format the Court will use.

Was Shepherd a qualified individual with a disability between March and September of 2003?
Beginning with the period predating his 2003 accident, the first question that must be answered is whether he had a medical condition that constituted an impairment? AutoZone states that this is not contested (Motion at p.63).
Next it must be determined whether the condition impacted a major life activity. His neck and back problems clearly impacted several such activities. Most obvious is "working"; he took several rather lengthy medical leaves of absence due to this problem.
Shepherd's testimony about his marital intimacy problems and inability to reproduce due to his back and neck problems also impacts a recognized major life activity. [*38]  Similarly, his testimony about his personal care issues reveals an impact on that life activity as well.
The real question prior to the 2003 accident is whether the limitations on these major life activities rose to the level of "substantial" limitations. I find that the limitations were not substantial prior to the 2003 accident. Based on his own testimony, Shepherd's limitations as to working and personal care were sporadic, based on flare-ups of his symptoms. For the most part he was able to perform his job sufficiently well that he received a promotion during this time frame. Likewise, his personal care issues became more severe, requiring much more involvement of his wife after the 2003 accident. Prior to that accident, however, he was taking care of himself independently most of the time, requiring assistance only occasionally.
The evidence relating to his reproductive ability, however, indicates that this limitation may have been severe. Shepherd and his wife testified about his total inability to engage in sexual activity and hence to reproduce even prior to his September 2003 injury. This evidence is not crystal clear, but it is there. For purposes of the motion, that is enough [*39]  to show a substantial limitation on a major life activity.
The problem arises at the next stage. There was no adverse employment action taken against Shepherd prior to the 2003 accident. While it is true that he received some negative scores on his performance reviews, that alone is not an adverse employment action. Hilt-Dyson v. Chicago, 282 F.3d 456, 466 (7th Cir. 2002); Smart v. Ball State Univ., 89 F.3d 437, 442 (7th Cir. 1996). He was not fired, demoted, stripped of meaningful responsibility or any of the other types of adverse actions that rise to the statutory level.
For this reason, I find that Shepherd has failed to establish a prima facie case of failure to accommodate for the period prior to the 2003 accident. It is unnecessary, therefore, to reach the question of whether his requests for accommodation were reasonable and whether AutoZone properly considered accommodating Shepherd during that time period.

Was Shepherd a qualified individual with a disability after the 2003 accident?
This question gets to the heart of this dispute. As the parties agree and the law cited above establishes, there are two ways to prove this case: directly (with direct or circumstantial evidence) or indirectly (using the burden shifting method).
AutoZone's first problem is its approach to the direct method of [*40]  proof. To refute direct evidence presented by EEOC, AutoZone relies on its assumption that Jacqueline Moore was the only decision-maker, an assumption that does not hold for purposes of this motion, and on LeJuene Rose's testimony about what Moore told her, testimony that is inadmissible. In addition, AutoZone argues that the requisite "accommodation" was an accommodation that Shepherd himself could provide, as he had in the past. This argument is based on testimony that is directly contradicted by other testimony, making this one of the many material disputes of fact and hence not one on which summary judgment can be based. The increasingly severe responses by Thompson and Smith, if Shepherd's testimony is believed, would demonstrate that he was no longer being permitted to make his own accommodation. AutoZone's assertion that the direct method fails is based on disputed and inadmissible testimony and a faulty assumption; it is therefore without merit.
With respect to the burden shifting method, AutoZone's position also suffers from several defects. AutoZone's primary argument is that Shepherd's own testimony proves that he was not capable of performing the essential functions of his [*41]  job. This argument stems in part from AutoZone's position that Shepherd's physical ailments can be ascertained from his testimony before the Social Security ALJ in 2007 and at his deposition in March of 2008. Based on those ailments, AutoZone claims that EEOC cannot show that Shepherd was capable of performing the essential functions of a PSM, with or without an accommodation.
Much of that testimony, however, is not at all helpful in evaluating his physical capacities in 2003 and 2004. A complete reading of Shepherd's testimony reveals that he was often talking activities such as yard work, housework and sexual activity, that required the very types of upper body flexibility that gave him such problems at AutoZone. The fact that he did not - could not - perform those activities at home sheds no additional light on his ability to perform mopping and buffing at work. To the extent he was talking about his problems in personal care issues, some of those issues (such as tying shoes or putting on pants) were clearly related to the types of twisting that aggravated his injury. Others (such as brushing teeth and hair) could be seen as more closely related to his depression than to any physical [*42]  limitation.
Even those parts of his testimony about his personal care and reproductive issues that may relate to the relevant time frame do not establish conclusively that he was unable to perform as a PSM. No effort has been made to relate the ability to perform personal care without assistance to the ability to perform essential functions of the job.
Neither his deposition testimony nor his Social Security testimony conclusively determine whether he was unable to perform the functions of a PSM in 2003 and 2004, which is the relevant time frame6 for purposes of this motion. There are clearly issues of fact about those abilities during that time frame.
Another important dispute about his abilities with respect to mopping and buffing the floors in the store, is whether such functions were "essential" to the position of PSM at all, for if they were not "essential" then the employee's inability to perform them cannot justify an adverse employment action. In AutoZone's stores, assignment of mopping and buffing was randomly generated by a computer to whatever employees happened to be working on a particular day or shift. While mopping and buffing may have been duties that had to be performed [*43]  by someone, there is strong evidence that it need not have been Shepherd or a PSM who performed it. While it may be true, as AutoZone points out, that this Court is not to sit as a "super personnel department", see Ritter v. Hill 'N Dale Farm, Inc., 231 F.3d 1039, 1044 (7th Cir. 2000), neither need the Court accept without analysis an employer's definition of what functions are essential, especially where there is contrary evidence as there is here.
Third, AutoZone's argument also skirts the fact that the disability found by the Social Security ALJ was depression; there was no finding that he was unable to work due to physical limitations. There is some evidence that the depression arose out of the loss of his job, and Shepherd himself believes that the medication he is on has controlled the depression. Is it not clear what effect the depression played in this entire scenario and whether it somehow was a part of Shepherd's abilities to perform his job as PSM. At this point, all that can be said is that the Social Security decision and the testimony elicited during that proceeding does not conclusively establish that Shepherd was unable to perform that job.
AutoZone raises another argument with respect to the prima facia case, namely that Terry Wilmot was [*44]  not similarly situated to Shepherd because their injuries and their physical limitations were significantly different. There is no "magic formula" for determining whether two employees are sufficiently similar. Here, the evidence shows that the two employees had the exact same job at the same facility and worked for the same supervisors. Both took multiple medical leaves of absence (although it is true that Shepherd took more) and both returned with physical limitations. Although the physical limitations were not identical, there is overlap. Certainly the similarities are sufficient to meet the "not onerous" burden of establishing this element of the prima facie case, Texas Dep't of Community Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 253, 101 S. Ct. 1089, 67 L. Ed. 2d 207 (1981).
Moreover, as noted above, this element of the prima facie case has been modified over the years; proof of differential treatment of a similarly situated employee is one way to show that the circumstances surrounding the adverse action support the inference that the disability was a determining factor behind the adverse action. Here, there are circumstances that would support such an inference. There was clearly a link between Shepherd's disability and the adverse employment action: his employment was terminated when [*45]  the employer did not let him return to work after a medical leave7. There was a hostile supervisor and a hostile district manager. There was a history of refusal to accommodate the disability until the injury, when the district manager showed how easy it would have been to make an accommodation. This is enough to permit a reasonable jury to conclude that AutoZone's decision not to permit Shepherd to return was due to his disability and/or the need to accommodate that disability.
Finally, this argument also fails because this is a failure to accommodate claim as well as a disparate treatment claim, and there is no need to show differential treatment in a failure to accommodate claim. All that is necessary to show is that the employer knew of the disability and failed to reasonably accommodate it. There is evidence of those elements sufficient to survive summary judgment.
Evidence exists that AutoZone refused to accommodate Shepherd's disability. If AutoZone had allowed him - accommodated him - by assigning mopping and buffing to someone else, who knows whether and for how long he would have been able to perform his job. To allow AutoZone on the one hand to refuse to accommodate Shepherd's [*46]  disability and then on the other hand to speculate that he would not have been able to do it with an accommodation would be to allow circumvention of the statutory obligations of employers. At the summary judgment stage, these issues simply cannot be resolved. I find that the EEOC has adequately presented a prima facie case of discriminatory treatment, namely the failure to accommodate Shepherd's disability.
Although AutoZone argues that it would have been a hardship to the company to accommodate Shepherd by assigning floor duties to other employees, Smith's letter of September 15, 2003, demonstrates that this duty was easy enough to delegate to someone other than the PSM. In light of that letter, coming from upper management of the company, I am wholly unpersuaded that this accommodation could possibly rise to the level of undue burden.
For the reasons stated herein, the motion for summary judgment on the discrimination claim is denied.

RETALIATION
To prove retaliation, a plaintiff must show that (1) he engaged in protected activity; (2) he suffered an adverse employment action; and (3) there is a causal link between the two. In this case, there is no question that Shepherd engaged in [*47]  protected activity; he filed four separate charges of discrimination with the EEOC. There is also no question that he suffered an adverse employment action; his employment was terminated.
The only question is whether there is a causal link between the two. Although causation is ordinarily a question for the jury, summary judgment is appropriate when the undisputed facts establish that a plaintiff cannot show the requisite causation as a matter of law. See, Buckner v. Sam's Club, Inc., 75 F.3d 290, 293 (7th Cir. 1996); Harris v. Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp., 102 F.3d 1429, 1433 (7th Cir. 1996).
In this case, there is a dispute about which AutoZone employees knew of the charges at what time. Whether Moore knew is not known at all. That Smith and Thompson knew is not disputed; when they knew not clear. In fact, because AutoZone has not established clearly just who made the decision to keep Shepherd involuntarily on leave, the decision that ultimately led to his discharge, it is impossible to tell whether the existence of the EEOC charges had any bearing at all on the decision to terminate his employment.
I therefore find that summary judgment on the retaliation claim is not warranted, and the motion as to that claim is denied.

CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated herein, the motion for summary judgment is denied in its entirety. [*48]  This case remains set for final pretrial conference on June 22, 2009 at 1:30 p.m. in person in Peoria, and for jury trial on July 6, 2009 at 9:00 a.m. in Peoria.
ENTERED ON June 16, 2009
/s/ John A. Gorman
JOHN A. GORMAN
UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE


End of Document

