Vanzant v. Wilcox
United States District Court for the District of Idaho
September 13, 2017, Decided; September 13, 2017, Filed
Case No. 1:15-cv-00118-EJL-CWD

Reporter
2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 219662 *
BRAD VANZANT, Plaintiff, v. DEPUTY DAVE WILCOX; SGT. CHRISTOPHER CRAIG; OFFICER CASEY EGERMAN; CPL. DANIEL COLE; OFFICER TRAVIS BALL; EFFIE REED-RODRIGUEZ; VERONICA FERRO; LT. GREENLAND; LT. CLARK; CORIZON, LLC.; DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTION; OFFICER LARSEN; DR. YOUNG; N.P. POLSON; and N.P. GELOK, Defendants.
Subsequent History: Adopted by, in part, Rejected by, in part, Summary judgment granted by, Summary judgment granted, in part, summary judgment denied, in part by, Motion denied by Vanzant v. Wilcox, 2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 50757 (D. Idaho, Mar. 26, 2018)
Prior History: Vanzant v. Wilcox, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 2627 (D. Idaho, Jan. 6, 2016)
Counsel:  [*1] Brad Vanzant, Plaintiff, Pro se, Boise, ID.
For Dave Wilcox, Deputy (Ada County), Defendant: Cory W Nielsen, LEAD ATTORNEY, Ada County Prosecutor's Office, Boise, ID; Sherry A Morgan, LEAD ATTORNEY, ADA COUNTY PROSECUTOR'S OFFICE, Civil Division, Boise, ID.
For Craig, Sgt., Egerman, Officer, Cole, Cpl., Ball, Officer, Greenland, Lt., Clark, Lt., Department of Correction, Defendants: Phillip J Collaer, LEAD ATTORNEY, ANDERSON JULIAN & HULL, Boise, ID.
For Effie Reed, Veronica, LNU, Corizon Inc, Defendants: Dylan Alexander Eaton, LEAD ATTORNEY, Parson Behle & Latimer, Boise, ID; J Kevin West, LEAD ATTORNEY, PARSONS BEHLE & LATIMER, Boise, ID.
Judges: Honorable Candy W. Dale, United States Magistrate Judge.
Opinion by: Candy W. Dale
Opinion



REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION

RE: DKT. 70

DKT. 73

INTRODUCTION
Plaintiff Brad Vanzant, a prisoner in the custody of the Idaho Department of Correction ("IDOC") and currently incarcerated at Idaho State Correctional Institution ("ISCI"), is proceeding pro se in this civil rights action. Vanzant has been allowed to proceed on Eighth Amendment claims (filed pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983) and claims under the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"). The Court concluded the Amended Complaint stated plausible Eighth Amendment claims against Defendants [*2]  Wilcox, Craig, Egerman, Cole, Ball, Reed-Rodriguez, Larsen, Ferro, and Corizon, as well as plausible ADA claims against the IDOC. (Dkt. 41.)
Now pending before the Court are two motions for summary judgment filed by the IDOC Defendants (Egerman, Ball, Cole, Craig, Larson and Department of Correction), (Dkt. 70), and by the Corizon Defendants (Corizon Inc., Rodriguez, and Ferro) (Dkt. 73).1
Having fully reviewed the record, the Court finds the facts and legal arguments are adequately presented in the briefs and record and that oral argument is not necessary. See D. Idaho Loc. Civ. R. 7.1. Accordingly, the Court enters the following report recommending the IDOC Defendants' motion be granted in part and denied in part, and the Corizon Defendants' motion be granted in part and denied in part, as further explained below.

FACTS2
Vanzant filed the instant civil rights complaint on March 31, 2015. The Amended Complaint alleges that, without narcotic pain medication and a special knee brace, Vanzant cannot walk due to severe pain in his knee. Vanzant claims: (1) Defendants denied him a wheelchair and adequate pain medication during at least some of his incarceration; (2) Vanzant was placed in a non-handicapped [*3]  accessible cell and required to use non-accessible showers; and (3) Vanzant was placed in segregated housing.
Vanzant sustained a shattered patella to his right knee in September of 1987. Since then, he has undergone eight surgeries, including knee replacement surgery, to repair the damage to his right knee. In or about 2011, Vanzant's physician prescribed narcotic pain medication—Hydromorphone #4 (Dilaudid) 5 times per day— for pain management. The dosage was later increased, in July of 2012, to 6 times per day. Vanzant indicates that, with the Dilaudid and his knee brace, he was able to walk without crutches or a walker, but occasionally used a cane.
Vanzant has been incarcerated several times, including having been through the IDOC CAPP program3 from December 16, 2013, through April 18, 2014. Upon his release in April of 2014, Vanzant's physician increased his prescription for Dilaudid to 8 times per day. Vanzant was told that, other than an above the knee amputation, no further surgical intervention could be done, and he was advised to continue working with a pain specialist to manage his knee medically.
Vanzant was arrested on September 6, 2014, and transported to the Ada County Jail. [*4]  Upon his arrest, Vanzant was not wearing his knee brace; as he exited the Sheriff's vehicle, his knee buckled. Vanzant's prescription for Dilaudid was confiscated, and he was not prescribed narcotic pain medication during his incarceration at the Ada County Jail. Vanzant's knee pain returned once the effects of the Dilaudid wore off. His knee became painful to the point that he claims he was unable to walk or put weight on it. Vanzant suffered also from gout pain in his left foot while at the Ada County Jail. Throughout his incarceration at the jail, he was prescribed a wheelchair.
Medical records from the Ada County Jail confirm that, while he was there, Vanzant suffered gout in both feet, resulting in bilateral foot pain and swelling. (Dkt. 106-6 at 7-8.) He refused to walk—medical clinicians noted Vanzant refused to walk due to his right knee and left leg gout pain. (Dkt. 106-6 at 8.) Vanzant stayed in a wheelchair from September 6, 2014, until December 24, 2014, when he was transported to ISCI. (Dkt. 106-6 at 3 — jail records indicating "temp alert added to allow wheelchair until seen" by medical staff.)
On December 24, 2014, Ada County deputies delivered Vanzant to the ISCI Unit [*5]  7 receiving station in a handicapped accessible van and a wheelchair. LPN Ferro and LPN Rodriguez were conducting intake evaluations in the Reception and Diagnostic Unit (RDU) for newly arrived inmates. Ferro handled the assessment of medical needs, while Rodriguez handled the assessment of mental health needs. Upon arrival, Vanzant was mechanically lowered and removed from the van, and he remained in a wheelchair. Vanzant rolled into Unit 7 in the wheelchair. (Decl. of Vanzant ¶ 45, Dkt. 106-5.) He completed a medical history questionnaire, listing the years of his various surgeries, and stating, "R-Knee total knee replacement went bad....been in a wheelchair since Sept. 6, 2014." (Dkt. 106-7 at 3.)
According to Ferro's notes, Vanzant walked into the RDU without a wheelchair, sat on a bench, and refused to get up unless provided Dilaudid. Ferro claims Vanzant "was seen walking from the door where they dropped him off to the bench," and, when it was time to change, Vanzant refused to get up and demanded 4 Dilaudid. Ferro did not personally see Vanzant walk from the van; however, she explains in her Declaration that the information in her notes came from an unnamed correctional officer [*6]  who told her Vanzant walked from the van to the bench in the holding cell. Vanzant denies that he walked into Unit 7 from the van to a bench in the holding cell. (Decl. of Vanzant ¶ 49.) There is no contemporaneous account of the events from Ferro, because Ferro drafted a "late entry" on January 26, 2015, recounting the events of December 24, 2014. (Dkt. 106-8 at 3-5.)
Officer Kilby, however, was there to meet the transport van on December 24, 2014. Kilby met Vanzant at the van, and because Ada County's officers wanted the wheelchair, Kilby asked Vanzant whether he could walk a short distance. "He responded that he could walk a short distance, but that it was painful for him to do so. After making that statement, I [Kilby] saw him walk from the back door of Unit 7 to a bench inside Unit 7, which is a distance of approximately 10 - 12 feet. Once he was on the bench, Vanzant refused to walk any longer without narcotic medication. He also demanded a wheelchair." (Kilby Decl. ¶ 3-4 Dkt. 70-7.)
Ferro was acquainted with Vanzant from a prior incarceration, and had provided nursing care to him from December 16, 2013, until January 2, 2014. During that time, Ferro recalls Vanzant ambulated without [*7]  a wheelchair and did not take Dilaudid for pain. Therefore, when Vanzant arrived at the RDU on December 24, 2014, Ferro decided to contact the Ada County Jail to gather information, because based upon her prior experience with Vanzant, he did not require a wheelchair. Ada County sent Vanzant's medical records from the past year to Ferro. (Dkt. 106-6 at 4; 106-9 at 14-22.)4 She was told by the Health Services Administrator at the jail that, although Vanzant sat in a wheelchair while in the jail, he was "caught on video tape getting out of his wheelchair and assaulting another offender." (Ferro Aff. ¶ 6 Dkt. 73-6.) Vanzant disputes that he walked at the jail, stating that he never walked after arriving at the Ada County Jail in September of 2014. (Dkt. 106-13 at 10, Vanzant Depo. p.32.)
"When a patient arrives from a facility such as Ada with a wheelchair or a prescription for a certain medication, under RDU policy, the course of care will be continued for a period of seven days, during which time the patient will be evaluated by a prescribing provider, such as a physician or nurse practitioner, to assess the further course of treatment." (Ferro Aff. ¶ 8.) Ferro, the evaluating health care [*8]  professional in this instance, also can offer a wheelchair accommodation, if she determines the patient has a medical need, for a maximum period of five days pending review and approval by a prescribing provider. (Id.) To Ferro's knowledge, Vanzant did not arrive at the RDU in a wheelchair, the prior facility indicated he could ambulate without one, and Vanzant would not allow her to assess him. (Id.)
Vanzant denies he refused to walk without narcotic medication; denies demanding a wheelchair; denies refusing to allow Ferro to evaluate him; and denies refusing to be evaluated. (Decl. of Vanzant ¶ 50.) Further, Vanzant denies being resistant or combative. Vanzant asserts correctional officers ordered him to walk to the change out area to change his clothes, but he informed the officers he was unable to walk without adequate pain medication and his knee brace, and he needed a wheelchair to get to the change out area.
Vanzant eventually was provided a wheelchair to get from the RDU to the change out room to change his clothes. (Decl. of Vanzant ¶ 60.) Vanzant was taken in a wheelchair from Unit 7 to the Orientation Classroom in Unit 15 by Craig. (Decl. of Vanzant ¶ 61.) Upon arriving at [*9]  Unit 15, Rodriguez had Vanzant get out of the wheelchair and sit in another chair, and she took the wheelchair away. Ferro and Rodriguez then ordered Vanzant to walk from the Orientation Classroom to the medical examination room area, which was about 25 feet away. (Decl. of Vanzant ¶ 62.) After informing them of his physical handicap and need for a wheelchair, Rodriguez offered Vanzant crutches. (Decl. of Vanzant ¶ 63.) Vanzant refused the crutches.
Ferro testified she grabbed a walker to allow Vanzant to use when changing his clothes. Ferro indicated also that "medical tried to complete an intake on him to assess his need [for a wheelchair]. Offender refused. He told CMS Effie Reed and myself that he would do it for six Dilaudid. I explained to him that we needed to complete his intake to evaluate him. Offender still refused. Offender was taken to Unit 8 due to refusing both medical and security intake.5 Offender submitted an HSR on 12/25/14 a day after his arrival,6 but refused to be assessed for a wheelchair." (Dkt. 106-8 at 3-4.)7
Vanzant explained that, while in Unit 15, because he refused to walk either with a walker or crutches from the classroom to the medical examination room, [*10]  no one tried to assess him to see if a wheelchair was necessary. (Dkt. 106-13 at 13, Vanzant Depo. p.42-45.) Vanzant next asserts Craig threatened him with a Disciplinary Offense Report (DOR) for refusing to obey his order to walk. Thereafter, Craig transported Vanzant in a wheelchair from Unit 15 to Unit 8 segregation for disobeying Ferro's and Rodriguez's orders to walk. (Decl. of Vanzant ¶ 64.)
Officer Craig has yet a different recall of what occurred in the RDU on December 24, 2014. According to policy, if an offender refuses to participate in the RDU process or refuses to allow a medical assessment, security staff is required to place the offender in restrictive housing due to disobedience of orders. (Craig Decl. ¶ 4.) Craig asserts Vanzant "had walked to the bench in Unit 7, he was refusing to stand to change his clothing or to walk from Unit 7 to Unit 15....Vanzant was being combative and was demanding narcotics before he was willing to walk from Unit 7 to Unit 15." (Craig Decl. ¶ 5.) Because of Vanzant's behavior, Craig borrowed a wheelchair from medical to transport Vanzant from Unit 7 to Unit 15. (Craig Decl. ¶ 5.) Once in unit 15, "Vanzant continued his resistance...[and] [*11]  refused to allow medical to perform a physicial evaluation to determine whether a wheelchair was necessary." (Craig Decl. ¶ 6.) Craig explained to Vanzant that medical needed to evaluate him to determine whether a wheelchair was medically necessary. But, Vanzant continued to deny medical the ability to perform a physical evaluation of him, and so he was assigned to restrictive housing for disobedience of orders, level 2. (Craig Decl. ¶ 6-8.)
After the events in Unit 15, Vanzant was moved, in a wheelchair, from the Unit 8 holding cage to Cell 78, and once in the cell and on his bunk, the wheelchair was taken away. (Decl. of Vanzant ¶ 66.) Vanzant asserts the person checking him into Unit 8 took his temperature and his blood pressure, and Vanzant asked to see a doctor. (Dkt. 106-13 at 14, Vanzant Depo. p. 46-49.) The cell in which Vanzant was housed had one grab bar on the left side of the door, and one by the restroom. (Dkt. 70-3 at 15, Vanzant Depo. p. 89.) To get around the cell, Vanzant "dog-crawled," but did not walk. (Dkt. 106-14 at 3, Vanzant Depo. p. 69.)
While in Cell 78 from December 24, 2014, up until December 31, 2014, Vanzant made several requests for a wheelchair so he could [*12]  be transported to the showers. (Decl. of Vanzant ¶ 66.) Vanzant claims Unit 8 had a plastic wheelchair available. (Dkt. 106-14 at 10, Vanzant Depo. p. 98-101.) Vanzant submitted a health services request form on December 24, 2014, stating, "can't walk need wheelchair to get around in Gout (L) ankle pain when pressure is applied (R) Leg no weight bearing cause of deterioration of (R) knee." (Dkt. 73-9 at 56.)8 Next, Vanzant submitted an offender concern form on December 25, 2014, indicating the cell he was in was not handicapped accessible, and asking for a wheelchair. (Dkt. 106-12 at 22.) Staff responded, "you possess no medical requirement for a wheelchair, thus your ability to be housed in Unit 8."
On December 25, 2014, Ms. Barny, a nurse, came to see Vanzant to determine if a wheelchair was necessary, but the assessment did not occur once Vanzant indicated he wanted to see a doctor. (Dkt. 106-14 at 2; Vanzant Depo. at 63.)9 The nurse wrote on the concern form: "refused to be seen 12-25-14." (Dkt. 73-9 at 56.) Nursing encounter notes from December 25, 2014, state: "pt. is complaining of gout R knee mobility to move pt. states he has been in a wheelchair for 3 months. But was able to [*13]  walk off/on the bus transport but refused to attempt d/t "inability" pt refused to walk and then refused to be assessed if he couldn't have a wheelchair pt then refused to be seen." (Dkt. 73-9 at 57.) The nurse rescheduled Vanzant to be seen on December 31, 2014.
Vanzant submitted an offender concern form on December 27, 2014, asking for a wheelchair to get to and from the shower; his request was denied. (Dkt. 106-12 at 26.) Vanzant asserts Larson threatened Vanzant with a DOR for trying to get a wheelchair. Staff's response to the concern form was: "you do not have a wheelchair memo. Any further attempts to access a wheelchair without proper medical documentation will be cause for a DOR for manipulation of staff. Cell 78 is a handicap accessible cell." On December 27, 2014, Vanzant submitted also a Health Services Request form, asking for a wheelchair to get around with. (Dkt. 73-9 at 52.) The response — "has not yet seen provider will refer to medical."
Officer Larson responded to Vanzant's December 27, 2014 offender concern form, and he was aware Vanzant was claiming he needed a wheelchair to access the showers. Finding no medical memo stating the need for a wheelchair in the computer [*14]  information system, Larson advised his fellow officer to inform Vanzant that, absent such a medical memo or order, security could not provide him with a wheelchair. (Larson Delc. ¶ 6.) Officer Larson indicated he relied upon medical staff to determine whether a wheelchair was medically necessary. (Larson Decl. ¶ 8.)
Vanzant submitted another health services request form dated December 28, 2014, asking for a refill of Ibuprofin 800. (Dkt. 73-9 at 59.) LPN Young indicated in his notes that Vanzant told him the Ibuprofen helped. During that nursing encounter, Vanzant apparently shook his leg and Young noted: "you can hear the hardware rattle." The note continues: "Refer to provider for Ibuprofin Order. Appt. Scheduled for 12-31-14."
Vanzant contends he was unable to shower for seven days, until December 30, 2014, because he was unable to physically get to the shower. On December 30, 2014, Ball assisted Vanzant to the shower. Vanzant was in restraints and hopped on his left leg to the shower. (Decl. of Vanzant ¶ 69.) Vanzant was provided with a shower chair. (Vanzant Depo. at 70.) After showering, Cole assisted Vanzant, who hopped back to his cell. On the way back, Vanzant slipped and fell, [*15]  hurting his tailbone. (Decl. of Vanzant ¶ 70.) Vanzant crawled back to his cell while still in restraints. (Id.)
The incident report Cole prepared on December 30, 2014, differs from Vanzant's account of events. Cole indicates he escorted Vanzant back to Cell 78. "When I opened the shower cage, Vanzant started hopping on his left foot to move to his cell. Surprised, I held his right arm to support him, but in the hallway, he slipped on the water and landed on his posterior....pulled himself back into his cell....I called medical response Larsen, she came down, asked him some questions and evaluated him and pronounced him 'fine.'" (Ex. C, Decl. of Vanzant, Bates IDOC00004; see also Cole Decl. ¶¶ 6-7.)
While Vanzant was housed in Cell 78, Officer Ball was assigned to Unit 8. According to Ball, absent a medical order or memo for a wheelchair, security staff had no basis to and could not provide an offender with a wheelchair. Ball asserts he witnessed Vanzant walk while in his cell, and that when he escorted him to the shower on December 30, 2014, Vanzant "walked carefully to the shower. He did not hop." (Ball Decl. ¶ 7.) Ball indicates he was unaware of any medical need for Vanzant to have [*16]  a wheelchair, and he was aware medical attempted to evaluate Vanzant on at least two occasions prior to December 31, 2014. (Ball Decl. ¶ 9.)
Officer Cole, as well as Officer Larsen, also witnessed Vanzant walk "slowly and carefully" while in his cell, and both were aware of the policy regarding wheelchairs. (Cole Decl. ¶¶ 3, 4, 5; Larson Decl. ¶ 5.)) Prior to December 31, 2014, Cole was unaware of any medical need for Vanzant to have a wheelchair. (Cole Decl. ¶ 8.)
Vanzant was seen by PA-C Daniel Dellwo on December 31, 2014. (Ex. B, Decl. of Vanzant, Bates No. Medfile000009, Medfile000209.) After Vanzant recounted his medical history, Dellwo physically evaluated Vanzant, approved accommodations for a wheelchair and bottom bunk, noted to obtain Vanzant's VA records, and prescribed Vanzant the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medication (NSAID) indomethacin, 50 mg three times a day for ten days before shifting to ibuprofen 600 mg three times a day for 210 days. (Decl. of Vanzant ¶ 72; Medfile000209; Ferro Aff. ¶ 12, Ex. A, MR. pp. 7, 49.) On January 2, 2015, Vanzant was released from segregation and moved to the ISCI Medical Annex.
With regard to Vanzant's arrival in the RDU on December [*17]  24, 2014, up through December 31, 2014, it is IDOC's position that, per IDOC staff's review of the file, Vanzant "refused to participate in the intake health assessment, submitted an HSR the following day and then again refused to be assessed, told staff you wouldn't stand up unless you were given Dilaudid, which you did not have an order for you finally agreed to be assessed on 12/31/14 at which time you were provided with a wheelchair." (Dkt. 106-17 at 2.)
Vanzant filed a grievance form on January 21, 2015, contending he was placed in Unit 8 Cell 78, which did not conform to ADA standards for handicap accessibility. (Dkt. 106-12 at 19.) "I informed unit staff of my physical and medical needs for a wheelchair and shower chair. They refusal [sic] to comply. Because of their refusal I fell while attempting to return from the shower." In response, IDOC staff asserted the need for a wheelchair was determined by the medical assessment in the RDU, and the report received from the county that the offender arrived from. "The medical staff that assessed you upon arrival at ISCI did not determine that your medical need was one that required the use of a wheelchair, therefore you were not provided [*18]  with one." The appellate response indicated that, "at the time of your placement in Unit 8, Medical deemed you did not need a wheelchair. Staff acted appropriately in not placing you in a wheelchair accessible cell." (Dkt. 106-12 at 20.) Another grievance response form dated January 21, 2015, stated: "there was no indication that you fell while in Unit 8." (Dkt. 106-12 at 23.)
Medical staff prescribed several medications, but not Dilaudid, for continued pain management. These included Pamelor, Depakote, and Ultram. (Decl. of Vanzant ¶¶ 84-85; (Dkt. 106-8 at 12; 106-9 at 2.) Vanzant took them, but asserts they were ineffective so he ceased taking the medications. On August 4, 2015, Vanzant was examined by an offsite orthopedist, Dr. Schwartzman, who recommended Vanzant live with what he has, and that he will require chronic pain management. (Decl. of Vanzant ¶ 91.) Vanzant contends that, despite this recommendation, Corizon has refused to prescribe Dilaudid or other pain medications that would allow him to walk. (Decl. of Vanzant ¶ 92.) Vanzant continued to use the wheelchair instead, and has been in a handicapped accessible area since December 31, 2014. Vanzant does not need Dilaudid [*19]  when in a wheelchair, because he is not putting weight on his injured leg. (Dkt. 106-14 at 12, Vanzant Depo. p. 114.)
On February 24, 2015, October 13, 2015, and November 2, 2015, Vanzant submitted grievance forms regarding the pain management he was receiving. In them, he complained the pain management protocol was not effective, and he wanted to receive the "same care here as I was in the community," including the same medication (Dilaudid) he had been receiving for pain. (Dkt. 106-1 at 3 - 11.) Vanzant testified also that every doctor he has seen while at ISCI has refused him medication, specifically Dilaudid. (Dkt. 106-14 at 12, Vanzant Depo. p. 117.) Medical staff was prescribing Tylenol #4 for pain, but Vanzant was taking only one tablet at night when he could take up to six tablets daily for pain.

ANALYSIS

1. Summary Judgment Standards
Summary judgment is appropriate where a party can show that, as to any claim or defense, "there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). One of the principal purposes of the summary judgment "is to isolate and dispose of factually unsupported claims ...." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323-24, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). It is "not a disfavored [*20]  procedural shortcut," but is instead the "principal tool[ ] by which factually insufficient claims or defenses [can] be isolated and prevented from going to trial with the attendant unwarranted consumption of public and private resources." Id. at 327.
"[T]he mere existence of some alleged factual dispute between the parties will not defeat an otherwise properly supported motion for summary judgment." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 247-48, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). The requirement is that there be no genuine dispute as to any material fact. "Material facts are those that may affect the outcome of the case." See id. at 248. The moving party is entitled to summary judgment if that party shows that each material issue of fact cannot be disputed. To show that the material facts are not in dispute, a party may cite to particular parts of materials in the record, or show that the materials cited do not establish the presence of a genuine dispute, or that the adverse party is unable to produce admissible evidence to support the fact. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(1)(A) & (B); see T.W. Elec. Serv., Inc. v. Pacific Elec. Contractors Ass'n, 809 F.2d 626, 630 (9th Cir. 1987) (citing Celotex, 477 U.S. at 322). The Court must consider "the cited materials," but it may also consider "other materials in the record." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c) (3).
Material used to support or dispute a fact must be "presented in a form that would be admissible in evidence." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c) (2). Affidavits [*21]  or declarations submitted in support of or in opposition to a motion "must be made on personal knowledge, set out facts that would be admissible in evidence, and show that the affiant or declarant is competent to testify on the matters stated." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(4).
The Court does not determine the credibility of affiants or weigh the evidence set forth by the non-moving party. The evidence of the opposing party is to be believed, Anderson, 477 U.S. at 255, and all reasonable inferences which can be drawn from the evidence must be drawn in a light most favorable to the nonmoving party. T.W. Elec. Serv., 809 F.2d at 630-31 (internal citation omitted). If the moving party meets its initial responsibility, the burden then shifts to the opposing party to establish that a genuine issue (dispute) as to any material fact actually does exist. Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986).
The existence of a scintilla of evidence in support of the non-moving party's position is insufficient. Rather, "there must be evidence on which the jury could reasonably find for the [non-moving party]." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 252. Rule 56(e)(3) authorizes the Court to grant summary judgment for the moving party "if the motion and supporting materials—including the facts considered undisputed—show that the movant is entitled to it." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e)(3).

2. Eighth Amendment Medical Care Claims
Vanzant asserts [*22]  Eighth Amendment claims pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983. To state a colorable § 1983 claim, a plaintiff must allege a violation of rights protected by the Constitution or created by federal statute proximately caused by the conduct of a person acting under color of state law. Crumpton v. Gates, 947 F.2d 1418, 1420 (9th Cir. 1991). Prison or jail officials generally are not liable for damages in their individual capacities under § 1983, unless they personally participated in the alleged constitutional violations. Taylor v. List, 880 F.2d 1040, 1045 (9th Cir. 1989); see also Iqbal, 556 U.S. at 677 ("[E]ach Government official, his or her title notwithstanding, is only liable for his or her own misconduct."). However, "[a] defendant may be held liable as a supervisor under §1983 'if there exists either (1) his or her personal involvement in the constitutional deprivation, or (2) a sufficient causal connection between the supervisor's wrongful conduct and the constitutional violation.'" Starr v. Baca, 652 F.3d 1202, 1207 (9th Cir. 2011) (quoting Hansen v. Black, 885 F.2d 642, 646 (9th Cir. 1989)).
The Eighth Amendment guarantees the right to adequate medical care in prison. Estelle v. Gamble, 429 U.S. 97, 106, 97 S. Ct. 285, 50 L. Ed. 2d 251 (1976). To state a plausible Eighth Amendment medical treatment claim, a plaintiff must show that a defendant acted with deliberate indifference to the plaintiff's serious medical needs. Id. "[D]eliberate indifference entails something more than mere negligence, [but] is satisfied by something less than acts or omissions for the [*23]  very purpose of causing harm or with knowledge that harm will result." Farmer, 511 U.S. at 835. A prison official or prison medical provider acts with "deliberate indifference . . . only if the [prison official] knows of and disregards an excessive risk to inmate health and safety." Gibson v. Cnty. of Washoe, 290 F.3d 1175, 1187 (9th Cir. 2002) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted). Medical malpractice, negligence, or mere disagreements between an inmate and medical personnel as to necessary treatment do not support a cause of action under the Eighth Amendment. Sanchez v. Vild, 891 F.2d 240, 242 (9th Cir. 1989); Broughton v. Cutter Labs., 622 F.2d 458, 460 (9th Cir. 1980) (per curiam).
In the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, the test for deliberate indifference consists of two parts. Jett v. Penner, 439 F.3d 1091, 1096 (9th Cir. 2006) (citing McGuckin v. Smith, 974 F.2d 1050 (9th Cir. 1991), overruled on other grounds by WMX Techs., Inc. v. Miller, 104 F.3d 1133 (9th Cir. 1997) (en banc)). First, the plaintiff must show a "serious medical need" by demonstrating that "failure to treat a prisoner's condition could result in further significant injury or the 'unnecessary and wanton infliction of pain.'" Id. at 1096 (quoting McGuckin, 974 F.2d at 1059). Second, the plaintiff must show the defendant's response to the need was deliberately indifferent. Id. (citing McGuckin, 974 F.2d at 1060).
This second prong—the defendant's response to the need was deliberately indifferent—is satisfied by showing (a) a purposeful act or failure to respond to a prisoner's pain or possible medical [*24]  need and (b) harm caused by the indifference. Id. Indifference "may appear when prison officials deny, delay or intentionally interfere with medical treatment, or it may be shown by the way in which prison physicians provide medical care." Id. (quoting Hutchinson v. United States, 838 F.2d 390, 392 (9th Cir. 1988)). Yet, an "inadvertent [or negligent] failure to provide adequate medical care" alone does not state a claim under § 1983. Id. A prisoner need not show his harm was substantial; however, such would provide additional support for the inmate's claim that the defendant was deliberately indifferent to his needs. Id. If the harm is an "isolated exception" to the defendant's "overall treatment of the prisoner [it] ordinarily militates against a finding of deliberate indifference." Id. (citations omitted). Prison officials must provide accommodations to prisoners with disabilities so that they can attend to their basic needs, including showering and using the toilet, without risking injury. Frost v. Agnos, 152 F.3d 1124, 1129 (9th Cir. 1998).
With regard to Corizon, to bring a civil rights claim against a municipality, local governing body, or private entity performing a public function, a plaintiff must allege sufficient facts in the complaint meeting the test articulated in Monell v. Dep't of Soc. Servs. of City of New York, 436 U.S. 658, 691-694, 98 S. Ct. 2018, 56 L. Ed. 2d 611 (1978). That test requires: [*25]  (1) the plaintiff was deprived of a constitutional right; (2) the entity had a policy or custom; (3) the policy or custom amounted to deliberate indifference to plaintiff's constitutional right; and (4) the policy or custom was the moving force behind the constitutional violation. See also Mabe v. San Bernardino County, Dep't of Pub. Soc. Servs., 237 F.3d 1101, 1110-11 (9th Cir. 2001).
The Court will now turn to the claims asserted against each of the Defendants or group of Defendants.

A. Corizon
The Court previously concluded the amended complaint stated a plausible Eighth Amendment policy claim against Corizon based on (1) Vanzant's assertions that Corizon did not employ a medical provider who was qualified to prescribe a wheelchair, and (2) the alleged statement of a Corizon employee that, as a matter of policy, Corizon does not allow its health care professionals to prescribe narcotic pain medication. (Dkt. 12.)
At this time, based upon its review of the record, the Court finds there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact on the claims asserted against Corizon. With regard to Vanzant's first assertion, Vanzant has not established that Corizon's policy of staffing the RDU with LPNs amounts to deliberate indifference, given Ferro was authorized to offer a wheelchair accommodation to those [*26]  patients needing one. Ferro, a Licensed Practical Nurse, was authorized under Corizon policy to offer a wheelchair accommodation if she determined the patient had a medical need for one. Other than his own speculation, Vanzant has not come forward with facts disputing that Ferro could have determined the medical necessity for a wheelchair pending review and approval of a prescribing provider. Generic complaints that Ferro lacked the credentials or ability to assess his medical needs pending review by a prescribing provider are insufficient to overcome summary judgment for Corizon.
Vanzant's alternative argument — that under the Balla settlement10 he was entitled to see a registered nurse or someone with superior medical training, and that LPNs did not have the required training to assess his medical needs — is unavailing. Vanzant "may not challenge, in this case, a failure to comply with a court order in a different case." Campbell v. Yordy, 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 173817, 2016 WL 7256812, at *6 (D. Idaho 2016). Rather, "a claim that a defendant is violating the Constitution is cognizable in this separate § 1983 action—a claim that a defendant is violating a court order in a different case is not." Id. Moreover, none of the documents, statements, or other quotes purportedly from [*27]  the Balla litigation referenced in Vanzant's memorandum are in the record of this action. And finally, Vanzant does not establish how the materials and documents he references are applicable to the policies in effect at the RDU on December 24, 2014.
With respect to Vanzant's second claim, that Corizon adopted an inadequate pain management policy, Vanzant specifically focuses upon his repeated requests for Dilaudid. However, Vanzant has not come forward with facts to establish Corizon has a policy or custom of refusing to prescribe Dilaudid for those patients medically requiring that specific drug. Second, the facts here indicate Corizon medical staff was attentive to Vanzant's pain. He was prescribed Ibuprofen while in Cell 78, and he reportedly asked for a refill on December 28, 2014, because it was helping his pain. Later, providers prescribed various medications to address Vanzant's pain, finally settling upon Tylenol #4. The record indicates, and Vanzant does not dispute, that he refused to take the prescribed dose and instead chose to take just one pill at night. And finally, Vanzant testified he did not require Dilaudid when in a wheelchair, as he was not putting [*28]  weight on his injured leg.
The facts do not support a claim of deliberate indifference by Corizon to Vanzant's medical needs. The facts establish Vanzant had access to medical services, he was referred to an orthopedic surgeon for evaluation, and the Corizon medical providers exercised their medical judgment in prescribing medications to address Vanzant's pain.11
The Court will recommend the motion be granted as to Corizon.

B. Ferro and Rodriguez
Vanzant argues that Ferro's and Rodriguez's refusal to provide Vanzant a wheelchair when he arrived at the RDU resulted in his placement in segregation in an inadequately equipped cell, and also his fall on the way back to his cell from the shower on December 30, 2017.
Reviewing the facts in the light most favorable to Vanzant, the nonmoving party, there are sufficient facts in dispute that the Court cannot recommend summary judgment with respect to Ferro. The facts, when taken as a whole, are disputed, and the Court cannot determine the credibility of the parties, as explained below.
Vanzant asserts he did not walk and was wheelchair bound throughout his incarceration at the Ada County Jail. Vanzant was medically assessed while at the jail and prescribed [*29]  the use of a wheelchair for the entirety of his stay prior to his transfer to ISCI. Medical records received by Ferro from the jail on December 24, 2014, confirmed Vanzant was prescribed the use of a wheelchair and the medical reason for it. Ferro was provided also with Vanzant's written statement submitted upon arriving at the RDU that he had been in a wheelchair since September 6, 2014. And finally, Ferro stated that, if a patient arrives from a facility in a wheelchair, she has the authority to continue the course of care for seven days, during which time the patient will be evaluated by a physician or nurse practitioner. Ferro has not articulated any reason why she could not have chosen this course of action, other than she received information from others that Vanzant was capable of walking. Yet, Vanzant informed her otherwise, and he arrived in a wheelchair. A reasonable juror could conclude Ferro read and understood the medical records she received, together with Vanzant's statement that he had been wheelchair bound, as requiring the continued use of the wheelchair to prevent needless infliction of pain, limited mobility, or a fall.
Ferro claims she was not aware Vanzant arrived [*30]  from the jail in a wheelchair and was told by an officer Vanzant walked from the transport van (a total of 10-12 feet) to the bench at intake.12 Officer Kilby met Vanzant at the van, and testified Vanzant walked from the van to the bench, but acknowledged Vanzant told him it was painful to walk. Vanzant, on the other hand, denies he walked from the van to the bench, asserting he was lowered from the van in a wheelchair, and he wheeled over to the bench. With regard to these disputed facts, it is unclear what weight a jury may give to the after-the-fact recall of Ferro, as her notes pertaining to the events of December 24, 2014, were dated January 26, 2015. The Court cannot make a credibility assessment upon summary judgment.
Second, the Court has no facts describing the RDU's layout, or whether Ferro could have seen Vanzant arrive in the van. Given the short distance between the van and the bench, it is entirely plausible Ferro could have seen Vanzant arrive in the wheelchair. The above equivocal evidence, coupled with the knowledge Vanzant imparted to Ferro in his written statement upon arrival at the RDU, as well as the medical prescription for a wheelchair evident in Ada County's medical [*31]  records, could reasonably lead to the conclusion that Ferro failed to respond to Vanzant's medical need for a wheelchair to ambulate effectively and without pain or risk of further injury.13 Ferro's decision to insist upon a medical assessment, when she also possessed the ability to continue the prescription for the wheelchair, could be considered by a jury to constitute a failure to respond to Vanzant's pain and medical need for a wheelchair.
Ferro argues Vanzant's refusal to be assessed and to use the mobility aids offered (crutches, walker) constitutes an unactionable disagreement between a patient and a medical care provider about a prescribed course of treatment. However, Vanzant testified he did not refuse to be assessed, and only stated he informed Ferro he was not able to use crutches or a walker without severe pain. Further, Vanzant indicated the distance he would have been required to navigate with crutches once in Unit 15 - 25 feet — was too far. Vanzant testified that, because he would not walk from the classroom to the medical examination room, no one was able to or would assess him. Consequently, he ended up in Unit 8 segregation. Again, the evidence is equivocal here, especially [*32]  given Ferro could have, if she chose, considered an alternative course of action by continuing the wheelchair prescription from the Ada County Jail.
Ferro argues Vanzant was not injured by any delay in receiving a wheelchair, because Vanzant did not complain of any injury from the slip and fall. However, the evidence is conflicting about the fall. Vanzant indicated he slipped and fell because he was forced to walk or hop in restraints to and from the shower. He complained to staff about pain in his tailbone. Although medical staff assessed him and pronounced him to be fine, Vanzant indicated he did not complain further because he knew he was scheduled to see a medical provider on December 31, the day after the fall.
Alternatively, the harm could be viewed as the placement in an inadequately equipped cell. Vanzant argues that, although he was placed in a cell with grab bars, the layout of the cell required him to crawl. He was housed in Cell 78 for approximately eight days. Staff reported Vanzant walked slowly and carefully, indicative of Vanzant's pain, or used his bed to scoot around the cell. The Court cannot make a determination upon summary judgment regarding Vanzant's injury.
It [*33]  is a different matter, however, with respect to Rodriguez. The facts are undisputed that Rodriguez handled the assessment of mental health needs. Vanzant does not assert Rodriguez was involved in the decision to grant or deny him the use of a wheelchair, only that she was present at the same time as Ferro when he was offered crutches. And, the recitation of disputed facts does not contain information about what role, if any, Rodriguez played with regard to an assessment for a wheelchair. Other than her mere presence in the RDU at the time Vanzant arrived, and later in Unit 15, it does not appear Rodriguez had any role in assessing Vanzant, or possessed authority to prescribe a wheelchair to Vanzant. The Court therefore will recommend summary judgment in favor of Rodriguez.

C. IDOC Defendants
The Court in its initial review concluded the Amended Complaint stated plausible Eighth Amendment claims against IDOC Defendants Craig, Egerman, Cole, Larsen, and Ball. Vanzant claims he informed these Defendants he could not walk without proper medical treatment, but they required him nonetheless to move about on his own, resulting in severe pain and injury, and they placed him in a cell that was not handicapped [*34]  accessible.
Although non-medical personnel such as Defendants Craig, Egerman, Cole, Larsen and Ball are generally entitled to rely upon the opinions of medical professionals with respect to the treatment of an inmate, such reliance will not shield an officer of liability if "a reasonable person would likely determine [the medical treatment] to be inferior." Snow v. McDaniel, 681 F.3d 978, 986 (9th Cir. 2012), overruled in part on other grounds by Peralta v. Dillard, 744 F.3d 1076 (9th Cir. 2014) (en banc).
Officer Craig's involvement with Vanzant was limited to December 24, 2014, in the RDU, and responding to a concern form, the first of which was submitted on December 26, 2014. His role in the RDU was ancillary to that of Ferro, and there is no factual dispute Craig relied upon Corizon staff (Ferro and Rodriguez) to complete a medical assessment of arriving inmates. Craig had no role in the medical assessment process. Despite what Craig characterized as Vanzant's refusal to participate in the assessment process (which Vanzant has denied), Craig provided Vanzant the use of a wheelchair to transport him to Unit 15 for the medical evaluation, and then to Cell 78, which had grab bars to assist with maneuvering around the cell. Because the medical assessment did not occur, Craig was entitled [*35]  to rely upon medical staff's judgment as to the best course of action.
Craig responded also to a concern form, submitted on December 26, 2014. Vanzant wrote to Craig regarding the lack of a wheelchair, and Craig advised him to work with medical staff. There is no evidence of Craig's personal participation in the decision to grant or deny Vanzant a wheelchair, and Craig had no independent authority to authorize one. Craig's instruction to submit a HSA to medical personnel was therefore reasonable, and does not constitute deliberate indifference.
Officers Cole and Ball were assigned to Unit 8, had occasion to observe Vanzant in Cell 78, and provided assistance with the showers. There is no dispute both officers instructed Vanzant to request a wheelchair from medical staff, which Vanzant did, as neither officer had the authority to provide one to him. The undisputed facts indicate Officers Cole and Ball relied upon medical staff to evaluate Vanzant's need for a wheelchair.
There is no dispute that medical staff attempted to assess Vanzant's need for a wheelchair on December 25, 2014, and Vanzant has admitted refusing the assessment. Finally, both officers, seemingly recognizing Vanzant's [*36]  infirmity, physically escorted Vanzant to the showers on December 30, 2014, and held him for support. After Vanzant's fall on December 30, 2014, Cole called medical staff to evaluate Vanzant. A nurse came and spoke to him outside his cell. The nurse indicated to Cole that Vanzant was fine. Based upon these undisputed facts, there is insufficient evidence to support a finding that Officers Cole and Ball had knowledge of Vanzant's need for (as opposed to his request for) a wheelchair, or were deliberately indifferent to his medical needs.
With regard to Officer Larsen, he too, was assigned to Unit 8 during Vanzant's stay there. Larsen observed Vanzant walk on a limited basis within his cell, and also maneuver around the cell by scooting on his bed. On December 27, 2014, Vanzant requested a wheelchair to get to the showers, but because Vanzant did not have a medical order for a wheelchair, Larsen indicated he was unable to provide one, and could not do so absent a medical order for one. There is no dispute Larsen was unaware of a medical need for Vanzant to have a wheelchair, and he relied upon medical staff to determine the medical necessity of one.
Last, there are no facts in the record [*37]  indicating what role, if any, Officer Egerman played. Vanzant has therefore not put forth any facts to support personal participation by Egerman in any Eighth Amendment violation.
Based upon the undisputed facts in the record, Officers Craig, Cole and Ball reasonably relied upon medical staff to evaluate inmates for a wheelchair. Egerman does not appear to have been personally involved with Vanzant at all. The Court therefore will recommend summary judgment be granted to the IDOC Defendants on Vanzant's Eighth Amendment claim.

3. ADA Claims Against IDOC
Vanzant asserts also claims under the ADA, 42 U.S.C. § 12101, et seq. Title II of the ADA applies to an "individual with a disability who, with or without reasonable modifications to rules, policies, or practices, the removal of architectural, communication, or transportation barriers, or the provision of auxiliary aids and services, meets the essential eligibility requirements for the receipt of services or the participation in programs or activities provided by a public entity." 42 U.S.C. § 12131(2). Title II extends to prison inmates who are deprived of the benefits of participation in prison programs, services, or activities because of a disability. See Pa. Dep't of Corr. v. Yeskey, 524 U.S. 206, 211, 118 S. Ct. 1952, 141 L. Ed. 2d 215 (1998).
The ADA is not a remedy for inadequate medical treatment. [*38]  See Simmons v. Navajo County, 609 F.3d 1011, 1022 (9th Cir. 2010) (citing Bryant v. Madigan, 84 F.3d 246, 249 (7th Cir. 1996) ("The ADA does not create a remedy for medical malpractice.")) However, the statute can be used to challenge the lack of accessible prison facilities when officials deny a prisoner the use of assistive devices. See St. Pierre v. McDaniel, 1999 U.S. App. LEXIS 3467, 1999 WL 109927, at *1, (9th Cir. March 2, 1999) (unpublished) ("Given the evidence presented by [the plaintiff] concerning the effect of defendants' failure to provide him with his crutches, we conclude the district court erred by granting summary judgment on his Eighth Amendment and ADA claims concerning access to the showers, recreation, meals, and medical services.").
The Title II regulations include specific requirements for correctional facilities. Among other requirements, jails must "ensure that qualified inmates or detainees with disabilities shall not, because a facility is inaccessible to or unusable by individuals with disabilities, be excluded from participation in, or be denied the benefits of, the services, programs, or activities of a public entity, or be subjected to discrimination by any public entity." 28 C.F.R. § 35.152(b)(1). Jails also must "ensure that each inmate with a disability is housed in a cell with the accessible elements necessary to afford the inmate access to safe, appropriate housing." 28 C.F.R. § 35.152(b)(3). Correctional facilities [*39]  also must implement "some form of [disability] tracking system ... to enable [them] to comply with the [ADA]." Armstrong v. Davis, 275 F.3d 849, 876 (9th Cir.2001), abrogated on other grounds by Johnson v. California, 543 U.S. 499, 504-5, 125 S. Ct. 1141, 160 L. Ed. 2d 949 (2005). Public entities must make changes necessary to provide programmatic access, including structural modifications and reasonable accommodations. See 28 C.F.R. § 35.150(a), (b).
Because of the unique nature of correctional facilities, in which jail staff control nearly all aspects of inmates' daily lives, most everything provided to inmates is a public service, program or activity, including sleeping, eating, showering, toileting, communicating with those outside the jail by mail and telephone, exercising, entertainment, safety and security, the jail's administrative, disciplinary, and classification proceedings, medical, mental health and dental services, the library, educational, vocational, substance abuse and anger management classes and discharge services. Hernandez v. Cty. of Monterey, 110 F. Supp. 3d 929, 935-36 (N.D. Cal. 2015) (citing 28 C.F.R. Pt. 35, App. A.)
But the public entity (here, IDOC) must have knowledge of the individual's disability and the individual's need for an accommodation before it can be required under the ADA to provide any reasonable accommodations. Robertson v. Las Animas County Sheriff's Department, 500 F.3d 1185, 1196-98 (10th Cir. 2007); Kiman v. New Hampshire Department of Corrections, 451 F.3d 274, 283 (1st Cir. 2006). That knowledge either can derive from the individual's request for an accommodation [*40]  or, in other cases, will be imputed to the public entity because the individual's need for an accommodation is "obvious." Id.
The Court allowed Vanzant's ADA claim to proceed against IDOC for the accessibility issues Vanzant identified. These include the denial of wheelchair accessible housing and a shower chair from December 24-31, 2014. With respect to the shower chair, Vanzant, by his own admission, was provided with a shower chair on December 30, 2014, and thereafter as well.
With regard to Vanzant's cell conditions and access to the shower, however, there are triable issues of material fact. Ferro indicated when a patient arrived from a facility with a wheelchair, "under RDU policy, this course of care will be continued...." There is no dispute Vanzant arrived in a wheelchair accessible van, in a wheelchair. Kilby testified Vanzant was asked if he could walk, and that Vanzant replied he could walk a short distance but it was painful to do so. On his intake questionnaire, Vanzant indicated his knee was "bad" and he had been in a wheelchair since September 6, 2014, plus suffered from gout. Further, Ferro received medical records from the Ada County Jail documenting Vanzant's prescription [*41]  for a wheelchair. When Vanzant refused to walk, Craig obtained a wheelchair to transport him, and did so without incident. Thus, it was obvious Vanzant had mobility issues, although the nature and extent of those issues may not have been known.
While it may have been pursuant to policy that Craig issued a DOR and assigned Vanzant to segregated housing in Unit 8, there are issues of fact regarding whether IDOC knew that Vanzant's disability would prevent him from receiving full access to things like the shower and recreation unless accommodations were provided. Upon arriving in Unit 8, Vanzant submitted a HSR on December 24, 2014, indicating he needed a wheelchair to get around in, and he experienced pain in his right leg when walking. The record indicates Vanzant made numerous requests for a wheelchair while in Cell 78, asserting he could not access the showers without one. Although Vanzant denies walking in his cell, Ball, Cole, and Larson admit they saw him walk with pain, scoot on his bed, and otherwise have difficulty ambulating. The IDOC defendants do not deny Vanzant's assertion that a plastic wheelchair was available in Unit 8. Under these facts, there is a triable issue as to [*42]  whether Vanzant's need for accommodations to safely move about in his cell and be provided with a wheelchair to access the shower, irrespective of the shower chair itself, was obvious.
During intake, Vanzant requested a wheelchair. Because he reportedly was belligerent and would not follow orders to walk to the medical examination room, he was placed in segregation. Once there, Vanzant made several requests for a wheelchair, ostensibly to access the showers, but those requests were denied and he was directed to submit concern forms to medical staff instead. The request for a wheelchair for permanent use is different than the request to be assisted to (or in) the shower. Here, the record is not sufficient for the Court to determine at summary judgment that Vanzant's requested accommodation—transport to the showers and elsewhere in a wheelchair—was unreasonable. The Court will recommend summary judgment be denied with respect to the ADA claim against IDOC.

CONCLUSION
Based upon the foregoing analysis, the Court recommends that summary judgment be granted to all Defendants on all claims, with the exception of Defendant Ferro on the Eighth Amendment Claim and IDOC on the ADA claim. The Court finds there [*43]  are disputed issues of material fact which would preclude the Court from granting summary judgment to Defendant Ferro and IDOC. Although Defendants raised additional arguments, the Court declines to address them in light of its analysis, above.

RECOMMENDATION
NOW THEREFORE IT IS HEREBY RECOMMENDED:
1) Defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment (Dkt. 70) be GRANTED IN PART AND DENIED IN PART.
2) Defendants' Motion for Summary Judgment (Dkt. 73) be GRANTED IN PART AND DENIED IN PART.
Written objections to this Report and Recommendation must be filed within fourteen (14) days pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1) and Dist. Idaho L. Rule 72.1(b), or as a result of failing to do so, that party may waive the right to raise factual and/or legal objections to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.
DATED: September 13, 2017
/s/ Candy W. Dale
Honorable Candy W. Dale
United States Magistrate Judge


End of Document

