Vinel v. Union Twp., Ohio
United States District Court for the Southern District of Ohio, Western Division
April 13, 2018, Decided; April 13, 2018, Filed
Case No. 1:16-cv-930

Reporter
2018 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 227455 *; 2018 WL 7080037
ANTHONY D. VINEL, Plaintiff, vs. UNION TOWNSHIP, OHIO, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Anthony D. Vinel, Plaintiff: Randolph Harry Freking, LEAD ATTORNEY, Kelly Mulloy Myers, Freking Myers & Reul LLC, Cincinnati, OH USA.
For Union Township, Ohio, Defendant: Lawrence Edward Barbiere, Scott A Sollmann, LEAD ATTORNEY, Schroeder Mundrell Barbiere & Powers, Mason, OH USA.
Judges: Timothy S. Black, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Timothy S. Black
Opinion



ORDER RESOLVING

DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT (Doc. 29) AND DEFENDANT'S MOTION TO EXCLUDE EXPERT TESTIMONY (Doc. 34)
This civil action is before the Court regarding the Defendant's motion for summary judgment (Doc. 29) and Defendant's motion to exclude expert testimony (Doc. 34).

I. BACKGROUND
Plaintiff Anthony Vinel was employed by Defendant Union Township as a firefighter/paramedic from 1998 to 2015. Plaintiff was able to work full time without issue until around 2012, when he began to suffer from noticeable hearing loss. At his annual physical in February 2013, the doctor conducting the physical, Dr. William Lovett,1 noted Plaintiff's mild, moderate, and moderately severe bilateral hearing loss, but still certified Plaintiff as fit for duty. (Doc. 22, at 47-49).
Plaintiff's hearing loss first became an issue at work in June of 2013, when [*2]  the fire department's chief, Stanley Deimling, noticed that Plaintiff failed to respond to verbal commands given at the scene of an automobile accident. (Doc. 14, at 22-23). Chief Deimling raised the issue of Plaintiff's hearing at the department's next staff meeting, where he was informed by other firefighter/paramedics that there had been ongoing problems related to Plaintiff's hearing in the field. (Id.).
After learning of Plaintiff's issues hearing on the job, Chief Deimling ordered that Plaintiff undergo a fitness-for-duty examination. (Id. at 26-28). Dr. Lovett conducted the fitness-for-duty examination on June 18, 2013. Dr. Lovett determined that Plaintiff could not perform duties at a fire scene, but could perform EMS duties, perform safety inspections, conduct classroom education, perform office duties, and inspect equipment. (Doc. 22-10, at 12). Based on these restrictions and the job requirements of a Union Township firefighter/paramedic, Dr. Lovett certified that Plaintiff was not fit for duty. (Id.).
Dr. Lovett based his restrictions on Plaintiff's duties at a fire scene on his conclusion that firefighters could not be permitted to wear hearing aids on the job. Dr. Lovett's conclusion [*3]  was based on the National Fire Prevention Association (NFPA) regulation A9.12.4.1, which states that "[h]earing aid use or cochlear implants are not considered a reasonable accommodation [for a firefighter][.]" (Doc. 29, at 23).2 The NFPA regulations have not been formally adopted by Union Township. (See Doc. 32, at 14).
Plaintiff immediately contested the assertion that he was unfit for duty, arguing that he could perform all the essential functions of his job if he were permitted to wear hearing aids. Plaintiff's audiologist, Sharon Christopherson, and his general physician, Dr. Yeullig, wrote letters for Plaintiff expressing their belief that Plaintiff could return to work with no restrictions so long as he was wearing hearing aids. (Doc. 26-11; Doc. 26-12). Nevertheless, Defendant placed Plaintiff on sick leave running concurrently with FMLA leave as a result of his not fit for duty status. (Doc. 29, at 14).
After he was placed on leave, Plaintiff applied for and was granted temporary restricted duties with Union Township while he applied for disability with the Ohio Police and Fire Pension Fund. (Id. at 14). After [*4]  receiving a disability determination of 14%, Plaintiff requested to be returned to his regular duties. Defendant denied that request, whereupon Plaintiff filed a formal grievance pursuant to his collective bargaining agreement ("CBA"). (Id. at 16). Pursuant to the CBA, Plaintiff's grievance was reviewed first by Assistant Chief Mark Fyffe, then by Chief Diemling, and then by township administrator Ken Geis. Each reviewer denied Plaintiff's grievance. (Id. at 17).
Finally, pursuant to the CBA for Union Township firefighter/paramedics, Plaintiff appealed the denial of his grievance to an independent and impartial administrator. The arbitration took place on April 29, 2014. Ultimately, the arbitrator held that "NFPA 1582 A.9.12.4.1 makes it clear and certain that hearing aids or cochlear implants are not a reasonable accommodation for a firefighter who has seriously impaired hearing." (Doc. 29-1, at 186). Accordingly, the arbitrator denied Plaintiff's claim that Defendant had violated the antidiscrimination portion of the CBA by refusing to allow Plaintiff to work. (Id. at 187).
Plaintiff filed the instant suit on September 16, 2016. In his complaint, Plaintiff raises the following claims against Defendant:
1) Failure to accommodate [*5]  in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA);
2) Failure to accommodate in violation of O.R.C. § 4112.02(A);
3) Disability discrimination in violation of the ADA;
4) Disability discrimination in violation of O.R.C. § 4112.02(A).
(Doc. 1, at 3-4).

II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
A motion for summary judgment should be granted if the evidence submitted to the Court demonstrates that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact, and that the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). See Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986); Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 247-48, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). The moving party has the burden of showing the absence of genuine disputes over facts which, under the substantive law governing the issue, might affect the outcome of the action. Celotex, 477 U.S. at 323. All facts and inferences must be construed in a light most favorable to the party opposing the motion. Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 587, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986).
A party opposing a motion for summary judgment "may not rest upon the mere allegations or denials of his pleading, but . . . must set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248 (1986).

III. ANALYSIS

A. Motion to Exclude Expert Testimony of William M. Kramer
Plaintiff's response to Defendant's motion for summary judgment relies in part upon the findings of its expert witness, Dr. William M. Kramer, Ph. D. Dr. Kramer has a long [*6]  and distinguished history in the field of firefighting operations, having served in every level of firefighting organizations over a career exceeding 40 years. (Doc. 34-1, at 4). Dr. Kramer was fire chief at the Indianapolis International Airport from 1995-1998 and fire chief at the Deerfield Township (OH) Fire Department from 1998-2006. (Id.). Dr. Kramer has also intermittently taught fire science at various universities including the University of Cincinnati, and currently serves as the fire department operations consultant to NASA (Id. at 1, 4).
After being retained by Plaintiff's counsel, Dr. Kramer prepared a 3-page written report (with additional supporting documentation) outlining his background and his opinions regarding Anthony Vinel's claims against Union Township. Dr. Kramer's opinion is laid out in the following passage from his report:
It is my professional opinion that Anthony Vinel makes an excellent case for reinstatement to his position as a Firefighter/Paramedic in the Union Township Fire Department, Clermont County, Ohio, notwithstanding a contrary opinion of Arbitrator Louis V. Imundo.
I feel that in this case Federal Law, namely the Americans with Disabilities (ADA) act should [*7]  take precedence over the NFPA Standard 1582, especially in light of the fact that All NFPA standards are voluntary unless enacted into law by municipal ordinance or similar legislation by local government.
(Id. at 2). Dr. Kramer was also deposed on November 17, 2017 in his capacity as expert witness for the plaintiff in this case. (Doc. 24).
Federal Rule of Evidence 702 permits expert testimony in the form of an opinion "if (a) the expert's scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge will help the trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue; (b) the testimony is based upon sufficient facts or data; (c) the testimony is the product of reliable principles and methods; and (d) the witness has reliably applied the principles and methods to the facts of the case." In Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. 579, 113 S. Ct. 2786, 125 L. Ed. 2d 469 (1993), the Supreme Court explained that the district court must act as a "gatekeeper" to ensure that proposed expert testimony is relevant and will assist the trier of fact in determining the ultimate issue. Id. at 597-98; Nelson v. Tennessee Gas Pipeline Co., 243 F.3d 244, 250-51 (6th Cir. 2001). The Supreme Court has extended Daubert to include not only scientific, but also any testimony based on "technical" and "other specialized knowledge." Kumho Tire Co. v. Carmichael, 526 U.S. 137, 152, 119 S. Ct. 1167, 143 L. Ed. 2d 238 (1999).
As noted above, expert testimony is admissible if it is helpful to the [*8]  jury in understanding the evidence or determining facts in issue. Eiland v. Westinghouse Elec. Corp., 58 F.3d 176, 180 (5th Cir. 1995). Where an expert opinion has a tendency to confuse the trier of fact, it may not satisfy the helpfulness prong of admissibility inquiry. Clena Investments, Inc. v. XL Specialty Ins. Co., 280 F.R.D. 653, 664 (S.D. Fla. 2012) (citing U.S. v. Frazier, 387 F.3d 1244, 1258 (11th Cir. 2004)). Given that expert evidence can be both powerful and potentially misleading, the trial court must be particularly careful to exclude such testimony if it might lead the jury to simply rely on the expert's opinion and surrender its own common sense. Somnis v. Country Mut. Ins. Co., 840 F. Supp. 2d 1166 (D. Minn. 2012). For this same reason, "judges must take care not to allow misleading and prejudicial opinions to influence the finder of fact." Clena Investments, 280 F.R.D. at 664 (citing Frazier, 387 F.3d at 1263). Proffered evidence that has a greater potential to mislead than to enlighten should be excluded. Westberry v. Gislaved Gummi AB, 178 F.3d 257, 261 (4th Cir. 1999). The party offering the expert's opinion has the burden of proving admissibility by a preponderance of the evidence. Huffman v. Electrolux Home Products, Inc., 129 F.Supp.3d 529, 537 (N.D.Ohio 2015) (citing Daubert, 509 U.S. at 592 n. 10).
On January 19, 2018, Defendant filed a motion to exclude William M. Kramer's expert testimony. (Doc. 34). Defendant makes two arguments in support of its motion: (1) Dr. Kramer is not qualified to give the opinions he has given in this case, and (2) Dr. Kramer has not demonstrated the methodology behind his opinion in a manner that would permit his testimony to be admitted [*9]  at trial. The Court will address each contention in turn.

1. Dr. Kramer's qualifications are sufficient to speak on fire department staffing and job qualifications, but not to give an opinion regarding the ADA or its relationship to NFPA standards.
As noted above, Dr. Kramer's background amply demonstrates his expertise with the inner workings of a fire department. (See Part III.A). Dr. Kramer has extensive experience of both the practical and the managerial side of firefighter operations and clearly can give a qualified expert opinion regarding the standard operating procedures of a fire department, including a typical firefighter's responsibilities and necessary qualifications.
However, Dr. Kramer's background demonstrates no such expertise in the various competing legal and industry standards on which he bases the conclusion in his report. His conclusion that the ADA "should take precedence" over the NFPA guidelines is demonstrably NOT based on a familiarity with either the statute or the standard. Dr. Kramer's testimony and invoice to Plaintiff for his services on this case1 reveal that Dr. Kramer spent about four total hours researching NFPA 1582 for the first time ever and that [*10]  such initial research began on May 4, 2017:
Q: As far as — turning to that back page, on May 4th, it looks like you conducted some initial research on NFPA 1582, correct?
Kramer: I did, yes.
Q: Would you agree that NFPA 1582 was a very large section that takes a number of hours to read, let alone digest and comprehend? Would you agree with that?
Kramer: Well, I agree with that, and I condensed it down to a couple of pages for the highlights.
Q: What areas were you focusing on?
Kramer: Well, Section 6.5, "Ears and Hearing."
Q: Any other sections?
Kramer: I did look at all of them, because it was quite a comprehensive standard. And you can see there are about 20 different subjects from head and neck, eyes, vision, dental, nose, lungs, heart, abdominal, reproductive, urinary, spine, extremities, neurological, skin, blood, endocrine, tumors, psychiatric, and chemicals.
****
Q: And for the record, we've marked as Exhibit S2 materials that were included in Mr. Kramer's file with respect to this case; is that correct? Kramer: That's correct.
Q: And are there any other 1582 materials, aside from these two that are Exhibit S, that you reviewed with respect to preparing an opinion in this case?
Kramer: I read several [*11]  articles online about 1582. These were the only ones I chose to copy.
****
Q: So your initial research just entailed you looking at materials online, not printing anything out; would that be fair to say?
Kramer: Yeah. I just wanted to make sure anything in my report did not conflict with 1582 standards.
****
Q: Was there anything else that you did or conducted with respect to coming to your report and opinion in this case, that you did not charge for any time or — that you spent?
Kramer: Well, occasionally there are additional articles I'll be reading that say, hey, gee, this looks like something, but 10, 15 minutes here and there, additional information, that's just part of my ambient experience that may enter into my report, but not direct enough that I could bill for it or would want to.
****
**** Q: Have you conducted any additional research on accommodations or what an accommodation could possibly entail aside—well, did any of your research entail researching accommodations.
Kramer: Other than what we've discussed, no.
Q: Have you ever taken any trainings on 1582, the NFPA 1582, prior to conducting that research that you did on the 4th?
Kramer: None other than that.
Q: Have you conducted [*12]  any additional research on accommodations or what an accommodation could possibly entail aside—well, did any of your research entail researching accommodations.
Kramer: Other than what we've discussed, no.
(Doc. 24, at 51-60).
Dr. Kramer testified that his first interaction with NFPA 1582 would have been that 1.25 hours he billed Plaintiff on May 4, 2017. (Id. at 64). When asked if he had a complete understanding of NFPA 1582, Dr. Kramer testified, "I believe my understanding of 1582, I certainly understand the intent, and that is to have healthy, fit firefighters capable of doing the job. Certainly in terms of knowing the details in the half-inch document, I certainly don't propose to know everything in there." (Id. at 70). Kramer testified that he has no experience being chief of a fire department that has used NFPA 1582. (Id. at 75). He also had no working knowledge of any other local fire departments who utilize NFPA 1582:
Q: Do you know that — of any local fire departments that utilize NFPA 1582?
Kramer: I cannot mention any that specifically say we are adopting this in its entirety.
Q: Do you know of any that utilize some of the guidelines and standards that are set forth in NFPA 1582?
Kramer: I don't.
Q: And [*13]  it would be fair to say that this is the only time that you've analyzed NFPA 1582, correct?
Kramer: That's correct. And I suspect it was probably the first time that Union Township decided to pull out NFPA 1582 is when this case arose.
(Id. at 85-86).
Dr. Kramer's testimony makes clear that he is not qualified to give expert opinion on the interpretation or implementation of NFPA guidelines, as his knowledge is entirely based on a few hours of research for this case.
Furthermore, the conclusion from Dr. Kramer's report that "in this case Federal Law, namely the Americans with Disabilities (ADA) act should take precedence over the NFPA Standard 1582" is an impermissible legal opinion that, if permitted to be expressed at trial, would threaten to substitute Dr. Kramer's judgment on the ultimate issues of this case for that of the jury. (Doc. 34-1, at 2). The Sixth Circuit has held that while Federal Rule of Evidence 704(a) permits an expert's opinion to "'embrace[ ] an ultimate issue to be decided by the trier of fact[,]' the issue embraced must be a factual one." Berry v. City of Detroit, 25 F.3d 1342, 1353 (6th Cir.1994) (citing Fed. R. Evid. 704(a)). The decision of how to rectify the private standards ostensibly used by Union Township in evaluating its firefighters with federal law is not a factual issue, [*14]  and Dr. Kramer's opining on that question is therefore inadmissible before a jury.

2. Dr. Kramer's report does not adequately identify the methodology that led to his opinions regarding this case, and accordingly cannot be admitted.
The Federal Rules of Civil Procedure state that expert testimony from one retained or specially employed by a party needs to be accompanied by a written report which must contain the following:
(i) a complete statement of all opinions the witness will express and the basis and reasons for them;
(ii) the facts or data considered by the witness in forming them;
(iii) any exhibits that will be used to summarize or support them;
(iv) the witness's qualifications, including a list of all publications authored in the previous 10 years;
(v) a list of all other cases in which, during the previous 4 years, the witness testified as an expert at trial or by deposition; and
(vi) a statement of the compensation to be paid for the study and testimony in the case.
Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(a)(2) (emphasis added). The Sixth Circuit has consistently enforced the requirement that expert witnesses articulate the basis for their findings in expert reports. See, e.g., Matilla v. South Kentucky Rural Elec. Co-op. Corp., 240 Fed. App'x 35, 42 (6th Cir. 2007).
The portion of Dr. Kramer's report outlining [*15]  his findings and professional opinion regarding the issues at the heart of this case is brief (at three pages) and conclusory. Dr. Kramer states that Plaintiff "makes an excellent case for reinstatement to his position as a Firefighter/Paramedic in the Union Township Fire Department," but does not attempt to apply his expertise to the specific facts of Plaintiff's disability or Union Township's staffing requirements. (Doc. 34-1, at 2). Dr. Kramer's report lists several factors upon which his opinion is supposedly based, but most of them are irrelevant to this case. For example, Dr. Kramer's report is supported by several news articles about individual firefighters who remain employed despite suffering disabilities. (Id. at 11-20). Dr. Kramer does not sufficiently explain how these stories about individuals whose circumstances are not outlined in any significant medical detail support a conclusion that Plaintiff is fit to perform the duties of a Union Township firefighter/paramedic—in fact, the disabilities suffered by the firefighters in some of the articles contained in Dr. Kramer's report are completely unrelated to hearing loss and therefore have no probative value whatsoever. (See id. at 11-16 (three [*16]  articles about amputees working as firefighters or police officers)).
Plaintiff claims that Defendant is attempting to rigidly apply the Daubert factors inappropriately because Dr. Kramer's expert testimony is not scientific in nature but rather is based on Dr. Kramer's considerable experience in the firefighting profession. In endorsing a broad interpretation of Rule 702, the Sixth Circuit has also stressed the potential limited usefulness of the Daubert factors for evaluating non-scientific expert testimony such as that at issue in this case:
Contrary to [the plaintiff's] argument, the fact that [an expert's] opinions may not have been subjected to the crucible of peer review, or that their validity has not been confirmed through empirical analysis, does not render them unreliable and inadmissible. In United States v. Jones, this court recognized that the four specific factors utilized in Daubert may be of limited utility in the context of non-scientific expert testimony. We noted that "if [the Daubert] framework were to be extended to outside the scientific realm, many types of relevant and reliable expert testimony--that derived substantially from practical experience--would be excluded. [*17]  Such a result truly would turn Daubert, a case intended to relax the admissibility requirements for expert scientific evidence, on its head." Indeed, even the Berry court itself recognized that "the distinction between scientific and non-scientific expert testimony is a critical one[,]" and that Daubert is "only of limited help" in assessing technical or experiential expertise. Consequently, in Jones we declined the appellant's invitation to apply the factors outlined in Daubert to testimony involving a non-scientific field.
First Tenn. Bank Nat'l Ass'n v. Barreto, 268 F.3d 319, 334 (6th Cir. 2001) (internal citations omitted).
However, even nonscientific expert testimony must be adequately supported by an explanation of how that testimony is derived from experience. An expert basing his opinion on experience "must do more than aver conclusorily that his experience led to his opinion." Scott v. Deerbrook Ins. Co., 714 F.Supp.2d 670, 674 (E.D. Ky. 2010) (quoting Lippe v. Bairnco Corp., 288 B.R. 678, 686 (S.D.N.Y. 2003)). If a witness is relying on experience, he or she "must explain how that experience leads to the conclusion reached, why that experience is a sufficient basis for the opinion, and how that experience is reliably applied to the facts." United States v. Brown, 415 F.3d 1257, 1261 (11th Cir. 2005); Fed. R. Evid. 702 advisory committee's note (citing Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 43 F.3d 1311, 1319 (9th Cir.1995)). In determining the admissibility of experience-based testimony, a court must analyze whether [*18]  the expert "employs in the courtroom the same level of intellectual rigor that characterizes the practice of an expert in the relevant field." Kumho, 526 U.S. at 152. Against this backdrop, the Supreme Court notes that "nothing in either Daubert or the Federal Rules of Evidence requires a district court to admit opinion evidence that is connected to existing data only by the ipse dixit of the expert." General Elec. Co. v. Joiner, 522 U.S. 136, 146, 118 S. Ct. 512, 139 L. Ed. 2d 508 (1997).
After reviewing Dr. Kramer's expert report in detail, the Court concludes that there simply is not enough of a substantive explanation for how Dr. Kramer's experience in the firefighting industry supports the key conclusion that Plaintiff has made an excellent case for reinstatement. Dr. Kramer does not discuss any specific details related to Plaintiff's disability or how Plaintiff has demonstrated that he should be reinstated. The connection between anecdotal stories of disabled firefighters upon which Dr. Kramer relies and the circumstances of this case is not sufficiently explained. The only piece of relevant information that can be fairly said to be based on Dr. Kramer's personal experience and expertise is his passing mention of a firefighter who was permitted to work under Dr. Kramer several years ago [*19]  with the use of hearing aids. However, Dr. Kramer's report does not indicate what responsibilities this individual had and how they may or may not compare to the required duties of a Union Township firefighter/paramedic.
Ultimately, Dr. Kramer's expert report fails to sufficiently explain the methodology supporting his ultimate conclusion that Plaintiff "makes an excellent case for reinstatement[.]" (Doc. 34-1, at 2). Accordingly, Dr. Kramer's expert report and testimony are excluded from trial and shall not be considered in the evaluation of the pending motion for summary judgment.

B. Motion for Summary Judgment

1. Failure to Accommodate Claim
The ADA prohibits discrimination due to disability against "a qualified individual with a disability," 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a), and defines "discrimination" to include "not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability," id. § 12112(b)(5)(A). The Act further defines "reasonable accommodation" to include (A) making existing facilities used by employees readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities; and (B) job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, reassignment to a [*20]  vacant position, acquisition or modification of equipment or devices, appropriate adjustment or modifications of examinations, training materials or policies, the provision of qualified readers or interpreters, and other similar accommodations for individuals with disabilities. id. § 12111(9).
The analysis of a claim under the ADA and a claim for violation of Ohio's employment discrimination law, O.R.C. § 4112.02, is identical. Case law regarding claims brought under the ADA is generally applicable to claims under the Ohio statute; accordingly, Plaintiff's state law failure to accommodate and disability discrimination claims can be analyzed in tandem with his ADA claims. See Sansom v. Cincinnati Bell Tel., 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 96920, 2009 WL 3418646, at *7 (S.D. Ohio 2009).
Plaintiff bases his failure to accommodate claim upon his allegations that Union Township's failed to reasonably accommodate his disability and failed to engage in the mandatory interactive process afforded to all disabled employees who request a reasonable accommodation. Union Township acknowledges that it did not accommodate Plaintiff's disability but maintains that no reasonable accommodation was possible without the Township incurring an undue hardship.

a. Reasonable accommodation
Defendant's motion for summary judgment asserts that all [*21]  of Plaintiff's claims are meritless beyond a dispute of material fact. Defendant's motion is based on the foundational argument that Plaintiff is unqualified for the job of Union Township firefighter/paramedic and that there is no reasonable accommodation that will allow Plaintiff to perform the required duties of that position. Plaintiff does not dispute that without hearing aids, he is unqualified to be a firefighter/paramedic. However, Plaintiff claims that he is qualified to be a firefighter/paramedic with the use of hearing aids, and that a reasonable accommodation would be either for Union Township to permit Plaintiff to perform his usual duties with hearing aids or for Union Township to permit Plaintiff to perform a slightly restructured list of duties with hearing aids.
Defendant's conclusion that Plaintiff is unqualified for his position was primarily based on the medical opinion of Dr. Lovett, who used the NFPA 1582 regulations as a guideline to determine that a firefighter could not safely perform his or her essential duties while wearing hearing aids. Specifically, Dr. Lovett has stated that a firefighter cannot be permitted to wear hearing aids while performing duties at [*22]  the scene of a fire. (See Doc. 22, at 68-70; Doc. 22-9). Dr. Lovett has testified that the heat and wetness of a fire environment make working with hearing aids impossible regardless of the individual circumstances of the wearer. (See Doc. 22, at 68; id. at 64 (Dr. Lovett's testimony that he didn't recall testing Plaintiff's hearing while wearing hearing aids and that "it wouldn't matter to [him]" how good Plaintiff's hearing was with hearing aids in)).
However, the record contains evidence that Union Township frequently permitted firefighter/paramedics to work despite being in violation of NFPA regulations. (See Doc. 32, at 15). For example, one firefighter/paramedic was permitted to work for over two years after having a cardiac defibrillator implanted despite the fact that NFPA 1582 standards indicate that a cardiac defibrillator renders a firefighter unable to perform essential tasks and that "[defibrillator] technology has not been FDA approved for operating effectively under conditions commonly found on the fire ground (electromagnetic interference)." (Doc. 14, at 110-12; Doc. 10, at 94-95; Doc. 22, at 88-90; see also Doc. 31-1 and Doc. 32-2 (NFPA guidelines §§ 9.4.10, A9.4.10.1)). If NFPA regulations [*23]  were the primary basis of Dr. Lovett's decisions regarding the fit-for-duty status of firefighter/paramedics, a reasonable juror could find those standards were not universally enforced.
Additionally, the evidence does not show that Dr. Lovett's blanket ban of any "duties at the scene of a fire" while wearing hearing aids was uniformly enforced by Union Township. One of the largest sources of discord between Union Township's words and its actions in this case is the long-time continued employment of Jeff Jackson, who worked for Union Township beginning as a Captain in 1990 before being promoted to Assistant Fire Chief in 2005 and ultimately leaving the department in 2013. Mr. Jackson has worn hearing aids on the job since around 1998. (See Doc. 18, at 19). As a Captain, Mr. Jackson was required to go on both fire and accident runs, where he would operate in a supervisory and support role. (Id. at 13). Mr. Jackson did not have to enter a fire structure during his tenure as a Captain, but was required as part of his job description to be able to do so as necessary. (Id. at 18).
Defendant argues that Mr. Jackson's position of Captain is easily distinguishable from Plaintiff's role as a firefighter/paramedic, [*24]  as Mr. Jackson's role was supervisory in nature and he never went into structure fires. (Doc. 33, at 12-15). However, Mr. Jackson's own testimony was that he was expected to be able to enter fires as necessary when he held the role of Captain, and this did not stop Union Township from finding him fit for duty despite his wearing hearing aids. (Doc. 18, at 18). While Plaintiff as a firefighter/paramedic would certainly be expected to enter a fire scene more often than a Captain, Dr. Lovett's assertion that wearing hearing aids completely bars an individual from holding a job that could require entry into a fire is incongruous with the evidence that Jeff Jackson was continually reauthorized to work in a position that, like Plaintiff's position, required the ability to enter a fire zone (albeit only as necessary and not on a regular basis like Plaintiff). This discrepancy between Mr. Jackson's stated job requirements and his disability could allow a reasonable juror to conclude that Union Township did not genuinely have a uniform job requirement forbidding the use of hearing aids in fire situations, especially given Defendant's reliance on Plaintiff's written job description in supporting [*25]  its motion for summary judgment. (See Doc. 29, at 7).
Plaintiff has additionally argued that, even if Union Township could not permit Plaintiff to enter a fire while wearing hearing aids, a reasonable accommodation would have been for Defendant to modify Plaintiff's job duties so exclude this singular portion of the job, as Plaintiff claims that he could perform all duties required of a firefighter/paramedic other than entering structure fires. Defendant vehemently denies that permitting Plaintiff to perform all duties except for entering structure fires would be a reasonable accommodation as defined by the ADA. Defendant argues instead that entering structure fires is an "essential function" of Plaintiff's job, and, accordingly, a reasonable accommodation cannot include removing that requirement. (Doc. 29, at 26) (citing 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8)). Plaintiff disputes the characterization of entering structure fires as an essential element of the duties of a Union Township firefighter/paramedic.
Whether a job function is essential "is a question of fact that is typically not suitable for resolution on a motion for summary judgment." Keith v. County of Oakland, 703 F.3d 918, 926 (6th Cir. 2013). Rather, "[w]hether a particular [job] function is essential is a factual determination [*26]  that must be made on a case by case basis," 29 C.F.R. part 1630, app. § 1630.2(n), and this factual determination must be undertaken by the Court while viewing all evidence in the light most favorable to the Plaintiff. See Kleiber v. Honda of Am. Mfg., Inc., 485 F.3d 862, 868 (6th Cir. 2007). However, despite the fact that the question of whether a job function is essential is usually reserved for a jury, a court is not precluded from making that determination on summary judgment if the facts demonstrate that the function in question was unequivocally essential. See Watters v. Summit Cnty., 2016 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 84358, 2016 WL 3544752 (N.D. Ohio June 29, 2016).
Essential functions are "the fundamental job duties of the employment position the individual with a disability holds or desires." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(1). Whether a function is "essential" is evaluated on a case-by-case basis by examining a number of factors. Keith, 703 F.3d at 925-26; see also D'Angelo v. ConAgra Foods, Inc., 422 F.3d 1220, 1230 (11th Cir. 2005). Two such factors are "the employer's judgment as to what functions of a job are essential" and an employer's "written description" of the job. 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). However, the regulations accompanying the ADA also direct a court to consider five additional factors: (iii) the amount of time spent on the job performing the function; (iv) the consequences of not requiring the incumbent to perform the function; (v) the terms of a collective bargaining agreement; (vi) the work experience of past [*27]  incumbents in the job; and/or (vii) the current work experience of incumbents in similar jobs. 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(n)(3)(iii)-(vii).
Defendant's motion for summary judgment and supporting memoranda continually argue as if it is a truism that "firefighters obviously must fight fires." Defendant also points to Plaintiff's written job description, which requires that all Union Township firefighter/paramedics be able to perform physically demanding work in temperatures up to 400 degrees. (Doc. 29-1, at 3). But Defendant glosses over the genuine questions raised by Plaintiff as to how significant a role fighting and entering structure fires actually is for a Union Township firefighter/paramedic. Assistant Chief Mark Fyffe testified during his deposition that fires of all severity compromise about 20 to 25 percent of the "runs" made by Union Township firefighter/paramedics, with the rest being ambulance runs where fire isn't involved. (Doc. 10, at 15). Fyffe also testified that only 10 percent of fire runs are actual structure fires, while the other 90 percent are lesser incidents such as vehicle fires, gas leaks, or false alarms. (Id. at 16). Furthermore, deposed Union Township firefighters have testified that even in the relatively [*28]  small number of cases where there is a structure fire, there are always firefighter/paramedics whose job is not to fight the fire from within but to provide support outside the fire by providing medical aid to victims and bystanders and running the pumper truck. (Id. at 17-34, Doc. 14, at 119-20). This is certainly not irrefutable proof that entering structure fires is not an essential element of Plaintiff's position, but a reasonable juror could agree with Plaintiff's argument based on the disputed evidence before the Court.
If a juror were to conclude that entering a structure fire was not an essential element of the duties of a Union Township firefighter/paramedic, then, by extension, that juror could conclude that Plaintiff's request for modified job responsibilities to perform all the functions of a firefighter/paramedic other than entering structure fires was a request for a reasonable accommodation. If every structure fire required a paramedic on the scene to treat bystanders and NOT enter a fire, and Plaintiff could be assigned that role on structure fire runs, than this case would draw significant parallels to Rorrer v. Stow, in which the Sixth Circuit held that there was a genuine dispute [*29]  of material fact as to whether driving was an essential element of a firefighter's job because the task was neither "highly specialized" nor something that only "a limited number of employees [were] available" to do. 743 F.3d 1025, 1042 (6th Cir. 2014).
Accordingly, a genuine dispute of material fact exists as to whether Plaintiff requested a reasonable accommodation from Defendant, which factual dispute requires the denial of Defendant's motion for summary judgment.

b. Failure to engage in the interactive process
When a disabled employee requests a reasonable accommodation from his employer, that request triggers "an informal, interactive process with the individual with a disability in need of the accommodation." 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(3). The Sixth Circuit has affirmed on multiple occasions that the informal, interactive process is mandatory. See, e.g., Lafata v. Church of Christ Home for Aged, 325 Fed. Appx. 416, 422 (6th Cir. 2009) (quoting Nance v. Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co., 527 F.3d 539, 556 (6th Cir. 2008)).
Plaintiff alleges that Defendant failed to engage in the mandatory interactive process after he requested to be accommodated. Defendant makes two arguments in response: (1) Defendant had no obligation to engage in the interactive process because Plaintiff failed to meet the prerequisite requirement of requesting a reasonable accommodation, and (2) even if an interactive process were [*30]  required, Defendant fulfilled its obligation to engage in the interactive process through the arbitration hearing challenging Plaintiff's termination. (Doc. 29, at 25-26).
Defendant's first argument is essentially the basis on which it argued for dismissal of Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim, and this Court has already held that a reasonable juror could conclude that Plaintiff's request to be assigned slightly modified job duties was a request for a reasonable accommodation. (See supra Part III.B.1.a). Defendant's second argument, that the arbitration hearing somehow satisfied the interactive process requirement, is not sufficiently supported by Defendant's motion to be taken as true beyond a genuine dispute of material fact. Several facts from the record could allow a reasonable juror to conclude that Defendant failed to adequately work with Plaintiff to identify whether some accommodation could be arranged to permit Plaintiff to continue to work. Dr. Lovett's testimony indicates that his decision to declare Plaintiff unfit for duty was based solely upon the fact that Plaintiff wore hearing aids—he did not test Plaintiff's hearing while Plaintiff was wearing hearing aids and [*31]  was not made aware of the countervailing opinions of Plaintiff's medical care providers. (See Doc. 22, at 64-65). "[A] cursory medical examination and summary conclusion that a disabled individual is not fit for employment violates an employer's duty to engage in the interactive process in good faith." Rorrer, 743 F.3d at 1041 (citing Keith, 703 F.3d at 924) (emphasis added). Defendant's motion also fails to articulate significant efforts by Union Township fire department management to work with Plaintiff once Plaintiff's request for accommodation had been made. A reasonable juror could accordingly find that Defendant failed to engage in the interactive process as mandated by the ADA.

c. Undue Hardship
Although there is at least a genuine dispute of material fact as to whether Plaintiff has identified a reasonable accommodation for his disability, Defendant can still prevail over Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claims at summary judgment if Defendant shows beyond a genuine dispute of material fact that granting the requested accommodation would pose an "undue hardship." See Rorrer, 743 F.3d at 1039 (6th Cir. 2014). 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2 defines an undue hardship as follows:
(1) In general. Undue hardship means, with respect to the provision of an accommodation, significant difficulty or [*32]  expense incurred by a covered entity, when considered in light of the factors set forth in paragraph (p)(2) of this section.
(2) Factors to be considered. In determining whether an accommodation would impose an undue hardship on a covered entity, factors to be considered include:
(i) The nature and net cost of the accommodation needed under this part, taking into consideration the availability of tax credits and deductions, and/or outside funding;
(ii) The overall financial resources of the facility or facilities involved in the provision of the reasonable accommodation, the number of persons employed at such facility, and the effect on expenses and resources;
(iii) The overall financial resources of the covered entity, the overall size of the business of the covered entity with respect to the number of its employees, and the number, type and location of its facilities;
(iv) The type of operation or operations of the covered entity, including the composition, structure and functions of the workforce of such entity, and the geographic separateness and administrative or fiscal relationship of the facility or facilities in question to the covered entity; and
(v) The impact of the accommodation upon the operation [*33]  of the facility, including the impact on the ability of other employees to perform their duties and the impact on the facility's ability to conduct business.
29 C.F.R. § 1630.2 (p).
Defendant has not shown beyond a genuine dispute of material fact that accommodating Plaintiff by modifying his job responsibilities to keep him out of structure fires would pose an undue burden on Union Township. Defendant's motion argues that Union Township is already deficit spending on the firefighter/paramedics it currently has, and, accordingly cannot afford to have employees who cannot do the work. (See Doc. 29, at 20-31). However, Plaintiff has presented evidence to suggest that Plaintiff's current procedures involve certain firefighter/paramedics at the scene of every structure fire who are not expected to actually enter the fire, and a juror could reasonably find that Plaintiff being consistently assigned to that position during a run is not an undue hardship for Defendant.
Based on the evidence before the court, a reasonable juror could conclude that Plaintiff requested a reasonable accommodation, Defendant failed to engage in the interactive process required by the ADA, and Plaintiff's requested accommodation would [*34]  not pose an undue burden to Defendant. Accordingly, Defendant's motion for summary judgment on Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claims is denied.

2. Disability Discrimination Claims
In addition to his claims that Union Township failed to accommodate his disability, Plaintiff's complaint contains claims alleging that Defendant discriminated against him based upon his disability in violation of both the ADA and Ohio law. (Doc. 1, at 4). To establish a prima facie case of disability discrimination under the ADA, Vinel must show that (1) he is disabled; (2) he is otherwise qualified for the position, with or without reasonable accommodation; (3) he suffered an adverse employment decision; 4) the employer knew or had reason to know of the plaintiff's disability; and (5) similarly situated non-disabled employees were treated more favorably. Gamble v. JP Morgan Chase & Co., 689 Fed. Appx. 397, 2017 WL 1908187, at *4 (6th Cir. 2017) (citing Whitfield v. Tennessee, 639 F.3d 253, 258-59 (6th Cir. 2011)); Waggoner v. Carlex Glass Am., LLC, 682 F. Appx. 412, 415 (6th Cir. 2017); Jones v. Potter, 488 F.3d 397, 404 (6th Cir. 2007).
Defendant's primary argument against Plaintiff's disability discrimination claim is that Plaintiff cannot meet the second factor of his prima facie case because he is not qualified for his position and no reasonable accommodation exists that can qualify him. As discussed in relation to Plaintiff's failure to accommodate claim, this Court [*35]  finds that a reasonable juror could conclude that Plaintiff could have been accommodated by a minor shift in his job responsibilities that would not impact the essential elements of the position.
Defendant also claims that Plaintiff has failed to present a genuine dispute of material fact that would allow a juror to conclude that Union Township treated any similarly-situated nondisabled employees more favorably than Plaintiff. (Doc. 29, at 35). In response, Plaintiff has cited evidence that several Union Township firefighter/ paramedics have been permitted to work with modified duties during periods of time when, for various reasons, those employees were not able to perform all of the standard duties required of a firefighter/paramedic. (Doc. 32, at 41-42). In one case, a firefighter/paramedic suffered a neck injury that prevented her from raising her head. Union Township allowed her to work in an auxiliary position involving no duty at fire scenes for over two years. (Doc. 18, at 55-57; Doc. 12, at 55-56). Defendant argues that each of these cited cases of accommodations for nondisabled employees were temporary in nature and so cannot be compared to Plaintiff's case. However, Plaintiff [*36]  has presented a genuine dispute of material fact as to whether Defendant's efforts to accommodate its nondisabled employees, despite their inability to perform what Defendant maintains are the essential components of the job, were equivalent to its efforts to accommodate Plaintiff.
Accordingly, Defendant's motion for summary judgment as to Plaintiff's claims of disability discrimination is denied.

3. Punitive Damages
Plaintiff's complaint requests an award of punitive damages. (Doc. 1, at 5). However, the Supreme Court of the United States held in Barnes v. Gorman that punitive damages shall not be awarded in private suits brought under the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act. 536 U.S. 181, 189-90, 122 S. Ct. 2097, 153 L. Ed. 2d 230 (2002). Plaintiff cites Lowe v. Hamilton Cty. Dep't of Job & Family Servs., 610 F.3d 321, 325 (6th Cir. 2010), for the proposition that local municipalities are not immune to suits for money damages under Title I of the ADA. (Doc. 32, at 43). This is a correct statement of law. However, Lowe says nothing about punitive damages, and is accordingly irrelevant to this Court's analysis of whether those damages may be sought. Because Union Township is clearly immune from a claim for punitive damages, Defendant's motion for summary judgment is granted with regard to that claim.

IV. CONCLUSION
Therefore, in accordance with the above, the Court ORDERS [*37]  the following.
1) Defendant's motion to exclude the expert testimony of Dr. William Kramer, Ph. D. (Doc. 34) is GRANTED. Dr. Kramer's testimony and expert report are excluded from all pretrial and trial proceedings in this matter.
2) Defendant's motion for summary judgment (Doc. 29) is GRANTED IN PART. Defendant's motion is GRANTED with respect to Plaintiff's claim for punitive damages, and that claim is accordingly DISMISSED WITH PREJUDICE. In all other respects, Defendant's motion for summary judgment (Doc. 29) is DENIED.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
Date: 4/13/18
/s/ Timothy S. Black
Timothy S. Black
United States District Judge


End of Document

