Walker v. Inventiv Health, Inc
United States District Court for the Northern District of Oklahoma
September 1, 2021, Decided; September 1, 2021, Filed
Case No. 17-CV-345-JED-CDL

Reporter
2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 264529 *
LAURA L. WALKER, Plaintiff, v. INVENTIV HEALTH, INC, Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] Laura L Walker, Plaintiff, Pro se.
For inVentiv Health, Inc., a Delaware corporation |, Defendant: Conor H Kelly, LEAD ATTORNEY, Littler Mendelson PC (Houston), Houston, TX USA. Kerry E Notestine, LEAD ATTORNEY, Littler Mendelson PC (Houston), Houston, TX USA; Randall James Snapp, LEAD ATTORNEY, Crowe & Dunlevy (Tulsa), Tulsa, OK USA.
Judges: Christine D. Little, United States Magistrate Judge.
Opinion by: Christine D. Little
Opinion



REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION
The District Judge referred defendant's motion for attorney fees (Doc. 56) to the undersigned for report and recommendation. For the reasons set forth herein, the undersigned recommends that the motion for fees be denied.

I. Procedural History
The plaintiff, Laura L. Walker, initiated this suit against the defendant in state court, asserting claims under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA). The defendant removed the case, asserting federal question jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1331. The Court dismissed plaintiff's FMLA claim (see Doc. 29), and subsequently granted summary judgment to the defendant, Inventiv Health, Inc., on plaintiff's ADA claim (Doc. 54, 55). The Court granted summary judgment because the plaintiff failed to present evidence "to overcome the evidence [*2]  showing that she abandoned the interactive process or to dispute that her employment was properly terminated and not in violation of the ADA." (See Doc. 54 at 6). The Court determined, alternatively, that the case "should also be dismissed as a sanction for [plaintiff's] blatant failure to comply with discovery and other case obligations." (Id. at 6-7). With respect to the defendant's request for an award of attorney fees as a sanction, the Court denied that request, stating,
Because the Court has determined to grant summary judgment, the Court does not deem additional sanctions, including monetary relief, to be necessary. The defendant's request for additional sanction of attorneys' fees is therefore denied.
(Id. at 7).
Following the entry of judgment, the defendant filed a timely motion for attorneys' fees. (Doc. 56). In support of the motion, the defendant argues that fees should be awarded pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 12205 and Christiansburg Garment Co. v. EEOC, 434 U.S. 412, 420-21 (1978) because plaintiff's "suit was frivolous and unreasonable." (Id. at 5).

II. Background
Ms. Walker's initial pleading alleged that she was hospitalized after experiencing a thyrotoxic crisis, and she was then diagnosed with hyperthyroidism and subacute autoimmune thyroiditis. According [*3]  to her claim, the hyperthyroidism caused muscle weakness in her legs, exhaustion, insomnia, rapid heart rate and palpitations, unstable blood pressure, shortness of breath, bowel issues, tremulousness, and neuropsychiatric symptoms. She claimed that she was in communication with her supervisor and that she required emergency treatment due to acute abdominal pain, and that she was hospitalized rendering her temporarily unable to respond to the defendant's request for information to substantiate her medical need for leave. She alleged that her employment was terminated before she could recover from the emergency and respond. (See Doc. 2-4).
The following facts are gleaned from the Court's summary judgment order. Ms. Walker worked for the defendant for less than a year, beginning in the Fall of 2014. On June 18, 2015, she took leave from work. On June 26, 2015, the defendant e-mailed Ms. Walker a number of documents containing instructions regarding the leave process. Those instructions included directions to contact the defendant's third-party leave administrator if Ms. Walker expected to be absent for more than three days due to a serious health condition, if she needed time off as an [*4]  accommodation, or if she believed her time off should be otherwise protected according to state or federal law.
Ms. Walker did not respond or contact the third-party administrator about her leave request, and she continued to be absent from work. The third-party administrator, Cigna, determined that Ms. Walker's leave was not covered by the FMLA, and on July 17, 2015, the defendant then sent her documents for beginning the interactive process under the ADA. The documentation included an ADA Request for Disability Accommodation form, which requested information regarding the projected length of Ms. Walker's medical leave, her job limitations, and the accommodations she would need to perform the essential functions of her position. It requested additional information from her medical provider. Ms. Walker never completed the ADA request form.
On July 28, 2015, the defendant reminded Ms. Walker that Cigna had not received her ADA request form and informed her that she needed to return it within 15 days of receipt, by August 4, 2015, in order to continue the process. On August 6, 2015, the defendant again asked Ms. Walker to return the ADA request form. She then returned a form beginning [*5]  the interactive process to request a medical accommodation, but did not complete the ADA request form. The defendant immediately acknowledged receipt of the medical accommodation form, but notified Ms. Walker that she must also complete the ADA request form.
Ms. Walker informed the defendant that she would return to work on August 10, 2015. The defendant left her a voicemail on August 7, 2015 to confirm that she would return to work on Monday, August 10. She did not respond, and she did not return to work on August 10. The defendant called her to determine why she did not return to work, and she then indicated she needed to extend her leave. She finally returned a portion of the ADA request form, but it did not include required medical information from her medical provider. She then e-mailed her manager, Kevin Nelson, later in the day on August 10, informing him that she had a diagnosis of autoimmune thyroiditis and that she would return to work August 13, 2015. The defendant again requested completion of the paperwork from her medical provider and indicated that she needed to complete a fitness for duty form before returning to work.
On August 12, 2015, the day before she was to return [*6]  to work, Ms. Walker e-mailed Mr. Nelson and told him that she "had a relapse" and would not be able to return to work until the following Monday, August 17, 2015. She still had not returned a completed ADA request form. The defendant notified Ms. Walker that her time off was not approved and that she must return to work on August 17, 2015 or her employment would be terminated. Ms. Walker replied on August 16, 2015 asking for an additional four weeks, but she did not provide an expected date to return to work. Ms. Walker indicated that she had been bedridden and undergone surgery but provided no medical documentation.
Ms. Walker did not show up to work on August 17, 2015, and her employment was terminated for failing to return to work after abandoning the interactive process. (See Doc. 35-3). She subsequently filed this suit. However, she failed to participate in discovery and to comply with the Court's Scheduling Order. (See Doc. 42 at 6, ¶¶ 7-8).

III. Discussion
The ADA authorizes district courts to award attorney fees to a party in certain circumstances. The statute provides:
In any action or administrative proceeding commenced pursuant to this chapter, the court or agency, in its discretion, [*7]  may allow the prevailing party, other than the United States, a reasonable attorney's fee, including litigation expenses, and costs, and the United States shall be liable for the foregoing the same as a private individual.
42 U.S.C. § 12205. An award of fees under § 12205 is discretionary. See 42 U.S.C. § 12205 ("the court . . ., in its discretion, may allow the prevailing party . . . a reasonable attorney's fee. . . ."); Murphy v. Samson Resources Co., 954 F. Supp. 2d 1295, 1299 (N.D. Okla. 2013) ("The ADA gives courts discretion to award attorney fees to a prevailing party.").
In deciding whether an award of fees is appropriate, the Court must first "determine whether the party seeking fees has prevailed in the litigation." CRST Van Expedited, Inc. v. EEOC,     U.S.    , 136 S. Ct. 1642, 1646 (2016). Here, the defendant prevailed by dismissal of plaintiff's FMLA claim (Doc. 29) and summary judgment as to plaintiff's ADA claim (Doc. 54), and defendant obtained a judgment in its favor (Doc. 55). The first inquiry is thus satisfied.
Courts apply a binary standard to motions for prevailing party fees in civil rights actions. A prevailing plaintiff "ordinarily is to be awarded attorney's fees in all but special circumstances" because "the plaintiff is the chosen instrument of Congress to vindicate 'a policy that Congress considered of the highest priority,'" and an award of fees [*8]  to a prevailing plaintiff is "against a violator of federal law." Christiansburg Garment, 434 U.S. at 417-18 (quoting Newman v. Piggie Park Enterprises, 390 U.S. 400, 402 (1968)). The same policy considerations "are not present in the case of the prevailing defendant." Id. at 418-19 (emphasis added). When the defendant is the prevailing party, district courts may award attorney's fees only "if the plaintiff's 'claim was frivolous, unreasonable, or groundless,' or if 'the plaintiff continued to litigate after it clearly became so.'" CRST Van, 136 S. Ct. at 1646 (quoting Christiansburg Garment, 434 U.S. at 422).
In determining whether to award fees, "it is important that a district court resist the understandable temptation to engage in post hoc reasoning by concluding that, because a plaintiff did not ultimately prevail, his action must have been unreasonable or without foundation. This kind of hindsight logic could discourage all but the most airtight claims, for seldom can a prospective plaintiff be sure of ultimate success." Christiansburg Garment, 434 U.S. at 421-22.
The Tenth Circuit has noted that the standard for a defendant to obtain fees in civil rights litigation is difficult to meet. See Mitchell v. City of Moore, 218 F.3d 1190, 1203 (10th Cir. 2000) ("[R]arely will a case be sufficiently frivolous to justify imposing attorney fees on the plaintiff."). Imposition of fees against a pro se plaintiff is subject to even further caution. See Hughes v. Rowe, 449 U.S. 5, 14-15 (1980) (The "limitations" [*9]  of Christiansburg "apply with special force in actions initiated" by unrepresented plaintiffs).
Although the Court awarded summary judgment to the defendants on the plaintiff's employment claims, the Court did not find that the plaintiff's claims were frivolous, unreasonable, or groundless or that the plaintiff continued litigation after it became clear that her claims were frivolous, unreasonable, or groundless. Rather, the District Judge determined that the plaintiff did not present evidence refuting that she caused a breakdown in the interactive accommodation process, which rendered summary judgment appropriate. The District Judge then denied the defendants' request for an award of fees as a sanction.
The plaintiff's ADA claim survived the dismissal stage. (Doc. 29).1 While the plaintiff was ultimately unsuccessful in prosecuting her claim, and the Court found there to be no material issues of fact, those realities are not equivalent to a determination that plaintiff's claim was frivolous, unreasonable, or groundless. See Christiansburg Garment, 434 U.S. at 421-22.
The District Judge's alternative finding, that dismissal of plaintiff's claim would be appropriate as a sanction for failing to participate in discovery, was premised [*10]  upon plaintiff's failure to participate in discovery rather than upon any finding that her claim was frivolous, unreasonable, or groundless. Moreover, the undersigned notes that the plaintiff had two separate attorneys who initiated the litigation then withdrew. After one had withdrawn, the other attorney filed a response to the motion for summary judgment, asking for additional time to respond. Both attorneys sought and were ultimately granted leave to withdraw from the case, leaving plaintiff pro se. While plaintiff was represented at the time the suit was initiated, her lawyers withdraw from the case and, thereafter, the plaintiff herself took no action and filed no documents on her own to pursue or prolong the litigation, and she did not initiate any appeal or object to the defendant's recovery of costs awarded by the Court Clerk. (See Docket).
Under the circumstances of this case, the undersigned recommends that the District Court find that an award of fees against the plaintiff would not be appropriate.

IV. Conclusion and Notice of Objection Rights
Based on the foregoing, the undersigned recommends that defendant's motion for attorneys' fees (Doc. 56) be denied.
In accordance with [*11]  28 U.S.C. § 636(b) and Fed. R. Civ. P. 72(b), a party may file specific written objections to this report and recommendation within 14 days. Any such objections must be filed on or before September 15, 2021. If specific written objections are timely filed, the District Judge will "determine de novo any part of the magistrate judge's disposition that has been property objected to" and may "accept, reject, or modify the recommended disposition; receive further evidence; or return the matter to the magistrate judge with instructions." Fed. R. Civ. P. 72(b)(3); see also 28 U.S.C. § 636(b)(1).
The Tenth Circuit has adopted a "firm waiver rule," which provides that the failure to make timely objections to the magistrate judge's findings or recommendations waives appellate review of factual and legal questions. United States v. One Parcel of Real Property, 73 F.3d 1057, 1069 (10th Cir. 1996) (citation omitted). Only a timely, specific objection will preserve an issue for de novo review.
DATED this 1st day of September, 2021.
/s/ Christine D. Little
Christine D. Little
United States Magistrate Judge


End of Document

