Webb v. Geo Group
United States District Court for the Central District of California
March 23, 2017, Decided; March 23, 2017, Filed
CV 16-02747-BRO (Ex)

Reporter
2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 235241 *; 2017 WL 11636422
WILLIAM WEBB v. GEO GROUP, INC. ET AL
Subsequent History: Dismissed by Webb v. Geo Grp., Inc., 2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 72923 (C.D. Cal., May 12, 2017)
Counsel:  [*1] Attorneys for Plaintiffs: Not Present.
Attorneys for Defendants: Not Present.
Judges: BEVERLY REID O'CONNELL, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: BEVERLY REID O'CONNELL
Opinion



CIVIL MINUTES - GENERAL

Proceedings: (IN CHAMBERS)

ORDER RE DEFENDANTS' MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT OR, IN THE ALTERNATIVE, PARTIAL SUMMARY JUDGMENT [27]

I. INTRODUCTION
Pending before the Court is Defendants Geo Group, Inc. and Geo Corrections Holdings, Inc.'s (collectively, "Defendants") Motion for Summary Judgment or, in the Alternative, Partial Summary Judgment. (Dkt. No. 27 ("Motion" or "Mot.").) After considering the papers filed in support of and in opposition to the instant Motion and hearing oral argument of counsel, the Court DENIES Defendants' Motion.

II. BACKGROUND

A. Factual Background

1. The Parties
Plaintiff William Webb ("Plaintiff") resides in the State of California. (Dkt. No. 1-1 ("Compl.") ¶ 1.) Defendant Geo Group, Inc. was and is a corporation doing business in the State of California, Los Angeles County. (Compl. ¶ 2.) Defendant Geo Corrections Holdings, Inc. was and is a corporation organized under Florida law, doing business in the State of California, San Bernardino County. (Compl. ¶ 3.) Defendants operate correctional, [*2]  detention and reentry services facilities in countries around the world, including the United States, Australia, United Kingdom, and South Africa. (Compl. ¶ 11.)
2. Employment
On or about February 21, 2012, Defendants hired Plaintiff as a corrections officer at Adelanto Detention Facility (the "Facility"), a detention facility owned and operated by Defendants. (Compl. ¶¶ 11, 14.) At the time of his hiring, Plaintiff completed a pre-employment physical, which included a lung capacity breathing test. (Compl. ¶ 12.) Plaintiff also noted on his medical questionnaire that he has asthma. (Id. ¶ 13.)

3. Pepper Spray Training
In May 2013, Plaintiff was promoted to Sergeant, which necessitated that he complete an additional week of training. (Id. ¶ 17.) Then, in mid-2013, supervisory staff received notice that pepper spray had been approved for use at the Facility, and thus, all sergeants and lieutenants were required to undergo training for its use. (Id.) Plaintiff claims that officers were not required to undergo the training, which consisted of an administration of 10% concentration pepper spray (as compared to 8% concentration spray customarily employed by law enforcement) to the face from [*3]  six inches' distance. (Id.) Upon learning of this training, Plaintiff obtained a note from his doctor which stated that Plaintiff could not be exposed to pepper spray. (Id. ¶ 18.) Plaintiff provided the doctor's note to his supervisor, Lieutenant Salgado. (Id. ¶ 19.) Then, for unrelated reasons, Plaintiff took a leave of absence from work, thereby avoiding the pepper spray training, which occurred during his absence. (Id. ¶ 20.) Plaintiff explains that upon his return, the training was not discussed further. (Id.)

4. The Commissary Incident
In late 2013, Defendants offered Plaintiff a promotion to lieutenant, which Plaintiff allegedly declined "on the grounds that he had not yet mastered his current duties and . . . had not been a sergeant for two years which was a requirement for lieutenant." (Compl. ¶ 22.) Instead, Plaintiff was designated as "acting Lieutenant." (Compl. ¶ 23.) On November 27, 2013, Plaintiff acted as "Watch Commander" in the absence of the designated Watch Commander. (Id. ¶ 24.) In this role, he learned that a particular dorm was under quarantine due to a feared shingles outbreak. (Id.) In the course of addressing the potential outbreak, Plaintiff declined a vendor's [*4]  request that Plaintiff distribute commissary to the inmates. (Id. ¶ 25.) As a result, "detainees in Dorm 3D . . . began to prepare to riot . . . ." (Id. ¶ 27.) After the facility employees calmed down the detainees, Assistant Warden Patricia Love asked Plaintiff why he did not administer the commissary to the detainees in that particular dorm. (Id. ¶ 28.) Plaintiff allegedly explained that "he couldn't because they were understaffed and also . . . there would be no record if he handed out commissary, which could have resulted in a financial discrepancy to Defendants." (Id.) According to Plaintiff, Love told him to refrain from informing vendors of quarantines, and expressed that "Plaintiff would be fired in the event of a riot, and he would never make Lieutenant." (Id. ¶ 29.)

5. Alleged Harassment
Plaintiff claims that from this point on, Love engaged in a pattern of harassing, questioning, and investigating Plaintiff's training and job performance. (Id. ¶ 30.) In March 2014, Love assertedly advised Plaintiff that his pepper spray training was not recorded in his training file; Plaintiff explained that he was excused from the training for medical grounds. (Id. ¶ 31.) Plaintiff provided [*5]  a copy of the initial doctor's note regarding pepper spray training, a second doctor's note, and a third note written by Plaintiff's wife (a licensed respiratory therapist) to Love. (Id. ¶¶ 32-36.) After further administrative exchanges regarding Plaintiff's medical condition, Defendants informed Plaintiff on or about May 8, 2014 that they had investigated his ability to respond to emergency situations, and had determined that his ability was insufficient. (Id. ¶¶ 36-37.) Defendants informed Plaintiff that he would be demoted to a position at lesser pay. (Id. ¶ 38.) Plaintiff asserts that "[a]s a result of Defendants' attempt to force Plaintiff to risk his health and/or his life by undergoing pepper spray training, Plaintiff developed hypertension and extreme anxiety." (Id. ¶ 40.)

6. Leaves of Absence and Termination
Due to the emotional distress Plaintiff allegedly suffered, he took disability leave from work from July 2014 through December 2014. (Id.) According to Plaintiff, he attempted repeatedly to return to work, only to be informed by Defendants that he would not be permitted to work "unless he underwent pepper spray training despite that this training was not necessary for Plaintiff [*6]  to do his job." (Id. ¶ 41.)

B. Procedural Background
Plaintiff filed his original Complaint in the Superior Court of the State of California, County of Los Angeles on March 17, 2016. (See Dkt. No. 1-1 ("Compl.").) In the Complaint, Plaintiff alleges the following claims: (1) Disability Discrimination in Violation of the California Fair Housing and Employment Act ("FEHA"); (2) Failure to Accommodate a Disability in Violation of FEHA; (3) Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process in Violation of FEHA; (4) Retaliation in Violation of FEHA; (5) Wrongful Termination in Violation of FEHA; (6) Wrongful Termination in Violation of Public Policy; (7) Unpaid Wages pursuant to California Labor Code ("Labor Code") sections 218.5, 512, 558, 1194 and 1198; (8) Failure to Pay Overtime Compensation pursuant to Labor Code sections 512, 558, 1194 and 1198; (9) Failure to Pay Missed Meal and Rest Compensation pursuant to Labor Code section 226.7; and (10) Failure to Pay All Wages Due and Owing at Time of Termination pursuant to Labor Code section 203. (See Compl.)
On April 20, 2016, Defendants answered Plaintiff's Complaint. (See Dkt. No. 1-3.) Defendants removed the action to the Central District of California on April 21, 2016. (See Dkt. No. 1 ("Removal").) On December 23, 2016, Defendants moved for summary judgment or, in the alternative, partial summary [*7]  judgment. (See Mot.) On January 30, 2017, the Court granted the parties' joint stipulation to dismiss with prejudice Plaintiff's seventh through tenth causes of action pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 41(a)(1). (Dkt. No. 39.) Then, on February 17, 2017, Plaintiff opposed Defendants' Motion. (See Dkt. No. 43.) Plaintiff also filed his Response to Statement of Undisputed Facts with his Opposition. (See Dkt. No. 44 ("RSUF").) Plaintiff filed a corrected version of his Opposition and supporting declarations on February 21, 2017.1 (Dkt. No. 45 ("Opp'n").) Lastly, on February 27, 2017, Defendants replied in support of their Motion. (Dkt. No. 47 ("Reply").) Defendants attached evidentiary objections to their Reply. (See Dkt. Nos. 47-2-47-8 ("Evid. Objs.").)

III. EVIDENTIARY OBJECTIONS
"In motions for summary judgment with numerous objections, it is often unnecessary and impractical for a court to methodically scrutinize each objection and give a full analysis of each argument raised." Doe v. Starbucks, Inc., No. 08-0582, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 118878, 2009 WL 5183773, at *1 (C.D. Cal. Dec. 18, 2009). "This is especially true when many of the objections are boilerplate recitations of evidentiary principles or blanket objections without analysis applied to specific items of evidence." Id.; see also Stonefire Grill, Inc. v. FGF Brands, Inc., 987 F. Supp. 2d 1023, 1033 (C.D. Cal. 2013) (explaining that "the Court will not [*8]  scrutinize each objection and give a full analysis of identical objections raised as to each fact").
Defendants separately filed a number of objections to Plaintiffs' evidence. (See Evid. Objs.) The Court addresses the relevant objections here. To the extent the Court does not explicitly address an objection, that objection is OVERRULED as moot because the Court does not rely upon the particular underlying evidence in deciding Defendants' Motion.
Generally, the Court OVERRULES Defendants' objections on "prejudice" grounds. The evidence to which Defendants object on prejudice grounds may be prejudicial to Defendants' position; however, the evidence is not unduly prejudicial because its probative value is not substantially outweighed by a danger of one or more of the following: unfair prejudice, confusing the issues, misleading the jury, undue delay, wasting time, or needlessly presenting cumulative evidence. See Fed. R. Evid. 403.

A. William Webb's Deposition
Defendants object to William Webb's deposition, (Dkt. No. 43-1, Ex. 9 ("Webb Dep.")), on relevance, speculation, foundation/personal knowledge, improper opinion, and best evidence grounds. (See Dkt. No. 47-8 at 1-2.) Defendants excerpt a portion of [*9]  Webb's deposition, namely page 166, lines 6 through 21.

1. Relevance
Evidence is relevant if it has any tendency to make a fact of consequence in determining the action more or less probable than it would be without the evidence. See Fed. R. Evid. 401. Relevant evidence is generally admissible, see Fed. R. Evid. 402, and the threshold for showing relevance is quite low, see Daubert v. Merrill Dow Pharm., Inc., 509 U.S. 579, 587 (1993). The Court OVERRULES Defendants' relevance objection; the Court considers only relevant evidence in deciding this Motion, and Webb's testimony regarding his medical condition has a tendency to make facts of consequence regarding Plaintiff's claims related to his medical condition more or less probable.

2. Speculation, Foundation, Personal Knowledge, and Improper Opinion
"A witness may testify to a matter only if evidence is introduced sufficient to support a finding that the witness has personal knowledge of the matter. Evidence to prove personal knowledge may consist of the witness's own testimony." Fed. R. Evid. 602. The Court OVERRULES Defendants' objections on speculation, foundation, personal knowledge, and improper opinion grounds because Webb's testimony and separately filed declaration establish that he has personal knowledge and foundation regarding his own [*10]  medical condition, his medications, and how his own body reacts to exposure to certain substances. Webb does not need specialized knowledge to state his personal experience with asthma or exacerbation through encapsulants. See Fed. R. Evid. 701.

3. Best Evidence Rule
The best evidence rule applies where a party seeks to prove the contents of a writing, and it generally requires that the party produce the writing itself. See Fed. R. Evid. 1002. Where the rule applies, the proponent must produce the original (or a duplicate, see Fed. R. Evid. 1003), or explain its absence. United States v. Bennett, 363 F.3d 947, 953 (9th Cir. 2004). The Court cannot discern any basis for Defendants' objection; Defendants fail to identify which document's contents Plaintiff allegedly seeks to prove. Accordingly, the Court OVERRULES Defendants' objection on best evidence grounds.

B. William Webb's Declaration
Defendants also object to Webb's Declaration, (Dkt. No. 43-2) for the following reasons: (1) lack of signature; (2) relevance; (3) prejudice; (4) speculation; (5) foundation/personal knowledge; (6) hearsay; (7) best evidence; (8) sham declaration; and, (9) improper opinion, (see Dkt. No. 47-2).

1. Signature
Defendants argue that Plaintiff's entire declaration is invalid for lack of proper signature, citing to Local Rule 5-4.3.4(a)(3). Plaintiff [*11]  filed a properly-signed copy2 of Webb's Declaration after the hearing on this matter, which the Court, in its discretion, will consider. (See Dkt. No. 52-1 ("Webb Decl.").) Thus, the Court OVERRULES Defendant's objection to exclude Webb's Declaration on this technical basis.

2. Relevance
The Court OVERRULES Defendants' objections on relevance grounds. The paragraphs to which Defendants object contain assertions that have a tendency to make facts of consequence in this action more or less probable. Moreover, the Court considers only the relevant evidence in deciding this Motion.

3. Sham Declaration
The Court did not rely upon Webb's declaration or deposition testimony regarding his leave requests in deciding this Motion. Accordingly, the Court OVERRULES as moot Defendants' objection based upon the sham affidavit rule.

4. Speculation, Foundation, Personal Knowledge, and Improper Opinion
To the extent the Court relies upon certain evidence in Webb's declaration, the Court OVERRULES Defendants' objections on speculation, foundation, personal knowledge, and improper opinion grounds because Webb has personal knowledge and foundation regarding his own medical condition, his medications, [*12]  his "problem with pepper spray," the Adelanto Facility, staffing, use of OC spray at the Facility, and his interactions with Defendants' employees. Webb attests that he has personal knowledge of the facts upon which he makes his declaration and that he worked at the Adelanto Detention Center. (See Webb Decl. ¶¶ 1-2.) Webb does not need specialized knowledge or education to state his personal experience with asthma or exacerbation through encapsulants. And Plaintiff may, based upon his personal knowledge of the Adelanto Facility, attest to relevant facts.
The Court OVERRULES as moot Defendants' objections on speculation, foundation, personal knowledge, and improper opinion grounds with respect to evidence upon which the Court did not rely in deciding this Motion.

5. Hearsay and Best Evidence
The Court OVERRULES as moot Defendants' objection on hearsay and best evidence grounds to Webb's restatement of his conversation with Dr. Radlauer and/or Ms. Webb's report in Paragraph 17. The Court does not rely upon this particular restatement of Dr. Radlauer's or Ms. Webb's opinions in deciding this Motion.

C. Marc Appell's Declaration
Defendants object to Appell's Declaration, (Dkt. No. 45-1 ("Appell [*13]  Decl.")), on relevance, foundation/personal knowledge, grounds. (See Dkt. No. 47-3.) The Court OVERRULES Defendants' objections to Paragraphs 4 and 5 of Appell's Declaration. Appell attests that he is an attorney representing Plaintiff Webb and that he makes his declaration based upon personal knowledge. Further, Appell has personal knowledge of the Request for Production his office propounded and the response they received from Defendants. (See Appell Decl. ¶ 2-4.) Similarly, Appell explains the basis of his knowledge regarding Bowdre's evaluation. (See Appell Decl. ¶ 5, 8.) The Court is mindful that Plaintiff untimely filed Holly Webb's deposition transcript; however, at this time the Court declines to strike Holly Webb's deposition on this technical ground.

D. George Neal's Declaration
Defendants object to George Neal's Declaration, (Dkt. No. 45-3 ("Neal Decl.")), on relevance, prejudice, speculation, foundation, and improper opinion grounds. (See Dkt. No. 47-4.) The Court considers only the relevant evidence in deciding this Motion. Accordingly, the Court OVERRULES Defendants' objection on relevance grounds.
Neal attests that he has personal knowledge of the facts based upon which [*14]  he makes his declaration and that he worked in the control center at Adelanto Detention Center. (See Neal Decl. ¶¶ 1, 2, 4.) He has sufficiently established his personal knowledge and foundation for his opinion; his opinions represent his own observations based upon personal experience at the Adelanto facility—no specialized knowledge or experience is necessary to form such an opinion. Accordingly, the Court OVERRULES Defendants' objections on speculation, foundation, and improper opinion grounds.

E. Jamal O'Kelly's Declaration
Defendants object to O'Kelly's declaration, (Dkt. No. 45-2 ("O'Kelly Decl.")), on prejudice, relevance, speculation, foundation/personal knowledge, improper opinion, and hearsay grounds, (see Dkt. No. 47-5). The Court OVERRULES as moot Defendants' objections to paragraphs 4 and 5 of O'Kelly's Declaration.
The Court OVERRULES Defendants' evidentiary objections on speculation, foundation, personal knowledge, and improper opinion grounds to paragraphs 9-12, and 15-16 of O'Kelly Declaration. O'Kelly attests that he worked as a training officer for Defendants, was responsible for the instruction and training of a variety of different roles, and is intimately familiar [*15]  with Defendants' use of force policies as well as the use of chemical agents. (See O'Kelly Decl. ¶¶ 1-3.) This attestation suffices to establish the basis of his personal knowledge on these matters. Furthermore, the Court finds that O'Kelly's opinions in paragraph 15 regarding the feasibility of accessing or carrying a respiratory mask do not constitute attempts at expert opinion regarding Webb's medical condition; rather, these opinions are reasonably based upon O'Kelly's personal knowledge of the Facility, and do not require specialized knowledge.
The Court also OVERRULES Defendants' objection on relevance grounds because O'Kelly's statements have a tendency to make facts of consequence to this Motion more or less probable.

F. Gerald Radlauer's Declaration
Defendants also object to Dr. Radlauer's declaration, (Dkt. No. 43-3 ("Radlauer Decl.")), on prejudice, relevance, speculation foundation/personal knowledge, improper opinion, and hearsay grounds, (see Dkt. No. 47-6).

1. Foundation and Personal Knowledge
The Court OVERRULES Defendants' foundation/personal knowledge objection to Paragraphs 3-5 of Radlauer's declaration. Dr. Radlauer attests that he has been responsible for Webb's medical [*16]  care and treatment for several years, including the time period pertinent to this action. (Radlauer Decl. ¶¶ 1-2.) Radlauer's attestation suffices to establish his foundation and knowledge relating to the assertions he makes.

2. Hearsay
Rules 801 and 802 of the Federal Rules of Evidence generally prohibit admission of statements made out of court that are being offered to prove the truth of the matter asserted. Fed. R. Evid. 801,802. Webb's assertions regarding his medical conditions (as recounted by Dr. Radlauer) are excepted from the hearsay rule under Rule 803(4). Accordingly, Defendants' hearsay objection to Webb's statements made for or pertinent to medical diagnosis or treatment are OVERRULED. Further, the Court does not rely upon Radlauer's restatement of Geo's assertions; thus, Defendants' hearsay objection to this particular evidence is OVERRULED as moot.

G. Porschea Bowdre's Deposition
The Court considered only relevant evidence in deciding this Motion. Bowdre's testimony is relevant because it has a tendency to make facts related to Plaintiff's retaliation claim more or less probable. Accordingly, the Court OVERRULES Defendants' objection on relevance grounds.
Further, Bowdre worked at the Facility at the relevant time and personally interacted with [*17]  Warden Clark—this suffices to establish her personal knowledge and the foundation of her testimony. (See Bowdre Dep. at 25:1-30:25.) Accordingly, the Court OVERRULES Defendants objections on knowledge/foundation grounds.
Lastly, to the extent Bowdre testifies regarding Warden Clark's statements, these statements are excluded from the hearsay rule as opposing party statements. Clark was acting in the course of his employment as Warden at Defendants' Facility at the time he made the alleged statements, and Plaintiff offers Clark's statements into evidence. Accordingly, the Court OVERRULES Defendants' hearsay objection to Bowdre's testimony. See Fed. R. Evid. 801(d)(2)(D).

H. Warden Janecka's Declaration
Plaintiff objects to Janecka's Declaration on foundation and lack of personal knowledge grounds. (See RSUF ¶ 7 ("Warden Janecka does not know if supervisors were required to be trained . . . .").) Janecka attests that he is employed at the Adelanto Facility, and as warden thereof, is familiar with policies and procedures at the Facility. (See Janecka Decl. ¶¶ 1-3.) This attestation suffices to establish his personal knowledge and foundation for his declaration regarding the requirements of 0C-certification. Accordingly, [*18]  the Court OVERRULES Plaintiff's evidentiary objections on foundation/lack of personal knowledge grounds.

IV. LEGAL STANDARD
Summary judgment is appropriate when, after adequate discovery, the evidence demonstrates that there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56. A disputed fact is material where its resolution might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law. Anderson v. Liberty Lobby Inc., 477 U.S. 242,248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). An issue is genuine if the evidence is sufficient for a reasonable jury to return a verdict for the non-moving party. Id. The moving party bears the initial burden of establishing the absence of a genuine issue of material fact. Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323-24, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). The moving party may satisfy that burden by showing "that there is an absence of evidence to support the non-moving party's case." Id. at 325.
Once the moving party has met its burden, the non-moving party "must do more than simply show that there is some metaphysical doubt as to the material facts." Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986). Rather, the non-moving party must go beyond the pleadings and identify specific facts that show a genuine issue for trial. Id. at 587. Only genuine disputes over facts that might affect the outcome of the lawsuit will properly preclude the [*19]  entry of summary judgment. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 248; see also Arpin v. Santa Clara Valley Transp. Agency, 261 F.3d 912, 919 (9th Cir. 2001) (holding that the non-moving party must present specific evidence from which a reasonable jury could return a verdict in its favor). A genuine issue of material fact must be more than a scintilla of evidence, or evidence that is merely colorable or not significantly probative. Addisu v. Fred Meyer, 198 F.3d 1130, 1134 (9th Cir. 2000).
A court may consider the pleadings, discovery, and disclosure materials, as well as any affidavits on file. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(2). Where the moving party's version of events differs from the non-moving party's version, a court must view the facts and draw reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to the non-moving party. Scott v. Harris, 550 U.S. 372, 378, 127 S. Ct. 1769, 167 L. Ed. 2d 686 (2007). Although a court may rely on materials in the record that neither party cited, it need only consider cited materials. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(3). The district court need not comb the record looking for other evidence. Carmen v. San Francisco Unified Sch. Dist., 237 F.3d 1026, 1029 (9th Cir. 2001). Thus, a court may properly rely on the non-moving party to identify specifically the evidence that precludes summary judgment. Keenan v. Allan, 91 F.3d 1275, 1279 (9th Cir. 1996).
Finally, the evidence presented by the parties must be admissible. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e). Conclusory or speculative testimony in affidavits and moving papers is insufficient to raise a genuine issue of fact and defeat summary judgment. Thornhill's Publ'g Co. v. GTE Corp., 594 F.2d 730, 738 (9th Cir. 1979). Conversely, a genuine dispute over [*20]  a material fact exists if there is sufficient evidence supporting the claimed factual dispute, requiring a judge or jury to resolve the differing versions of the truth. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 253.

V. DISCUSSION
"California has adopted the three-stage burden-shifting test established by the United States Supreme Court for trying claims of discrimination." Guz v. Bechtel Nat. Inc., 24 Cal. 4th 317, 354, 100 Cal. Rptr. 2d 352, 8 P.3d 1089 (2000). The first stage of the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting test3 places the initial burden on the plaintiff to establish a prima facie case for discrimination, retaliation, or wrongful termination. Cruz, 24 Cal. 4th at 354. If the plaintiff meets this burden, a presumption of discrimination, retaliation, or wrongful termination arises. Id. at 355. In the second stage, the burden shifts to the defendant to rebut the presumption. Id. The defendant can rebut the presumption by producing evidence "sufficient to raise a genuine issue of fact . . . that its action was taken for a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason." Id. at 355-56 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). If the defendant offers a legitimate, nondiscriminatory justification, "the presumption of discrimination disappears." Id. at 356.
The burden then shifts to Defendants to proffer evidence that [*21]  Plaintiff was terminated for a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason. See Harris v. City of Santa Monica, 56 Cal. 4th 203, 214, 152 Cal. Rptr. 3d 392, 294 P.3d 49 (Cal. 2013). "Under FEHA, defendant's true reasons, 'if nondiscriminatory, . . need not necessarily have been wise or correct . . . While the objective soundness of an employer's proffered reasons supports their credibility, the ultimate issue is simply whether the employer acted with a motive to discriminate illegally." Day v. Sears Holdings Corp., 930 F. Supp. 2d 1146, 1169 (C.D. Cal. 2013) (emphasis in original) (quoting Guz, 24 Cal. 4th at 358). Thus, legitimate reasons are those that are, on their face, unrelated to bias against a protected class and, if true, would prevent a finding of discrimination. Id.
Defendants argue that: (1) Plaintiff fails to establish a prima facie case for disability discrimination under FEHA because Plaintiff cannot demonstrate that he is able to perform the essential duties of an officer or sergeant; and, (2) Defendants have articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for their employment actions. Defendants also request that the Court grant summary judgment as to Plaintiff's claims for punitive damages. The Court will address each of Defendants' arguments in turn.

A. Disability Discrimination Under FEHA
In order to prevail on his claim for disability discrimination under the [*22]  FEHA, Plaintiff must show that he: (1) suffered from a disability,4 (2) was otherwise qualified to do his job, and (3) was subjected to adverse employment action because of his disability. Arteaga v. Brink's, Inc., 163 Cal. App. 4th 327, 344-45, 77 Cal. Rptr. 3d 654 (Cal. Ct. App. 2008). However, "[w]hen an employer moves for summary judgment, . . . 'the burden is reversed . . . because the defendant who seeks summary judgment bears the initial burden."' Lucent Techs., 642 F.3d at 745 (citing Hanson v. Lucky Stores, Inc., 74 Cal. App. 4th 215, 223, 87 Cal. Rptr. 2d 487 (Cal. Ct. App. 1999) (internal quotation marks omitted)). Thus, "[t]o prevail on summary judgment, [the employer is] required to show either that (1) plaintiff could not establish one of the elements of [the] FEHA claim or (2) there was a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its decision to terminate plaintiff's employment." Avila v. Cont'l Airlines, Inc., 165 Cal. App. 4th 1237, 1247, 82 Cal. Rptr. 3d 440 (Cal. Ct. App. 2008).

1. Qualifications/Essential Job Functions
The parties dispute whether Plaintiff can complete the essential duties of the officer and/or sergeant roles. Defendants claim that Plaintiff cannot meet his evidentiary burden with respect to his first claim because "Webb could not perform the essential functions of his job with or without an accommodation . . . ." (Mot. at 16.) The Court addresses the Parties' arguments in turn.

a. Sergeants' Job Duties Include Responding to Situations Involving Chemical Agents
The undisputed [*23]  evidence shows that sergeants at the Facility are charged with security/control-related functions, including responding to emergencies and situations that may involve the use of chemical agents and firearms to control detainees. (See RSUF ¶ 4.) Plaintiff claims that the "reference to chemical agents was added to the job description when their use was implemented in July 2013," (see RSUF ¶ 6); however, it remains undisputed that at least as of July 2013, use of chemical agents was enumerated in the job responsibilities. Further, Defendants offer evidence that sergeants are required to be certified in the proper use of chemical agents such as pepper spray. (See RSUF 6.)
Plaintiff argues that exposure to pepper spray is not an essential function of the job. (See Opp'n at 9.) Plaintiff maintains that "nowhere in the job descriptions of detention officer or sergeant does it say that exposure to pepper spray is an essential function of the job." (Opp'n at 9 (citing RSUF ¶ 88).) Plaintiff notes that the essential job functions "do not appear in any of Defendants' written materials, including the job descriptions." (See Opp'n at 11 (citing RSUF ¶¶ 86-89).) However, Plaintiff also claims that [*24]  "[t]he reference to chemical agents was added to the job description when their use was implemented in July 2013." (RSUF ¶ 4 (emphasis added).)
While Plaintiff's evidence suffices to establish that the job description of sergeants and officers does not include the words "ability to use pepper spray," the Court finds that Plaintiff fails to raise a triable issue regarding whether "responding to emergencies and situations that may involve the use of chemical agents and firearms to control detainees" is enumerated in the job description for sergeants.

b. OC Spray Certification
Plaintiff claims that the certification requirement was implemented sometime after Webb was promoted to sergeant; this nuance regarding timing does not create a dispute with respect to the fact that sergeants were required to be certified in the use of OC-spray during the time that Webb worked at the Facility. (See RSUF ¶ 6.) A genuine issue of material fact exists, however, with respect to whether certification must include a direct spray of OC to the face. Defendants offer Warden Janecka's Declaration to support their position that a direct spray to the face is required in the initial OC-spray certification process. [*25]  (See SUF ¶ 10.) Plaintiff responds with Jamal O'Kelly's Declaration, in which O'Kelly attests that "[d]uring the entire time [O'Kelly] worked for GEO, there was never any written protocol or procedure as to the manner in which an employee would be trained in the use and handling of OC . . . . There are several methods which are typically used to instruct as to these effects . . . ." (O'Kelly Decl. ¶¶ 9-10.)
This issue is genuine because viewing the evidence in a light favorable to Plaintiff, a factfinder could reasonably conclude that Plaintiff could not tolerate a direct spray of OC-spray to the face, but could tolerate alternate forms of OC training. Based on that conclusion, a reasonable factfinder could also infer that Plaintiff was capable of performing a central requirement at issue: the OC-spray training. The resolution of the issue of the essential OC-spray training mechanism may impact whether Plaintiff was capable of completing essential job functions as they related to OC-spray training.

c. Plaintiff's Ability to Tolerate Exposure to OC Spray
Related to the issue regarding whether Plaintiff can tolerate alternative OC certification methods is the broader issue of Plaintiff's [*26]  tolerance to exposure to chemical agents. The Parties agree5 that "[o]n December 13, 2013, Webb submitted a doctor's note dated July 18, 2013. The note, in its entirety, said that Webb has severe asthma and should not be exposed to pepper spray.' (RSUF ¶ 27.) Additionally, Defendants offer undisputed evidence that "[i]t would be "impossible to safely assess what level of chemical exposure William would be able to endure. Any attempt to expose him directly to a chemical restraint would risk an exacerbation of asthma that could be permanently damaging or life threatening." (See RSUF ¶ 38.) Plaintiff also does not dispute the responses Dr. Radlauer entered on the Request for Medical Information for William Webb. (See RSUF ¶ 34; see also Dkt. No. 27-4 ("Aldape Decl."), Ex. 6 ("Medical Info Request").)
Dr. Radlauer completed the Medical Info Request, which reflects Dr. Radlauer's opinion that pepper spray exposure could cause "life threatening" complications with Webb's asthma condition. (See Medical Info Request at 1.) Furthermore, Dr. Radlauer marked, in response to the questionnaire regarding "Primary Dut[y] and Responsibilit[y]" No. 14 that Plaintiff cannot "[r]espond to emergencies [*27]  including escapes, calls for help, and situations requiring first aid, use of force or deadly force, and the potential use of chemical agents and firearms to control detainees." (See Medical Info Request at 2.) Dr. Radlauer also wrote into that particular question-box the following: "pepper spray issue." (Id.) Lastly, Dr. Radlauer indicated that "the need for any restriction or limitation" regarding the "pepper spray issue" in job duty/responsibility No. 14 would last a "lifetime." (See Medical Info Request at 3.)
However, Plaintiff claims that Dr. Radlauer "thought this form was asking only about the training involving a blast to the face. [Dr. Radlauer] never meant that Webb could not do his job or even be around pepper spray." (Id.) In support of this position, Plaintiff offers Dr. Radlauer's Declaration as evidence that Dr. Radlauer "only ever refer[ed] [in his medical evaluations] to Webb's ability to take a blast to the face. [Radlauer] never meant to imply that Webb could not do the job." (See Opp'n at 12 (citing Radlauer Decl. ¶¶ 3-5).) Plaintiff also offers evidence to show that "at the very least, Webb could do the essential functions of his job with a respirator, and a respirator [*28]  would not interfere with Webb doing the job." (Opp'n at 12 (citing RSUF ¶ 124; Janecka Dep. at 128:2-12).)
Because genuine issues of material fact exist with respect to Plaintiffs ability to tolerate exposure to OC spray, the proposed certification methods, and whether Plaintiff could perform the essential functions of the position with reasonable accommodation, Defendants are not entitled to summary judgment with respect to Plaintiff's discrimination claimbased upon on this particular ground.

2. Defendants' Reasons for Termination
Although summary judgment is inappropriate based upon the first prong (regarding the elements of the discrimination claim), the Court also considers whether Defendants had "a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for [their] decision to terminate [P]laMtiff's employment." See Avila, 165 Cal. App. 4th at 1237. Defendants claim that "[e]ven assuming Webb could demonstrate a prima facie case, GEO's burden is slight — it need only articulate a legitimate business reason for the alleged adverse employment action." (Mot at 17 (citing Caldwell v. Paramount Unified Sch. Dist., 41 Cal. App. 4th 189, 201, 48 Cal. Rptr. 2d 448 (Cal. Ct. App. 1995).) To demonstrate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the decision to terminate Webb, Defendants "must show that the procedure by which [he] was terminated was [*29]  validly and fairly devised and administered to serve a legitimate business purpose." Lucent Techs., 642 F.3d at 745-46 (citing Hanson, 74 Cal. App. 4th at 223 (internal quotation marks omitted)). Under the FEHA, employers are afforded an inability to perform defense. Id. (citing Green v. State, 42 Cal. 4th 254, 64 Cal. Rptr. 3d 390, 165 P.3d 118 (Cal. 2007); Cal. Code Regs. tit. 2 § 7293.8(b)).

a. Safety Risk to Self, Coworkers, and Detainees
Defendants also argue that Plaintiff's "inability to respond to all emergencies because of the possibility of coming into contact with OC-spray was a clear and obvious risk to the safety of his co-workers and to detainees housed in GEO's facility." (Mot. at 17 (citing UF 50).) Under California Government Code Section 12940(a)(1), an employer is not prohibited from refusing to hire or discharging an employee with a physical disability, "where the employee, because of his or her physical or mental disability, . . . cannot perform [the essential job] duties in a manner that would not endanger his or her health or safety or the health or safety of others even with reasonable accommodations." Further, Under Section 12940(a)(2), an employer is not prohibited from refusing to hire or discharging an employee who "because of the employee's medical condition . . . cannot perform [the essential job duties] in a manner that would not endanger the employee's health or safety or the health or safety [*30]  of others even with reasonable accommodations."
Defendants offer undisputed evidence that a licensed respiratory therapist, Plaintiff's wife, stated "[i]t would be "impossible to safely assess what level of chemical exposure William would be able to endure. Any attempt to expose him directly to a chemical restraint would risk an exacerbation of asthma that could be permanently damaging or life threatening." (See RSUF ¶ 38.) Similarly undisputed is Defendants' evidence that "Ms. Webb further explained that 'it is imperative that William avoids exposure to chemical agents designed to deter people by irritating the respiratory tract and mucous membranes.'" (See RSUF ¶ 39; see also Dkt. No. 27-4, Ex. 7 ("Therapist Report").)
Additionally, Defendants offer evidence that their staff relied upon the expert reports Plaintiff provided. (See Bowen Decl. ¶ 5 ("I reviewed the medical documentation submitted by Webb, and I became concerned about his ability to perform the essential functions of his job.").) Specifically, Defendants claim that their evidence shows that
In light of the new information provided by Webb's physician and his wife, GEO determined that (1) Webb could not perform the essential [*31]  functions of the role of Sergeant, which included responding to emergencies and potential OC exposure, (2) Webb's inability to respond to emergencies presented a safety risk to his co-workers and the detainees housed at Adelanto, and (3) there was no way that GEO could guarantee that Webb would not come into contact with OC (perhaps in a life-threatening way) if he remained in his position.
(See SUF ¶ 40.) Defendants' inferences are reasonably supported by Ms. Webb and Dr. Radlauer's underlying reports.
Plaintiff disputes that (1) this information was new to Defendants, (2) Webb could not perform the essential functions of his job, and (3) this condition presented a safety risk to Webb's co-workers. (See RSUF ¶ 40.) In support of his position, Plaintiff cites admissible excerpts from Warden Janecka's deposition, (Mt. No. 45-1, Ex. 7 ("Janecka Dep.")), as well as O'Kelly's declaration. Specifically, Plaintiff refers the Court to Janecka's testimony regarding sergeants' access to respirators and the time it typically takes to employ OC spray. (See Janecka Dep. at 123:2-128:12.) Plaintiff's evidence supports a reasonable inference that he had access to respirators, could have carried one [*32]  on his person, and that under certain circumstances Plaintiff could have sufficient time to put on a respirator prior to use of OC spray.
However, Plaintiffs evidence fails to create a triable issue with respect to Defendants' evidence that (1) exposure to OC spray would risk an exacerbation of his asthma, (2) it would be difficult or impossible to safely assess what level of OC spray exposure Plaintiff could endure, and (3) a respiratory therapist opined that it was imperative that Plaintiff avoid exposure to OC spray. If Plaintiffs tolerance to OC spray could not safely be assessed and OC spray could be deployed without notice then Plaintiff's continued employment at Defendants' Facility could constitute a safety risk to Plaintiff himself; as well as others around him who depended upon him to ensure safety and security during situations involving the use of OC spray. The Court finds that Defendants have met their burden of demonstrating a legitimate ground for termination based upon uncontested medical opinions and a respiratory therapist's evaluation of Plaintiffs condition which raise legitimate safety concerns to both Plaintiff's and other staff members' safety.

b. Failure to Provide [*33]  Updated Medical Information
Defendants also contend that they had a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason to terminate Plaintiffs employment because he refused to provide medical documentation reflecting his ability to return to work as a detention officer. (See Mot. at 17.) The Parties agree6 that "[o]n December 13, 2013, Webb submitted a doctor's note dated July 18, 2013. The note, in its entirety, said that Webb 'has severe asthma and should not be exposed to pepper spray.'" (RSUF ¶ 27.) It is also undisputed that "Love asked Webb several times to submit [Dr. Radlauer's] notes." (See RSUF ¶ 27.)
However, the Parties dispute whether Defendants requested additional information regarding "how much OC exposure Webb could tolerate" and what the "potential consequences of exposure" could be to Webb. (See RSUF ¶ 28.) Defendants offer Love's Declaration, in which Assistant Warden ("AW") Love explains that "[g]iven that the July 18, 2013 doctor's note did not explain how much OC exposure Webb could tolerate or address the potential consequences of exposure, I requested that Webb provide more information." (See Dkt. No. 27-3 ("Love Decl.") ¶ 25.) Love also attests that "[i]n or about April [*34]  2014, [she] followed up with Webb to ask what his physician considered `direct contact' with OC . . . . [Love] also asked for documentation regarding the possible impact to Webb's health if he were ever exposed to OC." (See Love Decl. ¶ 26.) Defendants also attach the Medical Info Request they asked Webb's doctor to complete. (See RSUF ¶¶ 33-34; see also Medical Info Request at 2.)
As explained above, Dr. Radlauer opined that pepper spray exposure could cause "life threatening" complications with Webb's asthma condition, (see Medical Info Request at 1), and marked that Plaintiff cannot "[r]espond to emergencies including escapes, calls for help, and situations requiring first aid, use of force or deadly force, and the potential use of chemical agents and firearms to control detainees," (see Medical Info Request at 2). Plaintiff does not dispute the responses Dr. Radlauer entered on the Medical Info Request. (See RSUF ¶ 34.) But Plaintiff claims that Dr. Radlauer "thought this form was asking only about the training involving a blast to the face. [Dr. Radlauer] never meant that Webb could not do his job or even be around pepper spray." (Id.) Plaintiff offers no evidence to demonstrate [*35]  that Dr. Radlauer's alleged misunderstanding of the Medical Info Request was ever communicated to Defendants prior to Plaintiff's termination.
Also undisputed is the fact that "[o]n April 20, 2015, GEO sent Webb another letter from Cheryl Nelson (Director of Operations for the Western Region) and again offered to work with him to identify a position for which he was qualified that did not risk OC exposure." (Id. ¶ 61; see also Dkt. No. 27-2, Ex. C ("April 2015 Letter").) Plaintiff also does not dispute Defendants' evidence that:
Nelson noted that GEO had not received documentation from Webb's doctor regarding Webb's ability to return to work given his diagnosis of severe anxiety. Further, Nelson reiterated that GEO possessed documentation from Webb's doctor regarding his 'inability to be exposed to pepper spray,' noting that 'a number of documents that you provided warn of the serious life threatening consequences should you be exposed to pepper spray.'7
(RSUF ¶ 62.) The April 2015 Letter offered by Defendants reflects Defendants' comprehensive request for: (1) medical information regarding Plaintiff's anxiety; (2) updated medical information regarding Plaintiff's ability to perform his [*36]  job duties; and, (3) any suggested positions that may serve as accommodation to Plaintiff (See Nelson Letter at 1-3.) Plaintiff admits that he "provided no documentation addressing whether he was medically able to return to work in light of his anxiety diagnosis." (See RSUF ¶ 60.)
Defendants offer further uncontested evidence that they contacted Plaintiff again in June 25, 2015. (See RSUF ¶ 65; Dkt. No. 27-2, Ex. D ("June 2015 Letter").) In the June 2015 Letter, Defendants reiterate their request that Plaintiff provide updated "medical documentation addressing [his] ability to perform the functions of [his] job with or without reasonable accommodation." (See June 2015 Letter at 1.) Defendants offer evidence that Webb responded to the June 2015 Letter but did not provide "the requested medical documentation that would clarify, describe, or explain his ability to be exposed to OC spray." (See RSUF ¶ 66; see also Dkt. No. 27-2, Ex. 28.)
Plaintiff offers his own declaration that "[n]ot once was [Webb] ever asked by anyone at Geo 'how much exposure, if any was safe' for [him]." (Dkt. No. 43-2 ("Webb. Decl.") ¶ 12.) Plaintiff also relies on his declaration in support of his position [*37]  that "[he] responded to the [June 2015 Letter]" and "no clarification was requested." (See id.) Plaintiff's self-serving declaration, which focuses on a particular phrasing of ("how much exposure, if any was safe") is insufficient to create a triable issue of fact with respect to Defendants' requests for additional information. Firstly, the Ninth Circuit has consistently held that uncorroborated, self-serving declarations are insufficient to create triable issues of fact. See Villiarirno v. Aloha Island Air, Inc., 281 F.3d 1054, 1061 (9th Cir. 2002). More importantly, Webb's attestation that Defendant did not phrase the request using the particular words Plaintiff quotes does not reasonably suffice to create a genuine dispute regarding Defendants' evidence that they requested additional information regarding his medical condition.8
The Court finds that Defendants have met their burden to articulate legitimate reasons for Plaintiffs termination. The undisputed evidence before the Court shows that that OC certification was required of all officers and sergeants-not only of Plaintiff (See RSUF ¶ 6.) Further, Defendants undisputed evidence-the Therapist Report regarding Plaintiffs condition, as well as the Medical Info Request Dr. Radlauer filled and returned [*38]  to Defendants—demonstrates that Defendants received and considered professional opinions regarding Plaintiff's medical condition. The plain language of these opinions indicated Plaintiff could not be "exposed" to pepper spray, and that he was unable to perform item No. 14 on the Medical Info Request. Furthermore, Plaintiff offers no evidence to counter Defendants' evidence that Cheryl Nelson repeatedly contacted him to request information regarding his ability to perform his job duties.
Defendants have provided ample evidence that: (1) Plaintiffs own medical experts opined that Plaintiffs medical condition placed him at risk to potentially "life threatening" complications upon "exposure" to OC spray; and, (2) Plaintiff failed to communicate any different, more precise, or otherwise clarifying information regarding his ability to be exposed to OC spray to Defendants. Plaintiff's assertion at this time that both Dr. Radlauer and Ms. Webb's opinions were not intended to be understood according to their plain language, but rather required an unspoken inference that the opinions pertained only to "direct spray to the face" fails to undermine Defendants' decision-making at the time of termination [*39]  because Plaintiff, Ms. Webb, and Dr. Radlauer failed to communicate any such clarification of the professional opinions to Defendants. Thus, the presumption of unlawful discrimination "simply drops out of the picture," and Plaintiff bears the ultimate burden of persuading the Court that the stated reason for the termination was false and the true reason for the termination was unlawful discrimination on the basis of his disability. See Bradley v. Harcourt, Brace & Co., 104 F.3d 267, 270 (9th Cir. 1996).

3. Pretext
Once a plaintiff has established a prima facie case and the employer has offered legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons as to why it made its employment decisions, the "presumption of unlawful discrimination simply drops out of the picture." Wallis v. J.R. Simplot Co., 26 F.3d 885, 889 (9th Cir. 1994) (internal quotation marks omitted). In order to survive summary judgment, Plaintiff "must raise a genuine factual issue as to whether the articulated reason was a mere pretext for discrimination." Phillips v. PacifiCorp, 304 F. App'x 527, 530 (9th Cir. 2008).
To establish pretext, a plaintiff "must demonstrate . . . weaknesses, implausibilities, inconsistencies, incoherencies, or contradictions in the employer's proffered legitimate reasons . . . ." Hooker v. Parker Hannifin Corp., 548 F. App'x 368, 370 (9th Cir. 2013) (quoting Hersant v. Dep't of Soc. Servs., 57 Cal. App. 4th 997, 1005 (1997)). "Very little" direct evidence of discriminatory motive is sufficient to establish pretext; but if circumstantial [*40]  evidence is offered, such evidence must be "specific" and "substantial." Winarto v. Toshiba Am. Elecs. Components, Inc., 274 F.3d 1276, 1284 (9th Cir. 2001) (citing Godwin v. Hunt Wesson Inc., 150 F.3d 1217, 1222 (9th Cir. 1998); Little v. Windermere Relocation, Inc., 265 F.3d 903, 915 (9th Cir. 2001); Brown v. City of Tucson, 336 F.3d 1181, 1188 (9th Cir. 2003). An unwarranted reduction in performance review scores can constitute evidence of pretext in retaliation cases. Id. (citing Yartzoff v. Thomas, 809 F.2d 1371, 1377 (9th Cir. 1987); Steiner v. Showboat Operating Co., 25 F.3d 1459, 1465 (9th Cir. 1994).
Plaintiff argues that "[o]nly after the incident with the commissary, when Defendants knew Plaintiff had an aversion to pepper spray, did Defendants then insist that Plaintiff undergo the training." (Opp'n at 13.) Further, Plaintiff states that "[a]fter the November 2013 commissary incident, Love threatened Plaintiff with termination and told him that he would never make lieutenant." (Id. (citing RSUF ¶ 127).) And Plaintiff claims that "Clark either destroyed or buried Bowdre's favorable review of Webb." (Opp'n at 13 (citing RSUF ¶ 127).) According to Plaintiff, "[t]he above is evidence of Defendants' discriminatory motives" and thus, a triable issue of fact exists regarding whether Defendants' actions were a pretext for discrimination. (See id.) Plaintiff also offers evidence that "Clark told Webb pepper spray is good for asthma." (See RSUF ¶ 129 (citing Webb Dep. at 135:4-13))
Plaintiff offers little evidence that Defendants' reasons for termination were false; while Plaintiff [*41]  claims that Dr. Radlauer and Ms. Webb's opinions were intended only to apply to a "direct spray" to the face, it remains undisputed that Plaintiff did not provide updated or different medical opinions to clarify, describe, or explain his ability to be exposed to OC spray.9 (See RSUF ¶ 66; see also June 2015 Letter ("As of date, you have not provided us with the medical documentation addressing your ability to perform the functions of your job with or without reasonable accommodation.").)
Moreover, Plaintiff fails to offer any specific or substantial evidence that AW Love threatened that he would not become sergeant due to animus based upon Plaintiff's disability. Importantly, Plaintiff does not dispute the fact that "Assistant Warden Love was not involved in the decision to terminate Webb." (See RSUF ¶ 70.) Plaintiff concedes that "Warden Janecka recommended [Webb's] termination of employment." (RSUF ¶ 69.)
Furthermore, although Plaintiff claims that the wardens only required him to undergo the training after the Commissary Incident, the evidence before the Court shows that sergeants and officers were uniformly required to complete the OC-spray certification process. Plaintiff [*42]  offers no evidence to contradict Defendants' evidence that "[e]very single GEO supervisor (including Sergeants, like Webb) at Adelanto are [sic] required to be certified in the proper use of the chemical agent ... commonly known as pepper spray ...." (See RSUF ¶ 6.) Plaintiff's own evidence suggests that while "[p]epper spray was not used at Adelanto and nobody was required to be trained to use it when Webb was first hired," this requirement "happen[ed] a few months after [Webb] was promoted to sergeant." (See RSUF ¶ 80.)
Nevertheless, a plaintiff "need produce 'very little evidence of discriminatory motive to raise a genuine issue of fact' as to pretext.'" Strother v. S. California Permanente Med. Gyp., 79 F.3d 859, 870 (9th Cir. 1996), as amended on denial of reh'g (Apr. 22, 1996), as amended on denial of reh'g (June 3, 1996) (quoting Warren, 58 F.3d at 443). Plaintiff offers evidence that Warden Clark rejected Bowdre's performance evaluation of Plaintiff when he disagreed with Bowdre's ratings. Also, Plaintiff's evidence shows that Clark commented that "pepper spray is good for asthma." Viewing the evidence in a light favorable to Plaintiff, a reasonable factfinder could infer that Clark was aware of Plaintiffs condition as well as Plaintiff's need for accommodation regarding pepper [*43]  spray training, and expressed animosity towards Plaintiff based upon that need for accommodation. Additionally, a reasonable factfinder could determine that Clark's rejection of Bowdre's proposed positive performance evaluation supports Plaintiff's conclusion that Defendants' reasons for termination were pretextual. See Yartzoff, 809 F.2d at 1377 (holding that an unwarranted reduction in performance review scores can constitute evidence of pretext in retaliation cases). Because a genuine issue of material fact exists with respect to pretext, partial summary judgment is inappropriate with respect to Plaintiff's discrimination claim.

B. Failure to Provide Reasonable Accommodation
With respect to Plaintiff's second cause of action, Defendants argue that "[t]he undisputed evidence demonstrates that GEO accommodated Webb by providing him with months of leave and by offering him multiple alternative positions, all of which he refused." (Mot. at 19.) Plaintiff responds generally that Defendants were required to "consider any and all reasonable accommodations of which [they are] aware or that are brought to [their] attention by the employee, as long as [the reasonable accommodations] do not create undue hardship." ( [*44] See Opp'n at 14 (citing Cal. Code Regs. tit. 2, § 11068)) Plaintiff avers that "[t]here was an open position in the armory where [Plaintiff] was wanted and needed, and Defendants said no." (Opp'n at 15.)
Pursuant to the FERA, it is unlawful "[f]or an employer ... to fail to make reasonable accommodation for the known physical ... disability of an ... employee. Cal. Gov't Code § 12940(m). However, an employer is not required to provide "an accommodation that is demonstrated by the employer ... to produce undue hardship to its operation." Id. "Reasonable accommodation may include either ... [m]aking existing facilities used by employees readily accessible to, and usable by, individuals with disabilities" or "[j]ob restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, reassignment to a vacant position, acquisition or modification of equipment or devices, adjustment or modifications of examinations, training materials or policies, the provision of qualified readers or interpreters, and other similar accommodations for individuals with disabilities." Cal. Gov't Code § 12926(n).
Furthermore, lain 'employer cannot prevail on summary judgment on a claim of failure to reasonably accommodate unless it establishes through undisputed facts' that 'reasonable accommodation was offered [*45]  and refused,' that 'there simply was no vacant position within the employer's organization for which the disabled employee was qualified and which the disabled employee was capable of performing with or without accommodation,' or that 'the employer did everything in its power to find a reasonable accommodation, but the informal interactive process broke down because the employee failed to engage in discussions in good faith.'" Lucent Techs., 642 F.3d at 743-44 (citing Jensen v. Wells Fargo Bank, 85 Cal. App. 4th 245, 102 Cal. Rptr. 2d 55 (Cal. Ct. App. 2000)).

1. Offers of Accommodation
Under California law, "[i]f there are no funded, vacant comparable positions for which the individual is qualified with or without reasonable accommodation, an employer or other covered entity may reassign an individual to a lower graded or lower paid position." Cal. Code Regs. tit. 2, § 11068 (emphasis added). The undisputed evidence before the Court shows that Defendants offered to transfer Plaintiff to open administrative and food service positions. (See RSUF ¶ 46.) Also undisputed is the fact that Plaintiff declined the positions Defendants offered him because these positions were lower-paid than the sergeant position. (See RSUF ¶ 47.) The Parties also agree that "Webb requested, as an accommodation, that he be OC-certified using an alternative training [*46]  process, but ... never provided a doctor's note supporting this request." (RSUF ¶ 48.)
Defendants offer evidence that "Webb asked to be assigned to the armory" but "such an assignment was not a viable option because OC is stored in the armory" and "[t]here were no open positions in the armory at the time Webb inquired about a position there." (See SUF ¶¶ 43-44.) Plaintiff disputes that "the alleged presence of OC in the armory made reassignment there not a viable option." (RSUF ¶ 43.) Further, Plaintiff disputes that no positions were open at the armory. In support, Plaintiff offers Bowdre and Webb's deposition testimony. (See RSUF ¶ 44.) Plaintiff's counsel, Marc Appell, asked Bowdre: "Do you know if there were ever any open positions in the armory when Webb worked for you?" Bowdre initially responded "I don't think so because that was Sergeant Easton's job." (See Dkt. No. 45-1 ("Bowdre Dep.") at 63:6-7.) However, Bowdre goes on to state that "I'm taking that back. Yes, there was." (Id. at 63:7-8.) Bowdre also testified that the armory position was open before Plaintiff was asked to be certified for OC-use. (See id. at 64:9-18.)
Plaintiff also offers evidence that while Defendants contended [*47]  that a position in the armory "was not viable because OC was stored in the armory," "there was no meaningful risk that a sealed canister of OC properly stored would spontaneously evacuate its contents. So there was no meaningful risk to Webb if he were to work in areas where OC was stored." (Opp'n at 9 (citing RSUF ¶ 113).) Plaintiff's evidence is sufficient to create a genuine issue of fact regarding whether Defendants could have accommodated Plaintiff by offering him a position at the armory. With respect to Plaintiff's request to work in the control center, Defendants allegedly "contend[ed] this was not viable because Plaintiff needed to be away from all detainees due to the possible exposure of pepper spray." (See Opp'n at 9.) Plaintiff explains that "the control center area was an area secured from detainees, so there was no risk of pepper spray usage in this area." (Id. (citing RSUF ¶ 103); see Neal Decl. ¶ 5.)
These issues are genuine because, viewing the evidence in a light favorable to Plaintiff, a factfinder could reasonably conclude that comparable positions to accommodate Plaintiff's disability existed but were not offered to Plaintiff. These issues regarding positions at [*48]  the armory and control center are material because their resolution could impact whether Defendants failed to accommodate an express request by Plaintiff for reassignment to a position that Plaintiff may reasonably have been able to perform 'with or without accommodation." Furthermore, these issues are material to whether it was reasonable for Defendants to offer Plaintiff lower-paid positions as an accommodation. Defendants "cannot prevail on summary judgment on a claim of failure to reasonably accommodate unless it establishes through undisputed facts' ... that 'there simply was no vacant position within the employer's organization for which the disabled employee was qualified and which the disabled employee was capable of performing with or without accommodation' ...." See Lucent Techs., 642 F.3d at 743-44.) Accordingly, summary judgment based upon the offers of accommodation Defendants made is inappropriate.

2. Alternative Certification Methods
Plaintiff also argues that Defendants failed to accommodate his request for an alternative OC-spray certification method, such as a dab under the eyes. According to Plaintiff, "[a]t no time did anyone at Geo ever ask [training officer] O'Kelly to fashion an alternative test [*49]  for Webb other than a blast to the face." (Opp'n at 7; see O'Kelly Decl. ¶ 11.) Plaintiff also avers that "[i]f anyone had asked O'Kelly about OC tests other than blast to the face, [O'Kelly] would have responded that he could fashion a test protocol such as the dab test which would have accomplished similar results as the direct exposure to the face." (Opp'n at 7.) Plaintiff asserts that the accommodation he requested "was refused for no good reason." (Id. at 14.)
Defendants do not dispute that alternative methods of OC training exist. (See DRSUF ¶ 82.) However, Defendants offer evidence that while Webb requested to be OC-certified using an alternative process, Webb did not provide updated medical information to support that this request was a viable accommodation. (See RSUF ¶¶ 48-49.) Specifically, Defendants contend that even assuming an alternative process were used, the aforementioned safety "risk to Webb's life if he were ever exposed to OC spray on the job" was not alleviated by such an alternative process. (Id. ¶ 49 (citing Janecka Decl. ¶ 27).)
Based upon the Parties evidence, the Court finds that a triable issue of fact exists regarding whether alternative certification methods [*50]  could have served as a reasonable accommodation to Plaintiffs disability. A reasonable factfinder could conclude, viewing the evidence in a light favorable to Plaintiff, that Defendant failed to provide an alternative training material or policy to Plaintiff that could reasonably have accommodated Plaintiffs disability. And Defendant has failed to produce evidence that the use of an alternative certification method would cause "undue hardship to its operation." As stated above, "Reasonable accommodation may include job restructuring such as "adjustment or modifications of examinations, training materials or policies ...." See Cal. Gov't Code § 12926(n). Thus, summary judgment is inappropriate with respect to Plaintiff's cause of action for failure to provide reasonable accommodation.

3. Respirator
As discussed above, sergeants' job functions include responding to emergencies and situations that may involve the use of chemical agents and firearms to control detainees. Dr. Radlauer's and Ms. Webb's opinions before reflect that Webb was not physically able to perform these functions if/when they involved the use of pepper spray. Plaintiff does not dispute that he submitted a doctor's note on December 13, 2013 which [*51]  stated that Webb "has severe asthma and should not be exposed to pepper spray." (See RSUF ¶ 27.)
However, Plaintiff claims that Defendants failed to accommodate him by failing to permit him to use a respirator. Plaintiff explains that "[e]ven if Webb could not be removed from a situation, Geo maintained gas masks (Respirators) in secured areas which were easily accessible to all authorized GEO employees, including Webb." (Opp'n at 8 (citing RSUF ¶ 120)) Again, as discussed above, with respect to the use of a respirator, Defendants offer evidence that "there was no way GEO could have ensured that Webb would never come in direct contact with OC during the course of his duties ...." (RSUF ¶ 50.)
Plaintiffs' evidence creates a triable issue of fact regarding whether he could carry a respirator as a reasonable accommodation in the exercise of a sergeant's or officer's duties. Viewing the evidence in a light favorable to Plaintiff, a reasonable factfinder could conclude that Plaintiff could reasonably be accommodated through the use/provision of a respirator to be carried on his person. And Defendant has failed to produce evidence that the use of a respirator would cause "undue hardship to [*52]  its operation." See Cal. Gov't Code § 12926(n). At this time, Defendant has not met its burden of demonstrating that Plaintiffs proposed use of a respirator would produce undue hardship to Defendants. Thus, again, summary judgment is inappropriate with respect to Plaintiff's cause of action for failure to provide reasonable accommodation. 

C. Failure to Engage in Interactive Process
FEHA's "interactive process requires communication and good-faith exploration of possible accommodations between employers and individual employees with the goal of identify[ing] an accommodation that allows the employee to perform the job effectively." Lucent Techs., 642 F.3d at 742-43 (citing Nadaf-Rahrov v. Neiman Marcus Gip., Inc., 166 Cal. App. 4th 952, 83 Cal. Rptr. 3d 190 (2008)). "[C]ourts should attempt to isolate the cause of the breakdown [in the interactive process] and then assign responsibility so that liability ... ensues only where the employer bears responsibility for the breakdown." Lucent Techs., 642 F.3d at 743 (citing Barnett v. I.S. Air, Inc., 228 F.3d 1105, 1115 (9th Cir. 2000)).
Plaintiff contends that "[Defendants'] so called efforts were window dressing that were not designed to actually help Plaintiff." (Opp'n at 9.) As discussed above, it is undisputed that Defendants repeatedly sought information regarding Plaintiff's medical condition and offered multiple open positions to Defendant.10 However, triable issues of fact [*53]  remain with respect to Defendants' engagement in the interactive process.
Plaintiff claims that Defendants did not inform Plaintiff regarding job opportunities at other Geo facilities. (Opp'n at 9 (citing RSUF ¶ 103)) Plaintiff offers evidence that neither Warden Janecka nor HR specialist Aida Aldape spoke to Webb, or attempted to do so. (See Opp'n at 10 (citing RSUF ¶¶ 107, 109).) Plaintiff's evidence also shows that "[n]obody at GEO ever informed Webb of job opportunities at other GEO facilities." (See DRSUF ¶ 105 (citing Bowen Dep. at 95:20-96:8).) Bowen's deposition testimony supports a reasonable inference that Defendants did not seek out positions at Defendants' other facilities and that Bowen, a human resources representative, did not inform Plaintiff of the online database to view open positions at other facilities. Additionally, as explained above, a triable issue of fact exists with respect to the availability of positions at the armory or the control center. See discussion supra Section V.B.1.
The evidence before the Court at this time evinces a genuine issue of material fact regarding Defendants' engagement in the interactive process with respect to identifying accommodations [*54]  for Plaintiff Based on Plaintiff's offered evidence, a reasonable factfinder could find that Defendants did not seek to identify accommodations for Plaintiff. This issue is material because it impacts the determination of whether Defendant engaged in good faith exploration designed to identify accommodations for Plaintiff, rather than merely disingenuous, "window dressing" attempts. Accordingly, summary judgment is inappropriate with respect to Plaintiff's claim for failure to engage in the interactive process.

D. Retaliation
A prima facie case of retaliation requires a showing by Plaintiff that (1) he engaged in a "protected activity"; (2) Defendants subjected him to an "adverse employment action"; and (3) a "causal link" existed between Plaintiffs protected activity and Defendants' action. Yanowitz v. L'Oreal USA, Inc., 36 Cal. 4th 1028, 1042, 32 Cal. Rptr. 3d 436, 116 P.3d 1123 (Cal. 2005); accord Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(h). The primary issue in dispute centers on whether there is any causal link between Plaintiff's request for accommodation and his termination.
"The causal link may be established by an inference derived from circumstantial evidence, such as the employer's knowledge that the [employee] engaged in protected activities and the proximity in time between the protected action and the allegedly retaliatory [*55]  employment decision." Jordan v. Clark, 847 F.2d 1368, 1376 (9th Cir. 1988) (internal quotation marks omitted); accord Passantino v. Johnson & Johnson Consumer Prods., Inc., 212 F.3d 493, 507 (9th Cir. 2000) ("[W]hen adverse employment decisions are taken within a reasonable period of time after complaints of discrimination have been made, retaliatory intent may be inferred."); Clark Cty. Sch. Dist. v. Breeden, 532 U.S. 268, 273, 121 S. Ct. 1508, 149 L. Ed. 2d 509 (2001) ("The cases that accept mere temporal proximity between an employer's knowledge of protected activity and an adverse employment action as sufficient evidence of causality to establish a prima facie case uniformly hold that the temporal proximity must be 'very close.").
"Essential to a causal link is evidence that the employer was aware that the plaintiff had engaged in the protected activity." Cohen v. Fred Meyer, Inc., 686 F.2d 793, 796 (9th Cir. 1982). Once Plaintiff establishes his prima facie case, the analysis proceeds using the same McDonnell Douglas burden shifting test used for discrimination claims. See Brooks v. City of San Mateo, 229 F.3d 917, 928 (9th Cir. 2000) (citing Flak v. N Am. Watch Corp., 3 Cal. App. 4th 467 (Cal. Ct. App. 1992)).
Defendants argue that Webb fails to "establish any causal link between his request for an accommodation and his termination." (Mot. at 22.) According to Defendants, Plaintiffs termination occurred 20 months after Love learned that Webb could not be exposed to OC spray and other factors precipitated the termination, such as Webb ignoring Defendants' requests for updated medical information [*56]  regarding his ability to work and perform his job duties, and Webb's physician's determination that Webb could not perform his job functions. (Mot. at 22 (citing SUF ¶¶ 4-6, 34-37, 46, 47, 58, 59, 61-68).) Additionally, Defendants aver that Webb's retaliation claim based upon his alleged refusal to follow Love's order during the Commissary Incident fails "because the evidence completely contradicts it." (See Mot. at 23 (citing SUF ¶ 14).) Specifically, Defendants point to their evidence that during quarantines, "the vendor would learn of [the quarantine] by seeing the signage, which is there for that exact purpose." (Mot. at 23.) Furthermore, Defendants assert that Plaintiff was not disciplined after the Commissary Incident. Defendants also offer undisputed evidence showing that Warden Janecka, rather than Assistant Warden Love, made the ultimate decision to terminate Webb. (Id. (citing SUF ¶¶ 69, 70).) Lastly, Defendants argue that even assuming "Webb could establish a prima facie claim for retaliation ... GEO has satisfied its burden of showing a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for terminating Webb, namely that he repeatedly and consistently refused to engage in the interactive [*57]  process." (Mot. at 23.)
Plaintiff responds that a triable issue of fact exists as to the retaliation claim because "[t]he timing of the sequence of events is highly suspect, and timing alone will raise an inference of retaliation." (Opp'n at 20.) Plaintiff explains that he "refused to follow what he believed was an illegal order" whereupon "[he] was told he had to submit to the pepper spray testing." (Id.) And when Plaintiff "raised the idea that he was being retaliated against ... Geo dismissed his complaints." (Id.) Plaintiff does not dispute Defendants' evidence that Plaintiff was not formally reprimanded for the Commissary Incident. (See RSUF ¶ 20.) But Plaintiff offers his deposition and declaration in support of his contention that AW Love threatened to discipline him for failing to obey an order that Plaintiff thought was illegal and immoral. (See id. if 127.) Plaintiff also offers Porschea Bowdre's admissible deposition testimony that following the Commissary Incident she prepared and submitted Plaintiff's annual review to Warden Clark. (See DRSUF ¶ 130.) Bowdre testified that Warden Clark "didn't agree and [] wasn't going to accept it and stated that he would have someone else [*58]  prepare the evaluation." (See Bowdre Dep. at 24:14-26:20.) Bowdre also testified that Clark opined that Webb was "lazy." (See Bowdre Dep. at 26:23.)
The analysis of Plaintiff's retaliation claim proceeds by the same McDonnell Douglas burden shifting test used for discrimination claims. See Brooks, 229 F.3d at 928. As explained above, the Court finds that Defendants have offered legitimate reasons for Plaintiffs termination. In Winarto, the Ninth Circuit held that a plaintiff had introduced substantial and specific evidence of pretext for retaliatory termination when the evidence showed the following: the plaintiff's performance ratings declined; defendant expressed exasperation, lack of sympathy, and animosity toward plaintiff, and, defendant made comments regarding plaintiff's race. Winarto, 274 F.3d at 1286.
Here, viewing the evidence in a light favorable to Plaintiff, a reasonable factfinder could conclude that Defendants' wardens knew of Plaintiff's requests for accommodation and refusal to follow AW Love's alleged order, and that these circumstances motivated the wardens' employment actions with respect to Plaintiff Moreover, while the ultimate termination may have occurred some 20 months after the Commissary Incident, AW Love's [*59]  interactions with Plaintiff regarding OC certification, which directly relate to Defendants' alleged reasons for termination, occurred shortly after the Commissary Incident. (See DRSUF ¶ 127-28.) While the evidence shows that OC certification was required of all sergeants, a triable issue exists with respect to whether Defendants could have accommodated Plaintiff by OC certification using a different training mechanism than a direct spray to the face. Furthermore, a reasonable factfinder could infer that Clark rejected Bowdre's positive performance evaluation of Webb for reasons other than Webb's performance. Warden Clark's alleged comments regarding pepper spray being good for Plaintiff's health could be interpreted by a reasonable factfinder as a display of animosity based upon Plaintiffs medical condition. And as explained above, a triable issue exists with respect to whether Defendants' justification for terminating Plaintiff is mere pretext. Accordingly, the Court finds that summary judgment is inappropriate with respect to Plaintiff's retaliation claim.

E. Wrongful Termination Claims
Under California common law, although "an at-will employee may be terminated for no reason, or [*60]  for an arbitrary or irrational reason, there can be no right to terminate for an unlawful reason or a purpose that contravenes fundamental public policy." Silo v. CHW Med. Found., 27 Cal. 4th 1097, 119 Cal. Rptr. 2d 698, 45 P.3d 1162 (Cal. 2002) (internal quotation marks omitted). "[A]n employee who has suffered damages as a result of ... discharge [in violation of public policy] may maintain a tort action for wrongful discharge against the employer." Tameny v. At1. Richfield Co., 27 Cal. 3d 167, 178, 164 Cal. Rptr. 839, 610 P.2d 1330 (Cal. 1980). Tameny claims "typically arise when an employer retaliates against an employee for refusing to violate a statute, performing a statutory obligation, exercising a statutory right, or reporting an alleged violation of a statute of public importance." Gould v. Md. Sound Indus., Inc., 31 Cal. App. 4th 1137, 1147, 37 Cal. Rptr. 2d 718 (Cal. Ct. App. 1995). To state a valid Tameny claim, the plaintiff must prove: (1) an employer-employee relationship; (2) plaintiff was terminated; (3) that plaintiffs termination was substantially motivated by a violation of public policy; and, (4) the termination caused plaintiff harm. Yau v. Santa Margarita Ford, Inc., 229 Cal. App. 4th 144, 154 (Cal. Ct. App. 2014). "[T]his public policy exception to the at-will employment rule must be based on policies carefully tethered to fundamental policies that are delineated in constitutional or statutory provisions." Silo, 27 Cal. 4th at 1104; see also Stevenson v. Superior Court, 16 Cal. 4th 880, 894, 66 Cal. Rptr. 2d 888, 941 P.2d 1157 (Cal. 1997). "[D]isability discrimination can form the basis of a common law wrongful discharge claim ...." City of Moorpark v. Superior Court, 18 Cal. 4th 1143, 77 Cal. Rptr. 2d 445, 959 P.2d 752 (Cal. 1998).
Plaintiff [*61]  brings claims for wrongful termination based upon (1) his disability, as well as (2) his requests for and complaints regarding reasonable accommodation. (See Compl. ¶¶ 72-83.) Plaintiff argues that "two separate bases ... support public policy as a basis for wrongful termination: (1) Violation of the FEHA act itself; and (2) Discharge in violation of FEHA." (See Opp'n at 21.) Defendants claim that Plaintiffs wrongful termination claims "fail for the same reasons that his FEHA claims fail ...." (Mot. at 24.) Plaintiff responds that he "has shown disputed issues of fact regarding the discrimination, failure to accommodate, and failure to engage in the interactive process." (Opp'n at 21.)
As discussed above, genuine issues of material fact exist with respect to several of Plaintiff's FEHA claims. Those issues are material also with respect to Plaintiff's wrongful termination claims based upon violation of FEHA and termination in violation of FERA. Thus, summary judgment is inappropriate with respect to Plaintiff's claim for wrongful termination based upon violations of FERA.

F. Punitive Damages
Punitive damages generally may be awarded to a plaintiff in a civil action only if "the defendant [*62]  has been guilty of oppression, fraud, or malice ...." Cal. Civ. Code § 3294(a). Under California law, punitive or exemplary damages may be awarded only if the plaintiff proves by clear and convincing evidence that the defendant committed a tort with oppression, fraud, or malice. Cal. Civ. Code § 3294(a). California law "does not favor punitive damages and they should be granted with the greatest caution." Beck v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 54 Cal. App. 3d 347, 355, 126 Cal. Rptr. 602 (1976). Irrespective of the theories upon which a plaintiff relies to claim punitive damages, he must show that the defendant acted with intent or with conscious disregard for the plaintiff's rights. See Cal. Civ. Code § 3294(c) (defining oppression, fraud, and malice).
Corporations may be held liable for punitive damages through the malicious acts or omissions of their employees, but only for the acts or omissions of those employees with sufficient discretion to determine corporate policy. Cruz v. HomeBase 83 Cal. App. 4th 160, 167, 99 Cal. Rptr. 2d 435 (Cal. Ct. App. 2000). The alleged malice, fraud, conscious disregard, or oppression "must [have been] on the part of an officer, director, or managing agent of the corporation." See Cal. Civ. Code § 3294(b). "Managing agents" are employees who "exercise[ ] substantial discretionary authority over decisions that ultimately determine corporate policy." Davis v. Kiewit Fac. Co., 220 Cal. App. 4th 358, 366, 162 Cal. Rptr. 3d 805 (Cal. Ct. App. 2013) (citing White v. Ultramar, Inc., 21 Cal. 4th 563, 573, 88 Cal. Rptr. 2d 19, 981 P.2d 944 (Cal. 1999). "The scope of a corporate employee's discretion and authority [*63]  under [California's managing agent] test is ... a question of fact for decision on a case-by-case basis." Davis, 220 Cal. App. 4th at 366, citing White, 21 Cal. 4th at 567). "If there exists a triable issue of fact regarding whether a corporate employee is a managing agent under the White test, that factual question must be determined by the trier of fact and not the court on a motion for summary adjudication." Id.
Defendants argue they are entitled to summary judgment with respect to Plaintiff's claim for punitive damages because "[n]one of the GEO employees against whom Webb has raised complaints are officers, directors, or managing agents of GEO." (Mot. at 25.) Further, according to Defendants "[n]o one engaged in oppression, fraud, or malice." (Id. (citing SUF ¶¶ 3-68).) Plaintiff responds that his evidence shows that "Love retaliated against Plaintiff after the commissary incident" and "Warden Clark told Plaintiff that pepper spray was good for him, which [shows] disregard for Plaintiffs health." (Opp'n at 21.) Additionally, Plaintiff claims Clark "rejected Plaintiff's performance evaluation and/or Defendants destroyed evidence. Plaintiff argues that Warden Clark and AW Love were managing agents of Defendants because they were responsible [*64]  for the Facility's operations.
Plaintiff does not dispute that AW Love, Aldape, Bowen, and Janecka are "not responsible for creating company policy" and are not "officer[s], agent[s], or director[s] of GEO Corrections and Detention, LLC." (See RSUF ¶¶ 74-76, 78.) However, Plaintiff offers Janecka's deposition testimony as evidence that Warden Clark was responsible for management and operations of the Facility. (See RSUF ¶ 77 (citing Janecka Dep. at 16:20-24)) Janecka's testimony shows that as warden, he is "[b]asically ... responsible for the management and operations of the entire institution." (Id.) And as discussed above, Plaintiff has offered evidence that reasonably supports an inference that Warden Clark intentionally acted with animosity towards Plaintiff based upon Plaintiff's disability and rejected positive performance evaluations of Plaintiff Because Plaintiff has offered evidence that raises a genuine issue of fact regarding Warden Clark's authority over decisions that may determine company policy, and because a reasonable factfinder could conclude based upon Plaintiffs evidence that Warden Clark intentionally manipulated Plaintiff's otherwise positive performance review, [*65]  the Court finds that partial summary judgment is inappropriate with respect to Plaintiff's claim for punitive damages.

VI. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, the Court DENIES Defendants' Motion.
IT IS SO ORDERED.


End of Document

