Wentzo v. Signavio, Inc.
United States District Court for the Central District of California, Western Division
September 26, 2022, Decided; September 26, 2022, Filed
CV 21-09968 TJH (JCx)

Reporter
2022 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 207141 *; 2022 WL 16858834
ALEXANDRE WENTZO, Plaintiff, v. SIGNAVIO, INC., Defendant.
Counsel:  [*1] For Alexandre Wentzo, an individual, Plaintiff: John S. Baker, LEAD ATTORNEY, Navdeep Kumar Singh, Jill Alisa Gutierrez, Dorsey and Whitney LLP, Costa Mesa, CA.
For Signavio Inc., a Massachusetts corporation, Defendant: Eric B Schwartz, LEAD ATTORNEY, Marisol Ramirez, Monique Michele Candiff, Sidley Austin LLP, Los Angeles, CA.
Judges: Terry J. Hatter, Jr., Senior United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Terry J. Hatter, Jr.
Opinion



Order
The Court has considered Defendant Signavio Inc.'s ["Signavio"] motion to dismiss for forum non conveniens and failure to join an indispensable party or, in the alternative, to dismiss pursuant to Fed R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6) [dkt. # 26], together with the moving and opposing papers.
The following facts were alleged by Plaintiff Alexandre Wentzo in his First Amended Complaint ["FAC"], unless otherwise noted. The FAC was not artfully drafted and contained factual inconsistencies.
In early 2018, Wentzo and Signavio began employment negotiations. Signavio, a Massachusetts corporation with its principal place of business in Massachusetts, is a subsidiary of Signavio GmbH ["Signavio Germany"], a German corporation. Signavio specializes in business process management software. Wentzo is a French citizen who lived in [*2]  France at the time of the negotiations. When Wentzo informed Signavio that he planned to move to Los Angeles, Signavio assured Wentzo that he could work from wherever he lived, including from Los Angeles.
In March, 2018, Wentzo accepted Signavio's written employment offer and, then, moved to Los Angeles. From April, 2018, through November, 2020, Wentzo was employed by Signavio in at least two positions — Senior Vice President Global Accounts & Ecosystem and Senior Vice President Americas.
The written employment offer, a copy of which was attached to the FAC, stated, in part, that Wentzo's primary work location would be his "place of living." The offer, also, stated that Wentzo would be entitled to virtual shares of Signavio Germany once he reached certain performance goals. The virtual shares would, then, become payable upon a liquidity event, such as a merger or acquisition of Signavio Germany. The virtual shares, according to the offer, were provided "in accordance [with Signavio's] virtual share incentive plan."
In April, 2020, Signavio asked Wentzo to accept a 10 percent pay reduction in exchange for additional virtual shares. The FAC implied that Wentzo accepted the pay reduction. [*3]  Wentzo's rights to those additional virtual shares were to vest according to a schedule. The FAC, further, alleged that if Wentzo voluntarily left Signavio, his vested virtual shares would be forfeited and his unvested shares would be canceled, though he did not understand that at that time.
Later in 2020, Wentzo informed his direct supervisor, Mark Holenstein, of his intent to move back to France and to work remotely from there. Wentzo told Holenstein that he wanted to move to a healthier and less stressful environment for his then-pregnant wife, who was experiencing severe stress as a result of the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic, as well as the wildfires, pollution, and protests in Los Angeles. Wentzo did not foresee a dispute regarding his relocation decision because, inter alia, he had achieved success at Signavio; he had been promised that he could work from wherever he resided; he and his supervisors were already working remotely; and several Signavio executives, including Holenstein and Gero Decker, Signavio's CEO, lived in Europe and supervised United States-based employees.
On October 21, 2020, Holenstein denied Wentzo's request to work remotely from France. On November 6, 2020, [*4]  Wentzo resigned because the denial of his request to work from France was a constructive termination. Prior to his exit, Wentzo inquired about his virtual shares and learned that he would lose them due to his resignation.
On January 27, 2021, Signavio Germany announced its merger with SAP SE ["SAP"] for $1.2 billion. That merger qualified as a liquidity event, which granted cash to the holders of Signavio Germany's virtual shares. Had Wentzo not been constructively terminated, his vested virtual shares would have been worth approximately $5 million, and his unvested virtual shares would have been worth another $7 million.
On November 24, 2021, Wentzo filed this case in the Los Angeles County Superior Court, alleging that Signavio purposefully failed to disclose to him the upcoming SAP merger, and that Signavio and its executives wrongly benefitted from his $12 million in virtual shares. On December 28, 2021, Signavio removed based on both diversity and federal question jurisdiction.
On February 2, 2022, Wentzo filed his FAC, alleging the following claims against Signavio: (1) Fraudulent concealment; (2) Securities fraud, in violation of Section 10(b) of the Exchange Act of 1934 ["the Exchange Act"] and Rule 10b-5(b); (3) Breach of contract; (4) Sale of securities [*5]  by means of communications containing false statements and omissions, in violation of Cal. Corp. Code §§ 25401 and 25501; (5) Sale of securities which were not qualified for sale, in violation of Cal. Corp. Code § 25503; (6) Breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing; (7) Failure to pay wages, in violation of Cal. Lab. Code § 221; (8) Failure to engage in an interactive process for a requested reasonable disability accommodation, in violation of the California Fair Employment and Housing Act ["FEHA"], Cal. Gov. Code § 12900, et seq.; (9) Unjust enrichment; and (10) Violation of California's Unfair Competition Law ["UCL"], Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 17200, et seq. Wentzo did not join Signavio Germany as a defendant.
The claims for breach of contract, breach of implied covenant, and failure to engage in an interactive process are based on Signavio's refusal to grant Wentzo's request to relocate to France. The claims for fraudulent concealment, securities, unjust enrichment, and unfair competition are based on Signavio's failure to disclose to Wentzo its merger with SAP. The claim for failure to pay wages is based on Signavio's failure to cash out Wentzo's virtual shares. Wentzo seeks the cash value of the virtual shares from Signavio, not the return of the virtual shares from Signavio Germany.
Signavio, now, moves to dismiss for Signavio's failure to join Signavio Germany as an indispensable party and for [*6]  forum non conveniens, or, in the alternative, for failure to state a claim.

Signavio's Unauthenticated Documents
Signavio's counsel filed a declaration, in support of Signavio's motion to dismiss, which purported to authenticate three attached documents: (1) A document entitled "Allotment Offer," dated April 18, 2019, that, inter alia, allotted 21,982 virtual shares to Wentzo, set forth their vesting dates, and described the general nature of the virtual shares; (2) A document entitled "Signavio GmbH Virtual Share Incentive Plan — Terms and Conditions" ["Plan Terms"] setting forth the terms governing virtual share program; and (3) A document entitled "Appendix A - United States to the Signavio GmbH Virtual Share Incentive Plan."
However, Signavio's counsel did not properly authenticate those documents by sufficiently establishing a foundation for his personal knowledge of those documents. See Orr v. Bank of Am., NT & SA, 285 F.3d 764, 777-78 (9th Cir. 2002). Nevertheless, the Court will consider, arguendo, the forum selection and choice of law clauses in relation to the motion to dismiss for failure to join an indispensable party. Further, as discussed below, the Court will consider the Plan Terms for the Rule 12(b)(6) motion to dismiss.
The Plan Terms defined "Virtual [*7]  Shares" as the "contractual rights to payment in cash or in kind by [Signavio Germany] ... Virtual Shares carry no shareholder rights or rights to participation in [Signavio Germany]'s rights or any Subsidiary's profits." The Plan Terms, also, stated that "[t]he general place of jurisdiction for any legal actions by Beneficiaries against [Signavio Germany] in connection with the Plan is the place of the [Signavio Germany's] registered office." The Plan Terms, further, stated that "[t]he Plan Terms are exclusively governed by and construed in accordance with German law." The Plan Terms, further, included a "Bad Leaver" provision, which stated that "[i]if the Beneficiary is a Bad Leaver, all Virtual Shares held by such Beneficiary, whether vested or unvested, shall lapse with immediate effect ... nor shall such Beneficiary have any other claims or rights from Virtual Shares or otherwise under the Plan."

Motion to Dismiss for Failure to Join an Indispensable Party
Pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(7) and 19, Signavio moved to dismiss for Wentzo's failure to join Signavio Germany.
When considering a motion to dismiss for failure to join an indispensable party, the Court must conduct a three-step analysis. E.E.O.C. v. Peabody W. Coal Co., 400 F.3d 774, 779 (9th Cir. 2005). First, [*8]  the Court must determine whether the absent party is necessary. See Takeda v. Northwestern Nat'l Life Ins. Co., 765 F.2d 815, 819 (9th Cir. 1985). A party is necessary if "complete relief cannot be accorded among those already parties" in that party's absence. Fed. R. Civ. P. 19(a). Second, if an absent party is necessary to a case, the Court must determine whether joinder of that party is feasible. See Peabody, 400 F.3d at 779. Third, if joinder is not feasible, the Court must determine whether the case can proceed without the absent party, or whether the absent party is indispensable, thereby requiring the case to be dismissed. See Peabody, 400 F.3d at 779.
To determine whether Signavio Germany is a necessary party, here, the Court must consider: (1) Whether Wentzo can obtain complete relief solely from Signavio, and (2) Whether Signavio Germany has a legally protected interest in this action, other than a mere financial stake. See Makah Indian Tribe v. Verity, 910 F.2d 555, 558 (9th Cir. 1990).
Signavio argued that Signavio Germany is a necessary party because the Plan Terms make clear that Wentzo's agreement for virtual shares was with Signavio Germany. Signavio, further, argued that Signavio Germany cannot be joined because the forum selection and choice of law clauses in the Plan Terms require all disputes to be brought in Germany and resolved based on German law. However, Wentzo, here, [*9]  seeks monetary damages solely from Signavio based on his valuation of the virtual shares and based on Signavio's alleged actions. Wentzo alleged that Signavio, inter alia, fraudulently concealed facts regarding the SAP merger, sold unqualified securities, breached its employment contract, breached the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing, failed to engage in the interactive process, and failed to pay wages. None of Signavio's claims attempt to hold Signavio Germany directly liable.
Consequently, Signavio failed to establish that Wentzo cannot obtain complete relief from Signavio, or that Signavio Germany has more than a mere financial stake in this case.

Motion to Dismiss for Forum Non Conveniens
Signavio moved to dismiss based on forum non conveniens. The Court notes that Signavio did not move to dismiss for improper venue.
The Court has the discretion to dismiss a case if it would be more convenient to litigate the case in a foreign forum. Lueck v. Sundstrand Corp., 236 F.3d 1137, 1142 (9th Cir. 2001). When considering a motion to dismiss for forum non conveniens, the Court must determine: (1) Whether an adequate alternative forum is available and (2) Whether the balance of private and public interests favors dismissal. Lueck, 236 F.3d at 1142. A foreign forum [*10]  is available if it will have jurisdiction over the case and the competency to decide the legal questions involved. See Cheng, 708 F.2d at 1410. As the moving party, Signavio bears the burden on this motion to dismiss based on forum non conveniens. See Cheng v. Boeing Co., 708 F.2d 1406, 1411 (9th Cir. 1983).
Signavio argued that Germany is an adequate alternative forum because the Plan Terms contained a forum selection clause. However, Signavio failed to address the broader issue of whether a German court would have jurisdiction and competency to adjudicate all of Wentzo's claims.
When evaluating the private interests, here, the Court must consider the residence of the parties and witnesses, the availability of compulsory process for attendance of witnesses, the costs of bringing willing witnesses and parties to the place of trial, the access to physical evidence and other proof, whether unwilling witnesses can be compelled to testify, the cost of bringing witnesses to trial, the enforceability of the judgment, and "all other practical problems that make trial of a case easy, expeditious and inexpensive." Gulf Oil Corp. v. Gilbert, 330 U.S. 501, 508, 67 S. Ct. 839, 91 L. Ed. 1055 (1947).
There is no dispute that Wentzo currently resides in France; Signavio is based in Massachusetts; Mark Holenstein, Wentzo's direct supervisor, lives in Switzerland [*11]  or Germany; and Gero Decker, Signavio's CEO, lives in Germany. Signavio argued that all of the relevant evidence is in Germany and France, but it provided no evidence to support that assertion, or explain why the relevant documents would not be located in Massachusetts. See Neuralstem, Inc. v. ReNeuron, Ltd., 365 F. App'x 770, 772 (9th Cir. 2010). Further, Signavio argued that ease of access to sources of proof, compulsory process to obtain the attendance of hostile witnesses, the cost of transporting friendly witnesses, and other problems that interfere with an expeditious trial and the ability to enforce the judgement all point in favor of dismissal. Again, Signavio provided no evidence to substantiate those arguments. See Neuralstem. Thus, Signavio failed to meet its burden of establishing that the private factors weigh in favor of dismissal. See Neuralstem.
When evaluating the public factors, here, the Court must consider the local interest in the lawsuit, the Court's familiarity with the governing law, the burden on local courts and juries, congestion in the Court, and the costs of resolving a dispute unrelated to a particular forum. Boston Telecomms. Grp, Inc. v. Wood, 588 F.3d 1201, 1212 (9th Cir. 2009).
Signavio argued that California courts are congested with domestic disputes and should not be burdened by a dispute [*12]  between a French plaintiff, his Massachusetts-based former employer, and a German corporation regarding virtual shares governed by German law. However, Signavio failed to address the Court's interest in resolving an employment dispute involving a California-based employee. See Boston Telecomms., 588 F.3d at 1212. According to Signavio, this case should be dismissed so that Wentzo can re-file it in Germany, where German courts can properly interpret the Plan Terms virtual share agreement under German law. However, Signavio failed to address the German court's familiarity with Wentzo's California claims. See Neuralstem. Signavio, also, failed to discuss the costs of resolving this dispute in Germany. See Neuralstem.
In sum, Signavio failed to establish that an adequate alternative forum exists or that the public and private factors favor dismissal. See Neuralstem.

Motion to Dismiss for Failure to State a Claim
Dismissal for failure to state a claim under Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6) is proper when a complaint exhibits either a "lack of a cognizable legal theory or the absence of sufficient facts alleged under a cognizable legal theory." Balistreri v. Pacifica Police Dep't, 901 F.2d 696, 699 (9th Cir. 1988). To sufficiently state a claim, a plaintiff must allege enough facts so that the requested relief is plausible on [*13]  its face and the defendant receives notice of the basis for the claim. Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 555, 570, 127 S. Ct. 1955, 167 L. Ed. 2d 929 (2007). While the factual allegations need not be detailed, they must go beyond labels and conclusions and raise a right to relief above the speculative level. Twombly, 550 U.S. at 555. Further, the Court must accept all allegations in the complaint as true and draw all reasonable inferences in the plaintiff's favor. See Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678, 129 S. Ct. 1937, 173 L. Ed. 2d 868 (2009).
In deciding a motion to dismiss under Rule 12(b)(6), the Court can consider facts alleged in the complaint, as well as documents referenced or attached to the complaint, and any relevant facts that are subject to judicial notice. See Tellabs, Inc. v. Makor Issues & Rts., Ltd., 551 U.S. 308, 322, 127 S. Ct. 2499, 168 L. Ed. 2d 179 (2007). Additionally, the Court may consider documents that are only passingly referenced in the complaint, or even not mentioned at all, if the claim at issue necessarily depends on those documents. Khoja v. Orexigen Therapeutics, Inc., 899 F.3d 988, 1002 (9th Cir. 2018). Those documents may be considered if they are relevant and if their authenticity is not questioned. Coto Settlement v. Eisenberg, 593 F.3d 1031, 1038 (9th Cir. 2010). On the other hand, where a document "merely creates a defense to the well-pled allegations in the complaint" or is intended to allow the defendant to insert its own version of events, the Court cannot consider that document. Khoja, 899 F.3d at 1002.
In the FAC, Wentzo did not specifically refer to any of the three unauthenticated documents [*14]  attached to the declaration of Signvio's counsel. Nor did Wentzo challenge, here, the authenticity of any of those documents. Further, Signavio failed to explain how any of Wentzo's claims depend on any of those documents. Nevertheless, Wentzo's general references to the Plan Terms alleged in the FAC is sufficient to show that his claims depend significantly on that document. But, it is not clear whether Wentzo's claims depend on the other two unauthenticated documents — the Allotment Offer and Appendix A. Therefore, the Court will not consider the Allotment Offer or Appendix A at this juncture.

Claim for Breach of Contract
To sufficiently state a claim for breach of contract against Signavio, Wentzo must allege the existence of a valid contract, his performance or excuse for failure to perform, Signavio's breach of the contract, and the damages resulting from the breach. See McKell v. Washington Mut., Inc., 142 Cal. App. 4th 1457, 1489, 49 Cal. Rptr. 3d 227 (2006).
Wentzo sufficiently alleged that there was an employment contract that gave him a valid contractual right to work from this place of residence, wherever that may be; that he performed all terms and conditions of the contract, except those that were excused or prevented by Signavio; that Holenstein's refusal to [*15]  accommodate his request to work from France was a breach of the contract; and that he suffered damages in the amount of $12 million.
Consequently, Wentzo sufficiently stated his breach of contract claim. See McKell.

Claim for Breach of the Implied Covenant of Good Faith and Fair Dealing
"There is implied in every contract a covenant by each party not to do anything which will deprive the other parties thereto of the benefits of the contract." Harm v. Frasher, 181 Cal. App. 2d 405, 417, 5 Cal. Rptr. 367 (1960). However, "insofar as the employer's acts are directly actionable as a breach of [the contract], a claim that merely realleges that breach as a violation of the covenant is superfluous." Guz v. Bechtel Nat. Inc., 24 Cal. 4th 317, 352, 100 Cal. Rptr. 2d 352, 8 P.3d 1089 (2000).
Here, Wentzo alleged that Signavio breached the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing by denying his request to work from France in bad faith. However, Signavio's denial is, also, the basis for Wentzo's breach of contract claim. Thus, the two claims are based on the same alleged facts. Therefore, the implied covenant claim is superfluous. The fact that the denial was, allegedly, done in bad faith does not create a second claim. See Guz.
Consequently, Wentzo's claim for breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing will be dismissed without [*16]  prejudice. See Guz.

Claim for Unjust Enrichment
Wentzo alleged that Signavio unjustly enriched itself when its officers canceled his virtual shares. Signavio relied on Klein v. Chevron U.S.A., Inc., 202 Cal. App 4th 1342, 1388, 137 Cal. Rptr. 3d 293 (2012), to argue that Wentzo's claim for unjust enrichment should be dismissed because it is based on a quasi-contract theory. When a plaintiff pleads the existence of, and relies upon, an express contract, as Wentzo has done, here, there can be no quasi-contract claim that encompasses the same issues as the express breach of contract claim. See Paracor Fin., Inc. v. Gen. Elec. Cap. Corp., 96 F.3d 1151, 1167 (9th Cir. 1996).
Consequently, Wentzo's claim for unjust enrichment will be dismissed.

Claim for Failure to Engage in the Interactive Process
FEHA makes it unlawful for an employer to "fail to engage in a timely, good faith, interactive process with [an] employee ... to determine effective reasonable accommodations, if any, in response to a request for reasonable accommodation by an employee ... with a known physical or mental disability or known medical condition." Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(n). Failure to engage in the interactive process is a standalone claim, distinct from a claim for discrimination or a claim for failure to provide a reasonable accommodation. Gelfo v. Lockheed Martin Corp., 140 Cal. App. 4th 34, 61, 43 Cal. Rptr. 3d 874 (2006).
To sufficiently allege a claim for failure to engage in the interactive [*17]  process, Wentzo must have suffered from a disability. See Gelfo, 140 Cal. App. 4th at 61. FEHA defines physical disability as "[h]aving any ... condition ... that ... [l]imits a major life activity." Cal. Gov. Code § 12926(m)(1)(B). Further, a person who is "associated with a person who has, or is perceived to have" a physical disability can be deemed to be disabled. Cal. Gov. Code § 12926(o); see also Castro-Ramirez v. Dependable Highway Express, Inc., 2 Cal. App. 5th 1028, 1036, 207 Cal. Rptr. 3d 120 (2016).
Here, Wentzo argued that he was disabled by association with his wife, who was, in turn, allegedly, disabled by pregnancy and severe stress due to nearby wildfires, the Covid-19 pandemic, and social unrest in Los Angeles. The nature of FEHA's protections for non-disabled employees who associate with an individual with a disability has been the subject of very little litigation. Castro-Ramirez, 2 Cal. App. 5th at 1036 (2016). The California Court of Appeal has concluded that those who associate with a person with a disability can state a claim for disability discrimination. Castro-Ramirez. However, it declined to specifically hold that such a person can, also, state a claim for failure to engage in the interactive process, because that issue was not directly before that court. Castro-Ramirez.
FEHA's employment discrimination provisions — Cal. Gov. Code §§ 12940(a),(b),(c),(d), and (j) — and its interactive process provision — Cal. Gov. Code § 12940(n) — both refer to "physical disability." Therefore, those [*18]  provisions both incorporate Cal. Gov. Code § 12926(o)'s definition of physical disability. That definition explicitly includes a person who associates with a person with a physical disability. Consequently, FEHA requires employers to engage in the interactive process with employees who are associated with a disabled person.
Therefore, Wentzo's claim for failure to engage in the interactive process is, theoretically, viable. However, Wentzo failed to allege facts to sufficiently state that claim.
First, Wentzo failed to allege that his wife was, in fact, disabled. He alleged that his wife's pregnancy, and the stress caused by living in Los Angeles, "impacted her ability to sleep and other major life activities." FEHA regulations include sleep among the examples of major life activities. Cal. Code Regs. tit. 2, § 11065(l)(1). However, the regulations, also, specifically define "disabled by pregnancy" as being "unable because of pregnancy to perform any one or more of the essential functions of [a person's] job or to perform any of these functions without undue risk to herself, to her pregnancy's successful completion, or to other persons." Cal. Code Regs. tit. 2, § 11035(f). The regulation includes additional criteria, such as whether the pregnant person, in the opinion of their [*19]  health care provider, needs to take time off of work for, inter alia, bed rest. Cal. Code Regs. tit. 2, § 11035(f). Wentzo's vague allegation about his wife's inability to sleep does not constitute a sufficient allegation of disability.
Second, even if Wentzo had sufficiently alleged that his wife was disabled, he failed to sufficiently allege that he was disabled by his association with her. Because case law in this area is very limited, the nature and extent of the type of associational disability that gives rise to FEHA's protections is not very clear. In Castro-Ramirez, the Court of Appeal held that there was associational disability where the plaintiff alleged that he was the only person who could administer his son's kidney dialysis, thereby limiting his available work hours. Castro-Ramirez, 2 Cal. App. 5th at 1031. In Castro v. Classy, Inc., No. CV 19-02246 H (BGS), 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 35556, 2020 WL 996948, at *5 (S.D. Cal. Mar. 2, 2020), the Southern District of California, following Castro-Ramirez, found associational disability where the plaintiff alleged that her infant son's disability "required her to be within close proximity to him," limiting her ability to work in person at her office. In both of those cases, each plaintiff's association with a disabled person limited their own ability to engage in their own major life activities, thereby giving rise to their own need for a reasonable [*20]  accommodation.
Unlike in Castro-Ramirez and Castro, there is no allegation, here, that Wentzo's wife required care that only he could provide, such that his ability to work, or any of his other major life activities, was impaired. In fact, such a conclusion would be directly undermined by Wentzo's inconsistent allegation that, had he known about Signavio's merger with SAP, he could have "remain[ed] in Los Angeles for a few more months in full view of the information about the impending merger, or take family leave, while allowing his wife to live in France with his family." Those allegations alone belie Wentzo's argument that his ability to work was impaired.
In reaching that conclusion, the Court does not, also, conclude that Signavio's obligation to engage in the interactive process under FEHA is relieved by, or otherwise affected by, Wentzo's right to family leave. While the Pregnancy Disability Leave Law, Cal. Gov. Code § 12945, which applies to employees disabled by pregnancy, provides that it "shall not be construed to affect" FEHA's disability discrimination provisions, Cal. Gov. Code § 12940, the California Family Rights Act, Cal. Gov. Code § 12945.2, which provides for leave for family members of pregnant persons, contains no similar provision. See Sanchez v. Swissport, Inc., 213 Cal. App. 4th 1331, 1338-39, 153 Cal. Rptr. 3d 367 (2013). Regardless, based on Wentzo's allegations in the FAC, that he could [*21]  have taken family leave to avoid his resignation, shows that the major life activity at issue — his ability to work for Signavio in Los Angeles — was not, actually, constrained.
Consequently, Wentzo's claim for failure to engage in the interactive process will be dismissed without prejudice.

Claim for Failure to Pay Wages
Wentzo's claim for failure to pay wages is based on his argument that the virtual shares were wages. The claim arises under Cal. Lab. Code § 221, which prohibits an employer from "collect[ing] or receiv[ing] from an employee any part of wages theretofore paid by said employer to said employee."
Signavio argued that there is no private right of action for § 221 claims. However, courts in California are divided over whether § 221 created a private right of action for wage recovery. The Court agrees with those decisions that have held that there is a private right of action under § 221. See, e.g., Fleming v. Matco Tools Corp., No. CV 19-00463 WHO, 2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 207080, 2021 WL 4945190, at *7-8 (N.D. Cal. July 9, 2021).
Whether a private right of action exists depends on whether the legislature manifested an intent to create one through either explicit statutory language or through a statute's legislative history. Lu v. Hawaiian Gardens Casino, Inc., 50 Cal. 4th 592, 596, 113 Cal. Rptr. 3d 498, 236 P.3d 346 (2010). Section 221 is situated in the same article as Cal. Lab. Code § 218, which provides, inter alia, that "[n]othing in this article shall limit the [*22]  right of any wage claimant to sue directly or through an assignee for any wages or penalty due him under this article." If, indeed, Signavio wrongfully collected or received any of Wentzo's wages, those wages would be "due [Wentzo] under [that] article." Therefore, Cal. Lab. Code § 221 must provide a way — a private right of action — for employees to recover those wages.
Wages, as defined by Cal. Labor Code § 200(a), include "all amounts for labor performed by employees of every description, whether the amount is fixed or ascertained by the standard of time, task, piece, commission basis, or other method of calculation." "Incentive compensation, such as bonuses and profit-sharing plans, also constitute wages." Schachter v. Citigroup, Inc., 47 Cal. 4th 610, 618, 101 Cal. Rptr. 3d 2, 218 P.3d 262 (2009).
Signavio argued, without persuasive authority, that the virtual shares are not, by definition, wages. However, the question of whether the virtual shares were wages, ultimately, depends on other issues, such as whether the value of those virtual shares was ascertainable at the time that they were granted. See IBM v. Bajorek, 191 F.3d 1033, 1038-40 (9th Cir. 1999). The resolution of those other issues requires an evaluation of evidence, such as the Allotment Offer, that is not properly before the Court at this procedural juncture. See Tellabs, 551 U.S. at 322.
The parties, also, disagreed as to whether [*23]  Wentzo actually earned his virtual shares. Signavio argued that "the virtual shares were not earned until certain liquidity events occurred," and that Wentzo never earned them because he resigned before the merger took place. Wentzo acknowledged, in the FAC, that the virtual shares were to "become immediately payable to Plaintiff upon a 'liquidity event.'" However, he argued, inter alia, that he did not resign, but, rather, was constructively terminated, and, therefore, did not relinquish his virtual shares under the Plan Terms' Bad Leaver provision.
Both Wentzo and Signavio relied on Schachter, which involved incentive compensation in the form of restricted company stock provided in lieu of a portion of annual cash compensation. Schachter, 47 Cal. 4th at 613. "Incentive compensation ... is generally understood as an 'inducement to employees to procure efficient and faithful service,'" a definition which appears to generally describe the nature of the virtual shares. Schachter, 47 Cal. 4th at 621, quoting Dept. of Industrial Relations, Div. of Labor Stds. Enforcement (DLSE), Enforcement Policies and Interpretations Manual (Rev.2006) § 35.1. "Only when an employee satisfies the condition(s) precedent to receiving incentive compensation, which [*24]  often includes remaining employed for a particular period of time, can that employee be said to have earned the incentive compensation (thereby necessitating payment upon resignation or termination)." Schachter, 47 Cal. 4th 610, 621, 101 Cal. Rptr. 3d 2, 218 P.3d 262 (2009). However, "[i]f the employee is discharged before completion of all of the terms of the bonus agreement, and there is not valid cause, based on conduct of the employee, for the discharge, the employee may be entitled to recover at least a pro-rata share of the promised bonus." Schachter, 47 Cal. 4th at 622. Nevertheless, here, the Plan Terms provide that if an employee is not deemed a Bad Leaver — including if the employee is terminated without cause — he is entitled to an "Exit Payment" to be calculated based on the value of his vested shares.
Wentzo alleged that he resigned involuntarily in that he was constructively terminated. At this procedural juncture, the Court must accept that allegation as true. See Iqbal, 556 U.S. at 678. Accordingly, Wentzo's virtual shares might not have been subject to forfeiture.
Consequently, assuming that Wentzo's virtual shares constituted wages under Cal. Lab. Code § 200(a), Wentzo sufficiently alleged his Cal. Lab. Code § 221 claim for failure to pay wages.

Securities Claims
Wentzo's federal claim for securities fraud — brought under Section 10(b) of the Exchange Act of 1934 and Rule 10b-5(b) — requires [*25]  there to have been a sale of securities. 17 CFR § 240.10b-5. Likewise, Wentzo's two California state securities claims — for damages for the sale of securities by means of communications containing false statements and omissions, and for damages for the sale of securities which were not qualified for sale — also, requires there to have been a sale of securities. See Esebag v. Whaley, No. CV 18-08446 JAK (RAOx), 2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 247271, 2020 WL 7414734, at *5 (C.D. Cal. Sept. 8, 2020); see Timboe v. Clark, No. CV 20-08719 WHO, 2022 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 61045, 2022 WL 991721, at *8 (N.D. Cal. Mar. 31, 2022).
Signavio argued that the virtual shares were not securities, and that they were were never sold. Wentzo's opposition to those arguments was brief and vague. Wentzo alleged, and argued, that the virtual shares were sold when they were forfeited by his resignation.
Under both federal and California law, the sale of a security is defined to include the disposition of a security. 15 U.S.C. § 78c(a)(14); Cal. Corp. Code § 25017(a). However, Wentzo provided no authority, and the Court could find none, that would deem the forfeiture of an employee's virtual shares, or any other incentive stock program shares, to be a disposition or other sale of securities that would trigger liability under Rule 10-b5 or California securities law. Accordingly, no sale of securities took place, here.
Consequently, Wentzo's state and federal securities claims must be dismissed with prejudice.

Claim for Fraudulent Concealment [*26] 
Wentzo's claim for fraudulent concealment is based on his allegation that Signavio fraudulently concealed Signavio Germany's pending merger from him.
Claims sounding in fraud must satisfy the heightened pleading standards of Fed. R. Civ. P. 9(b) by alleging the "who, what, when, where, and how" of the alleged fraudulent activity. Vess v. Ciba-Geigy Corp. USA, 317 F.3d 1097, 1106 (9th Cir. 2003). While a plaintiff need not allege all of the elements of fraud, the allegations must be "specific enough to give defendants notice of the particular misconduct ... so that they can defend against the charge and not just deny that they have done anything wrong." Vess.
Wentzo alleged that Signavio withheld the fact that, at the time of Wentzo's resignation, Signavio Germany had reached a merger deal in principle with SAP; that Signavio intentionally kept that information from Wentzo so that it could keep, or would not need to pay out, his virtual shares; and that, if Wentzo had known, he would not have resigned. Those allegations are sufficient to put Signavio on notice of the nature of Wentzo's fraud-based claims, and to allow it to prepare its defense. See Vess.
Signavio argued that, as a matter of law, it had no duty to disclose the merger information, citing Eldridge v. Tymshare, Inc., 186 Cal. App. 3d 767, 776, 230 Cal. Rptr. 815 (1986). However, Eldridge considered [*27]  only whether corporate directors' failure to disclose merger negotiations to shareholders was a breach of the broad fiduciary duty the directors owed to shareholders. Eldridge, 186 Cal. App. 3d at 772. Signavio went to great pains to argue that Wentzo was not a shareholder in furtherance of its argument that the virtual shares were not securities. Eldridge is clearly inapposite.
Here, Wentzo argued that Signavio's duty to disclose arose from, inter alia, their contractual and employment relationship, and the fact that Signavio maintained exclusive knowledge of the forthcoming merger. See OCM Principal Opportunities Fund, L.P. v. CIBC World Markets Corp., 157 Cal. App. 4th 835, 68 Cal. Rptr. 3d 828 (2007). Signavio presented no authority to rebut those arguments. Further, at this procedural juncture, the Court must draw all factual inferences in favor of Wentzo. See Iqbal, 556 U.S. at 678. Moreover, the Court cannot determine whether there was a duty to disclose until the factual record is more fully developed.
Consequently, Wentzo's sufficiently stated his fraudulent concealment claim.

Claim for Unfair Competition
The UCL prohibits three varieties of unfair competition: unlawful conduct, unfair conduct, and fraudulent conduct. See People v. Persolve, LLC, 218 Cal. App. 4th 1267, 1272, 160 Cal. Rptr. 3d 841 (2013). Wentzo alleged that Signavio violated the UCL's unlawful conduct and fraudulent conduct prongs.
Unlawful conduct UCL claims are derivative, [*28]  meaning they "borrow[] violations of other laws and treats these violations, when committed pursuant to business activity, as unlawful practices independently actionable under [the UCL]." Farmers Ins. Exch. v. Super. Ct., 2 Cal. 4th 377, 383, 6 Cal. Rptr. 2d 487, 826 P.2d 730 (1992). Here, Wentzo's unlawful conduct claim is derivative of his claim for failure to pay wages. Because the Court determined, above, that Wentzo sufficiently alleged his failure to pay wages claim, he sufficiently alleged a UCL claim based on that same theory. See Farmers.
With regard to the fraudulent prong, Wentzo alleged that Signavio "fraudulently conceal[ed] facts that caused the loss and cancellation of Wentzo's shares." When a plaintiff relies entirely on an allegedly fraudulent course of conduct as the basis for his UCL claim, his claim sounds in fraud and must meet the heightened pleading standard of Fed. R. Civ. P. 9(b). Kearns v. Ford Motor Co., 567 F.3d 1120, 1125 (9th Cir. 2009). As determined, above, Wentzo satisfied that standard. See Vess, 317 F.3d at 1106.
However, to state a claim for equitable relief, including claims under the UCL, a plaintiff must allege that he lacked an adequate remedy at law. Sonner v. Premier Nutrition Corp., 971 F.3d 834, 844 (9th Cir. 2020). Here, Wentzo failed to do so. Consequently, Wentzo's claim for unfair competition must be dismissed without prejudice.
Accordingly,
It is Ordered that the motion to dismiss for failure to join [*29]  an indispensable party be, and hereby is, Denied.
It is further Ordered that the motion to dismiss for forum non conveniens be, and hereby is, Denied.
It is further Ordered that the claim for unjust enrichment be, and hereby is, Dismissed with prejudice.
It is further Ordered that the claims for breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing, failure to engage in the interactive process, federal securities fraud, sale of securities by means of communications containing false statements and omissions, sale of securities which were not qualified for sale, and unfair competition be, and hereby are, Dismissed without prejudice.
It is further Ordered that the motion to dismiss the claims for breach of contract, failure to pay wages, and fraudulent concealment, be, and hereby is, Denied.
Date: September 26, 2022
/s/ Terry J. Hatter, Jr.
Terry J. Hatter, Jr.
Senior United States District Judge


End of Document

