Weston v. Ups
United States District Court for the Western District of Arkansas, Hot Springs Division
March 27, 2009, Decided; March 27, 2009, Filed
Civil No. 08-6061

Reporter
2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 150218 *
SHERRY WESTON, PLAINTIFF v. UNITED PARCEL SERVICE, INC., DEFENDA
Prior History: Weston v. UPS, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 12227 (W.D. Ark., Jan. 23, 2009)
Counsel:  [*1] For Sherry Weston, Plaintiff: Lucien Gillham, LEAD ATTORNEY, Sutter & Gillham, PLLC, Benton, AR.
For United Parcel Service, Inc., Defendant: Sneha Channabasappa, LEAD ATTORNEY, Waller Lansden Dortch Davis LLP, Nashville, TN; Stanley E. Graham, LEAD ATTORNEY, Waller Lansden Dortch & Davis, Nashville, TN.
Judges: JIMM LARRY HENDREN, UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE.
Opinion by: JIMM LARRY HENDREN
Opinion



ORDER
Now on this 27th day of March, 2009, comes on for consideration Defendant's Motion For Summary Judgment (document #19), and from said motion, the supporting documentation, and the response thereto, the Court finds and orders as follows:
1. Plaintiff Sherry Weston ("Weston") asserts claims under the Arkansas Civil Rights Act ("ACRA") and the Americans With Disabilities Act ("ADA").1 In her Amended Complaint, Weston alleges that she became disabled in May, 2007. She alleges that she was awarded disability benefits under the ERISA plan of her employer, defendant United Parcel Service, Inc. ("UPS"), but that those benefits were terminated in November, 2007, because the ERISA plan administrator found that she could perform the essential functions of her job.
Weston further alleges that in spite of this, UPS would not return [*2]  her to work so long as she had any restrictions, and retaliated against her by replacing her with "individuals who do not have a disability, who are not females, or have not requested accommodation to continue working."
Defendant denied the material allegations of the Complaint, and now moves for summary judgment. The matter is fully briefed and ripe for decision.
2. Summary judgment should be granted when the record, viewed in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party, and giving that party the benefit of all reasonable inferences, shows that there is no genuine issue of material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Walsh v. United States, 31 F.3d 696 (8th Cir. 1994). Summary judgment is not appropriate unless all the evidence points toward one conclusion, and is susceptible of no reasonable inferences sustaining the position of the nonmoving party. Hardin v. Hussmann Corp., 45 F.3d 262 (8th Cir. 1995). The burden is on the moving party to demonstrate the non-existence of a genuine factual dispute; however, once the moving party has met that burden, the nonmoving party cannot rest on its pleadings, but must come forward with facts showing the existence of a genuine dispute. City of Mt. Pleasant, Iowa v. Associated Electric Co-op, 838 F.2d 268 (8th Cir. 1988).
3. Pursuant to Local Rule 56.1, the defendant filed a statement of facts which it contends are [*3]  not in dispute, and plaintiff has responded.2 From that statement, and the response thereto, the following significant undisputed facts are made to appear:
* As of May 31, 2007, Weston worked for UPS as a Senior Account Executive ("SAE") in its Mid-South District. As an SAE, Weston was responsible for handling UPS third-party shipping accounts in a specified sales territory.
* On May 31, 2007, Weston began a leave of absence due to back pain.
* Weston applied for Short Term Disability ("STD") benefits under the UPS ERISA plan insured by Aetna. STD benefits were paid from May 31, 2007, through July 2, 2007, at which point Aetna denied further STD benefits.
* Weston remained on leave from UPS until on or about May 30, 2008.
* In July, 2007, Weston notified her supervisor, Dennis Prince, that she could not perform her job even from home.
* On July 26, 2007, Weston submitted a written request to Jon Robertson, then UPS Mid-South District Human Resources Manager, for an unspecified workplace accommodation. Her request stated that she was taking two medications which made her drowsy and unable to drive.
* By November, 2007, Weston was able to drive, but was not able to do the amount of driving that [*4]  she would have done in her SAE position.
* On or about November 12, 2007, UPS received notice that Aetna had denied Weston's STD claim, and notified Weston that she must either (1) return to work with a release from her doctor or (2) submit additional documentation to Aetna in support of her STD claim.
* On November 16, 2007, Weston submitted a release from her doctor, stating that she could return to work but that she could not drive.
* On December 7, 2007, UPS sent Weston a copy of its ADA Accommodations Packet, along with a Request for Medical Information ("RMI") and an Authorization for Release of Health Information ("Release").
* On January 7, 2008, UPS sent Weston a second letter, requesting to engage in the interactive process with her in an effort to return her to work.
* Weston sent UPS the RMI from her doctor outlining her workplace restrictions, but requested additional time to submit the Release.
* Weston sent UPS the Release on or about January 23, 2008.
* On or about February 5, 2008, Weston sent a letter to June Reed ("Reed"), UPS District Occupational Health Supervisor, notifying Reed of her availability to meet regarding the requested accommodation and asking for permission [*5]  to tape record the meeting.
* Based on a long-standing policy against the tape recording of any meeting, Weston's request to tape record the accommodation meeting was denied.
* At some point in the Spring of 2008, Weston filed a Motion for Preliminary Injunction in the Circuit Court of Montgomery County, Arkansas, seeking an order that UPS engage in the interactive accommodation process with her. This motion was denied.
* On or about April 5, 2008, UPS and Weston met to engage in the interactive accommodation process. At some point before that meeting, Weston's doctor had changed her medications so that she would not be drowsy during the day.
* Weston returned to work on May 30, 2008, as a Sales Support Representative ("SSR"). When an SAE position became available in September, 2008, Weston returned to that position.
* Weston ultimately received all the benefits to which she was entitled under UPS' employee benefits plan.
* Weston received her full salary for the first six months of her leave, and received sixty percent of her salary for the remainder of her leave. She returned to work at the same rate of pay she had been receiving when she went on leave.
4. In order to establish a prima [*6]  facie case of disability discrimination under the ADA, Weston must prove that she was disabled within the meaning of the ADA; that she was qualified to perform the essential functions of her job; and that she suffered an adverse employment action because of her disability. If that showing is made, the burden shifts to UPS to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for the adverse employment action, whereupon the burden shifts back to Weston to produce evidence that the stated reason is a pretext for discrimination. Kosmicki v.Burlington Northern & Santa Fe R. Co., 545 F.3d 649, 651 (8th Cir. 2008). These same principles apply to analysis of the ACRA claim. Duty v. Norton-Alcoa Proppants, 293 F.3d 481, 4990 (8th Cir. 2002).
5. UPS first contends that Weston was not disabled within the meaning of the ADA or the ACRA, because her condition was not permanent or long-term. It bases this contention on the fact that Weston was able to return to work within the year, and that she feels like she is "a hundred percent."
While UPS is correct that "temporary impairments with little or no long-term impact are not disabilities" under the ADA, Samuels v. Kansas City Missouri School Dist., 437 F.3d 797, 802 (8th Cir. 2006), its argument on this issue overlooks Weston's evidence that she is able to work only by virtue of several permanent accommodations: being allowed to [*7]  stop and stretch and walk around every hour or so when driving long distances, and use of a rolling briefcase to avoid exceeding her lifting restrictions.
UPS also ignores the fact that the deposition question to which it refers in discussing Weston's current abilities incorporated her back problems. The question asked of Weston was "[d]o you feel, despite your problems with your back, that you're back to full speed, full strength?" Weston answered "I believe that I'm able to do my job. I think my numbers will reflect it."
These aspects of Weston's testimony, when viewed in the light most favorable to her, could persuade reasonable jurors that Weston is disabled, but can perform the essential functions of her job with accommodations.
The Court also notes that UPS engaged in the interactive process contemplated under the ADA for developing accommodations so that disabled employees can be returned to work, and that UPS does not accommodate persons who are not disabled. The UPS ADA manual states "[t]he company's policy is that no job-related accommodations will be granted to employees not otherwise entitled to such assistance by law, a collective bargaining agreement, or the terms of a specific [*8]  UPS program. . . . No manager has the authority to grant an exception to this policy without the prior approval of the Corporate Legal Department, which will be granted only in rare circumstances."
When the foregoing is viewed in the light most favorable to Weston, as it must be on a motion for summary judgment, the Court finds that there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Weston is disabled within the meaning of the ADA and the ACRA.
6. UPS next contends that Weston was not a "qualified individual" with a disability because her back pain prevented her from driving for a period of many months, and driving was an essential function of her job.3
Two time periods must be looked at here. For the time period from May 31, 2007, until January 8, 2008, UPS is correct. Weston was restricted from driving, and thus could not perform all the essential functions of her position as SAE during that period of time.
On January 8, 2008, Weston's doctor, Charles Jackson, wrote a return to work note, stating that Weston could perform the essential functions of her job, but might need accommodation. He stated that she could not lift over five pounds; that she might need intermittent leave; and [*9]  that "extended sitting without ability to stop and stretch is not recommended." These were permanent restrictions. Dr. Jackson added that the medications Norco, Soma, and Baclofen would enable Weston to perform the functions of her position, but that "these medications may impair Mrs. Weston's ability to think and concentrate in a substantial manner."
No mention was made in Dr. Jackson's January 8, 2008, report of any restriction on driving, nor has UPS offered any evidence that Weston's driving was restricted after January 8, 2008. Thus, for the period from January 8, 2008, until Weston went back to work, the evidence before the Court presents a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Weston was a "qualified individual" with a disability.
For the foregoing reasons, the Court concludes that summary judgment is not appropriate on Weston's claims of discrimination under the ADA and ACRA.
7. UPS next contends that it did not fail to engage in the interactive process with Weston. Under the ADA, if an employee requests accommodation, "the employer must engage in an interactive process to determine whether reasonable accommodations are possible." Buboltz v. Residential Advantages, Inc., 523 F.3d 864, 870 (8th Cir. 2008).
In order to prove failure to accommodate, [*10]  Weston must show:
* that UPS knew she was disabled;
* that she requested accommodations;
* that UPS did not make a good faith effort to assist her in making accommodations; and
* that UPS could have reasonably accommodated her, but for its lack of good faith.
Id. Given the Court's determination that Weston has offered evidence from which a jury could find that she was disabled and that UPS knew she was disabled, it turns to an examination of the evidence relating to the other three issues of a failure to accommodate claim.
(a) Did Weston request accommodations?
On July 26, 2007, Weston wrote Jon Robertson, in UPS Human Resources, noting that Aetna considered her able to perform her job, but that she did not believe she could do so without accommodation, and stating that "[i]f UPS believes I cannot do my job without accommodation, then this is a request for accommodation under the ADA. Please send me a copy of my essential job function and I will do my best to identify a specific accommodation once I receive a response to this letter."
On November 16, 2007, Weston faxed Reed, Shunda Taylor, and Eddie Roach a note, enclosing a medical release to return to work and stating that "[i]f I do not [*11]  hear anything before Monday afternoon, I will be at work Tuesday morning in Springdale." The attached release states
IF THERE IS WORK AVAILABLE, SHERRY WESTON CAN RETURN TO WORK ON TUESDAY NOV 20TH. THESE ARE HER LIMITATIONS; SHE SHOULD CONTINUE TO TAKE HER MEDICATIONS DAILY WHICH ARE: LUNESTA 1 TAB AT BEDTIME, SOMA 2 TABLETS PER DAY, AND NORCO ONE TABLET EVERY 4 HOURS. THESE MEDICATIONS MAKE HER FEEL DROWSY AND SHE SHOULD NOT DRIVE. IN ADDITION, THE MEDICATIONS WILL AFFECT HER ABILITY TO CONCENTRATE. SHE CANNOT LIFT MORE THAN 5 LBS. IF THESE LIMITATIONS ARE MET SHE MAY BE ABLE TO DO HER JOB. PLEASE SEND ME A LIST OF SHERRY'S JOB FUNTIONS [sic].
(Emphasis in original.)
A request for accommodations need not contain any particular magic words, but must simply "make clear that the employee wants assistance for his or her disability." Ballard v. Rubin, 284 F.3d 957, 962 (8th Cir. 2002). The ADA manual followed by UPS notes that "[g]enerally, any notification that a job modification is needed because of a physical or mental impairment will be sufficient to trigger this inquiry; no 'magic' words or explicit use of the term 'accommodation' or 'ADA' is required."
It, thus, appears that there is no genuine issue of disputed fact on the issue of [*12]  whether Weston requested accommodations -- she did so on at least two occasions.
(b) Did UPS make a good faith effort to accommodate Weston?
Reed testified that when she got Weston's return-to work release with limitations in November, 2007, she conveyed the limitations to Shunda Taylor and Eddie Roach, and was told that UPS did not have work available within these limitations. There is no evidence that any interactive process was commenced with regard to this release.
Instead, the evidence before the Court shows that UPS commenced the interactive process only after receiving Dr. Jackson's January 8, 2008, report. On February 5, 2008, Weston responded to a telephone call from Taylor, who was attempting to set up a conference for February 7, 2008, with regard to Weston's return to work. In the note, Weston asked to record the conference "so that I may submit the tape recording to Aetna for review." Weston also asked that Taylor inform her "what essential job functions, you believe I can't perform with or without accomodation [sic]."
It appears that the response to this note was Reed's letter to Weston dated March 10, 2008, stating that recording meetings was against UPS policy, and suggesting [*13]  a meeting without recordation. Weston responded on March 13, 2008, stating that she was not "insisting" on recording the meeting, but wanted to "avoid any further misunderstandings." She indicated that she would be happy to meet.
On May 5, 2008, Weston sent an e-mail to Reed, Taylor, Christi Willson, and Rick Walter, with copies to Eddie Roach and Jim Smith, stating that she had met with them on April 3, 2008, and had been assured of follow-up within two weeks, but had heard nothing, nor had telephone messages to Willson, Reed, or Marshall Watson been returned. Roach directed the other recipients not to respond to Weston, saying that he would respond.
On May 22, 2008, Roach wrote Weston, saying that UPS had "made every effort to engage in an interactive process with you to return you to work based on your medical restrictions . . . as a courtesy to you, even though in our view your condition does not qualify as a disability under the law. Unfortunately, we have been unable to locate a vacant position for you that meets the restrictions provided by your physician." In spite of this supposed inability, in the same letter Roach offered Weston the position of Sales Representative based out [*14]  of Little Rock.
This evidence, viewed in the light most favorable to Weston, could result in a finding that UPS took almost five months to complete the interactive process4 ; that it was not engaging in the process out of any good faith intent to comply with the law or company policy; and that it claimed to have no vacant position when in fact it did have such a position. These findings could support a jury conclusion that UPS did not engage in the interactive process in good faith. A defendant can engage in the interactive process, but do so in bad faith rather than good faith. Battle v. United Parcel Service, Inc., 438 F.3d 856, 863 (8th Cir. 2006).
(c) Could UPS have reasonably accommodated Weston, but for its lack of good faith?
Weston's burden on this issue is to show that accommodation was possible; if she meets that burden, UPS must then show that it was unable to accommodate. Fjellestad v. Pizza Hut of America, Inc., 188 F.3d 944, 950 (8th Cir. 1999). The jury could find that Weston met her burden by showing the accommodations she would need and her doctor's release that she could work if those accommodations were provided. The jury could also find that UPS did not meet its burden, given that Roach told Weston that UPS did not have a vacant position that met her needs and then offered her one. Under the circumstances, the [*15]  Court finds a genuine issue of material fact as to whether UPS could have reasonably accommodated Weston before May 22, 2008, if it had sincerely tried to do so.
For the foregoing reasons, the Court concludes that summary judgment is not appropriate on Weston's failure to accommodate claim.
8. Finally, UPS contends that it is entitled to summary judgment on Weston's retaliation claim because it did not retaliate against Weston for requesting an accommodation. It argues that Weston did not engage in protected activity; that she did not experience an adverse employment action; and that there is no causal connection between any activity of Weston and any conduct of UPS.
Weston responds that she made a request for accommodation (the protected activity) and "was not permitted to return to work and was not permitted to enter the accommodation process for the period between July 2007 and May 2008" (the adverse action). The Court agrees with UPS that Weston's position on this issue is an attempt to turn a cause of action for discrimination into one for retaliation, and rejects that attempt.
Weston also responds that she suffered retaliation because she retained counsel (the protected activity) [*16]  and her return to work was delayed as a result (the adverse action). She relies on the testimony of Roach as evidence of this fact.
Roach testified, regarding the delay between the accommodation meeting in early April, and his job offer of May 22, that "[t]here was knowing that she had an attorney, there's conversations going on legal counsel consultation." Roach later qualified this by testifying that "any time litigation is involved, it makes it more deliberate. And I also remember there was an injunction or something filed sometime around that period, February or March, if I'm not mistaken. . . . any time litigation is involved, we're going to get legal counsel involved as we discuss options."
While Weston's retaliation theory is slim, the Court finds the evidence sufficient to withstand summary judgment. In order to establish a prima facie case of retaliation under the ADA, Weston must show (a) that she engaged in statutorily protected activity; (b) that an adverse employment action was taken against her; and (c) a causal connection between the two events. Stewart v. Independent School District No. 196, 481 F.3d 1034, 1042-43 (8th Cir. 2007). While no ADA case has been cited, the Court agrees with Weston that hiring an attorney to represent you when you believe you [*17]  are being discriminated against is protected activity. Cf. Ambers v. Village Family Service Center, Inc., 329 F.Supp.2d 1046, 1051 (D.N.D. 2004)(age discrimination case). The testimony of Roach is susceptible to varying interpretations, from "we are more careful when an attorney is involved" to "we slow the process down a lot when an attorney is involved."
Under these circumstances, the Court finds that summary judgment is not appropriate on Weston's retaliation claim.
IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED that Defendant's Motion For Summary Judgment (document #19) is granted in part and denied in part.
The motion is granted insofar as it seeks dismissal of plaintiff's claims under the Arkansas Equal Pay Act, the federal Equal Pay Act, and her claim of sex discrimination, and those claims are hereby dismissed.
The motion is denied in all other respects.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
/s/ Jimm Larry Hendren
JIMM LARRY HENDREN
UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGE


End of Document

