Whittington v. Tyson Foods
United States District Court for the Western District of Missouri, Central Division
November 2, 2020, Decided; November 2, 2020, Filed
Case No. 2:19-cv-04214-NKL

Reporter
2020 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 228628 *; 2020 WL 7074185
BRANDON WHITTINGTON, Plaintiff, v. TYSON FOODS, INC., Defendant.
Subsequent History: Affirmed by Whittington v. Tyson Foods, Inc., 2021 U.S. App. LEXIS 38463 (8th Cir. Mo., Dec. 29, 2021)
Counsel:  [*1] For Tyson Foods Inc., Defendant: Sarah Holdmeyer, Bryan Cave Leighton Paisner LLP - KCMO, Kansas City, MO; Jennifer L. Berhorst, LEAD ATTORNEY, Bryan Cave Leighton Paisner LLP - KCMO, Kansas City, MO; Robert J Hoffman, LEAD ATTORNEY, Bryan Cave Leighton Paisner LLP, Kansas City, MO.
For Brandon Whittington, Plaintiff: Joshua P. Wunderlich, Mary Katherine Paulus, Cornerstone Law Firm, Kansas City, MO.
Judges: NANETTE K. LAUGHREY, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: NANETTE K. LAUGHREY
Opinion



ORDER
Before the Court is Plaintiff Brandon Whittington's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment, Doc. 38, and Defendant Tyson Foods, Inc's Motion for Summary Judgment. Doc. 37. Whittington was employed by Tyson from July 2016 until March 2018. In August 2017, he was diagnosed with severe anxiety and depression and became certified to take FMLA leave by his physician. He took FMLA leave on multiple occasions between August 2017 and March 2018, sometimes for a few days and in other instances for multi-week periods. On March 23, 2018, he was terminated. Tyson, citing to the fact that they had had no communication with him since March 14 and had not seen him at work since March 6, claims he was terminated because he had effectively [*2]  abandoned his job. Whittington claims he was terminated for applying for FMLA leave on March 6 on the basis of his anxiety and depression, which he claims are disabilities. Whittington has sued Tyson under the Americans with Disabilities Act for its failure to accommodate his disabilities (Count I), wrongful termination on the basis of his disabilities (Count II), and retaliation for requesting accommodation (Count III). Whittington also states claims under the Family and Medical Leave Act for FMLA interference (Count IV) and retaliation for requesting FMLA leave (Count V). Whittington moves for partial summary judgment on its FMLA interference claim. Tyson moves for summary judgment on each of Whittington's claims. For the reasons explained below, the Court will deny Whittington's Motion and grant Tyson's Motion on all counts.

I. Background1
Tyson operates a chicken processing facility in Sedalia, Missouri. On July 26, 2016, Whittington began working at the Sedalia facility as a laborer. Whittington has been diagnosed with depression and anxiety that caused him to have panic attacks, to shake, and to have difficulty talking to people, sleeping, and focusing. These illnesses additionally [*3]  caused him to feel like he was going to pass out, to sweat, and to turn pale. He feels at least one of these symptoms on a daily basis. A Tyson HR representative, Patricia Bell, became aware of Whittington's mental illnesses "toward the end" of 2016. Raymond Sandlin, Whittington's immediate supervisor during the relevant time period, became aware of Whittington's mental illnesses "toward the end of 2017." Robert Long, a general production manager, knew that Whittington suffered from anxiety and depression before he began working at Tyson. Id. ¶ 5.
On September 8, 2016, Whittington transferred to the role of attendant in the "knife room" in the facility at the suggestion of a supervisor. Whittington testified that that position was the best position for him because it reduced his anxiety. In response to a question about whether anything could have been modified or changed in his position as a knife room attendant that would allow him to work with his symptoms, he responded "I don't think there's anything that could have been changed" and that he "absolutely enjoyed it."

A. First FMLA Leave Period
Almost a year into his employment, Whittington told his HR supervisor, Patricia Bell, he was [*4]  having serious problems with anxiety and was "feeling funny." Bell reminded him he would soon become eligible for FMLA leave. On August 3, 2017, Tyson notified Whittington of his rights and responsibilities under the FMLA. That same day, he requested FMLA leave until August 14, 2017, because of his anxiety and depression. On August 4, Whittington's psychiatrist, Dr. Mary Beegle, D.O., certified that he needed FMLA leave from August 3, 2017 to August 13, 2017, due to his anxiety and depression. Dr. Beegle stated Whittington could not perform any part of his job and would be fully disabled until August 13, 2017. She further stated he would continue to suffer such episodes, which lasted "4-5" days per episode, "1-2 times" every "1-2 months" for the next 12 months. On August 7, Tyson approved Whittington's August 3, 2017 leave request and designated that period of absence as FMLA leave based on Dr. Beegle's certification. Tyson used a form called a "Designation Notice" both to designate leave taken in the past as FMLA leave and to approve requests for future leave as FMLA-eligible. The Designation Notice stated: "Provided there is no deviation from [Whittington's] leave schedule," he was [*5]  approved to take FMLA leave on an "intermittent" basis going forward in accordance with Dr. Beegle's certification. It also required Whittington to notify Tyson if the dates of his leave were changed or extended "or were initially unknown." Doc. 37-13 (First Designation Notice).
Tyson's Leave of Absence Policy required employees returning from FMLA or non-FMLA medical leave to provide a "Return to Work Certification from their health care provider indicating that they are able to resume work, with or without reasonable accommodation." Doc. 41-11, at 5 (Leave of Absence Policy). On August 15, 2017, Whittington submitted a Return to Work Certification form provided by Tyson and filled out by Dr. Beegle. On the form, Dr. Beegle indicated Whittington could perform past work without restriction as of August 15. On August 24, 2017, Whittington submitted a Leave of Absence Application asking for his absences from August 3 to August 14 to be classified as FMLA leave. The application was approved the same day by Bell.
Whittington later used his FMLA leave on September 28, October 3, December 4, and December 5, 2017. Tyson approved these absences.

B. Second FMLA Leave Period
On December 12, 2017, [*6]  Whittington submitted a second Leave of Absence Application requesting FMLA leave from December 8 to December 18, 2017. That same day, Tyson notified Whittington of his rights and responsibilities under the FMLA, stated he had 299.5 hours of FMLA leave remaining, and told him he had until December 27, 2017, to provide unspecified information to support his FMLA leave request. It is not clear from that Notice what information Tyson sought, but Whittington nonetheless returned an FMLA Certification from Dr. Beegle on December 18 that was substantially identical to the certification provided in August. Dr. Beegle indicated Whittington needed FMLA leave from December 8 to 18, 2017, and would need intermittent leave 1-2 times per 1-2 months for the next year, with a duration of 4-5 days per episode. Whittington also provided a Return to Work Certificate form provided by Tyson and filled out by Dr. Beegle which stated he was able to perform past work without restriction as of December 18. Finally, on that same day, Tyson provided Whittington a Designation Notice approving the requested leave for past absences along with intermittent leave 1-2 times a month 4-5 days per episode for the next [*7]  year. Whittington signed and dated the Designation Notice on December 18, 2018.
Whittington later used his FMLA leave on December 20 and December 21, 2017, and January 3. January 4, January 31, and February 1, 2018. Tyson approved these absences.

C. Third FMLA Leave Period
Beginning February 12 and until March 5, 2018, Whittington called Tyson each morning to report he would not be at work that day, as required by Tyson's attendance policy. On March 6, 2018, Whittington returned to the facility after missing 16 consecutive workdays and met with Bell, his HR supervisor. Bell noted Whittington was "shaky" and did not appear "able to come to work." At that meeting, he provided a note from Dr Beegle regarding his latest absences. The note was dated February 28, 2018 and read in its entirety "Please excuse Brandon from work starting Feb. 12 — March 5, 2018, we have been adjusting his meds in the past weeks. If questions, please call." Unlike the prior two return-to-work notes, this one was filled out on Dr. Beegle's stationary, not the Tyson-provided form, and did not state if Whittington could return to work and whether he had any work restrictions.
Bell requested that Whittington get an updated [*8]  note from a physician indicating his ability to work, whether he had work restrictions and, if so, what they were. In an email sent to Whittington's managers on March 6, Bell stated "he needs to get his note changed to add no restrictions or full duty." Bell believed that under Tyson's Leave of Absence policy, Whittington needed a note that either stated Whittington had no restrictions or listing his restrictions so they "can try to accommodate them." Tyson's Leave of Absence policy included a Return-to-Work policy that required employees returning from FMLA or non-FMLA medical leave to provide a note from their doctor indicating "that they are able to resume work, with or without reasonable accommodation."
Later in the day, Whittington submitted his third Leave of Absence Application requesting FMLA leave from February 19 to March 9, 2018, his expected return date. That same day, Tyson notified him of his rights and responsibilities under the FMLA, stated he had 203.5 hours of FMLA leave remaining, and told him he had until March 21, 2018, to provide "sufficient certification" to support his request for FMLA leave.
Whittington did not return to work on March 9, as expected. Whittington [*9]  alleged that at some point he notified someone at Tyson he was having trouble getting in touch with Dr. Beegle, though he does not remember when he did this, to whom he spoke, or what specifically was said. Bell attempted to contact Whittington by phone at least three times and emailed him after March 6 to check on him but never made contact or had her calls returned. Whittington's supervisor Raymond Sandlin and Robert Long also attempted to reach Whittington but were similarly unsuccessful. Whittington did not return his FMLA certification paperwork by March 21. Between March 7 and March 14, he called Tyson's absence hotline on weekdays to report he would not be at work that day, but he stopped calling after March 14. According to Tyson's Attendance Policy, "Three consecutive days absent without notifying the company will be considered job abandonment," justifying immediate termination. Doc. 37-3 (Attendance Policy). Tyson's Leave of Absence policy also stated that "Termination of employment may occur if a team member does not return to work at the end of the approved LOA" or "if the person fails to obtain an extension of the Leave prior to its expiration[.]". Doc. 41-11, at 5.
On [*10]  March 23, 2018, two days after Tyson's deadline for providing certification had expired and 14 days after his approved Leave of Absence period had ended, Tyson terminated Whittington. The Termination Form, filled out by Karen Williams, stated Whittington was terminated because he failed to return from leave on March 9 and failed to communicate with Tyson. In an email to Karen Williams on April 6, 2018, Bell stated that earlier in the day she had "explained [to Whittington] that he was terminated for not contacting HR nor did he return the FMLA in a timely manner." Doc. 41-2 (Bell email to Williams, Apr. 6, 2018).

II. Standard of Review
"Summary judgment is proper if, after viewing the evidence and drawing all reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to the nonmovant, no genuine issue of material fact exists and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Higgins v. Union Pac. R.R. Co., 931 F.3d 664, 669 (8th Cir. 2019) (quotation marks and citation omitted); Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). While the moving party bears the burden of establishing a lack of any genuine issues of material fact, Brunsting v. Lutsen Mountains Corp., 601 F.3d 813, 820 (8th Cir. 2010), the party opposing summary judgment "must set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue of material fact for trial." Thomas v. Corwin, 483 F.3d 516, 527 (8th Cir. 2007). The Court must enter summary judgment [*11]  "against a party who fails to make a showing sufficient to establish the existence of an element essential to that party's case, and on which that party will bear the burden of proof at trial." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986).

III. Discussion
The parties have filed cross-motions for summary judgment. Whittington moves for summary judgment on his FMLA Interference claim (Count IV). Tyson moves for Summary Judgment on each of Whittington's claims.

A. FMLA Interference (Count IV)
Whittington claims the undisputed material facts establish that Tyson interfered with his FMLA rights by (1) requiring him to recertify his FMLA eligibility in December 2017; (2) requesting the same in March 2018; and (3) terminating him for not complying with the 2018 recertification request, and therefore he is entitled to judgment as a matter of law on his interference claim. Tyson agrees that there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact on this claim but asserts that Tyson did not interfere with Whittington's FMLA rights as a matter of law. Tyson moves for summary judgment on the claim as well.
A covered employer may not interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of or the attempt to exercise, any FMLA right. 29 U.S.C. § 2615(a)(1). To succeed on his [*12]  FMLA interference claim, Whittington must establish (1) he was eligible for FMLA leave; (2) Tyson was on notice of his need for FMLA leave; and (3) Tyson denied Whittington his FMLA benefits. Hazenwinkel v. Mosaic, 809 F.3d 427, 432 (8th Cir. 2015). An FMLA interference claim is limited to instances where "the employee proves that the employer denied a benefit to which [h]e was entitled under the FMLA." Lovland v. Employers Mut. Ca. Co., 674 F.3d 806, 811 (2012); Wisbey v. City of Lincoln, Neb., 612 F.3d 667, 675 (8th Cir. 2010).
An employer may request that an employee provide a certification from their health care provider that they need FMLA leave. 29 U.S.C. § 2613(a). The purpose of certification is to substantiate the employee's need for FMLA leave. 73 Fed. Reg. 67934-01, at 68010. Once an employer has certified an employee's eligibility for FMLA leave, it may request recertification "on a reasonable basis." 29 U.S.C. § 2613(e). The Department of Labor regulations provide that "If a medical certification indicates that the minimum duration of the serious health condition at issue is more than 30 days, an employer must wait until that minimum duration expires before requesting recertification" unless (1) the employee requests an extension of the leave; (2) the circumstances underlying the previous certification have significantly changed; or (3) the employer receives information that casts doubt on the employee's [*13]  stated reason for absence or the validity of the original certification. 29 C.F.R. §§ 825.308(b)-(c). However, "[i]n all cases, an employer may request a recertification of a medical condition every six months in connection with an absence by the employee. Accordingly, even if the medical certification indicates that the employee will need intermittent or reduced schedule leave for a period in excess of six months ..., the employer would be permitted to request recertification every six months in connection with an absence." 29 C.F.R. § 825.308(b).
In creating these regulations, the Department of Labor sought to balance the employer's right to receive updated medical information against the employee's right to take leave. 73 Fed. Reg. 67934-01, at 68022; see also 29 C.F.R. § 825.308. In striking that balance, the Department noted its concern that too-frequent recertification requests would burden employees suffering from serious health conditions. Id.

1. December 2017 Recertification Request
On August 7, 2017, Tyson approved Whittington's FMLA request for intermittent leave for anxiety and depression. Doc. 41-13. In that certification, Dr. Beegle noted Whittington's condition would persist for a year. Then on December 12, 2017, a little over four months after its August [*14]  approval and designation, Tyson requested Whittington recertify his eligibility. Tyson does not state its justification for the request.
For purposes of this Order, the Court will assume that Tyson's request for recertification on December 12, 2017 ran afoul of 29 C.F.R. § 825.308(b), and that no exception excused Tyson's decision to request recertification. Nonetheless, Tyson argues that even if this recertification request was premature, "Plaintiff cannot establish a claim for FMLA interference because he was not denied a FMLA benefit for which he was entitled." Doc. 40, at 24 (Tyson's Suggestions in Opposition to Whittington's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment). Essentially, Tyson asserts that its recertification request did not constitute FMLA interference because Whittington, in response to the request, recertified his eligibility and that it granted his request for FMLA leave in December.
In Stallings v. Hussman Corp., 417 F.3d 1041, 1051 (8th Cir. 2006), the Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's dismissal of an employee's FMLA interference claim after finding the employer "granted every request [the employee] made to take FMLA leave" without reaching the question of whether the employer's actions discouraged the employee's leave-taking. The Eighth Circuit [*15]  has consistently held to this approach, limiting FMLA interference claims to situations where an FMLA benefit was in fact denied. In Lovland, the Eighth Circuit found an employee could not assert a valid FMLA interference claim when she only alleged "discrimination that occurred after she took FMLA leave, not denial of, or interference with, her leave." Lovland, 674 F.3d, at 811. In Wisbey, similarly to this case, an employee argued that a fitness-for-duty exam imposed by her employer was FMLA interference because the employer had already approved her doctor's FMLA certification. Wisbey, 612 F.3d, at 675. The Eighth Circuit rejected the employee's FMLA interference claim out of hand because "[she] was never denied FMLA leave and, therefore, has not shown that she was entitled to any benefit that was denied." Id. at 675 (citing Stallings, 447 F.3d, at 1050-51). Finally, in Quinn v. St. Louis County, 653 F.3d 744-45 (8th Cir. 2011), the Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's dismissal of an FMLA interference claim where the employee argued she was discouraged from using her FMLA leave but conceded she received her full twelve weeks of FMLA leave every time she asked for it. The Eighth Circuit declined to even address the employee's discouragement argument, instead affirming on the sole basis that no benefit was denied. Id. at 744 (citing [*16]  Wisbey, 612 F.3d, at 675); see also Pulczinski v. Trinity Structural Towers, Inc., 691 F.3d 996, 1007 (8th Cir. 2012) ("Pulczinski must show that the employer denied him entitlements under the FMLA.").
In this case, the record shows that Whittington, after being asked to recertify his FMLA eligibility, promptly did so, and that Tyson approved his certification and granted his FMLA leave request for both the December 11 to December 18 period and on an intermittent basis until February 2018. Doc. 39-15 (December Designation Notice). There is no indication that Whittington was denied FMLA leave or any FMLA benefit as a result of Tyson's December recertification request. Because Eighth Circuit precedent is clear that an FMLA interference claim must establish the denial of an FMLA benefit, the Court holds that Whittington's FMLA interference claim premised on the December 2017 recertification request fails as a matter of law.

2. March 2018 Recertification Request
Beginning February 12, 2018, Whittington was absent from work, and was absent every day thereafter until March 6. On that day, he appeared at the Tyson facility with a note from Dr. Beegle asking Tyson to excuse his absences from February 12 to March 5. Whittington met with his HR representative, Patricia Bell, about his absences and [*17]  his return to work. Bell requested that Whittington recertify his FMLA eligibility by March 21, 2018. Whittington claims this request for recertification, coming only four months after his December 2017 recertification, was unreasonable and constituted FMLA interference as a matter of law. In contrast, Tyson claims its request for recertification was reasonable as a matter of law because by March 6, Whittington had missed 16 consecutive days of work, constituting a significant change in the circumstances underlying the December 2017 FMLA certification, which contemplated leave-taking 1-2 times per 1-2 months for the next year, with a duration of 4-5 days per episode. In support of its position, Tysons points to 29 C.F.R. § 825.308, a Department of Labor regulation that contains an example which Tyson contends is analogous to the increase in Whittington's absences. The regulation states: "For example, a medical certification stated that an employee would need leave for one to two days when the employee suffered a migraine headache and the employee's absences for his or her last two migraines lasted four days each, then the increased duration of absence might constitute a significant change in circumstances." [*18]  29 C.F.R. § 825.308.
As a preliminary matter, the Court must determine whether the December 2017 certification indicated that Whittington could take FMLA leave twice each month or twice in a thirty-day period. Whittington argues the Designation Notice permitted him to take up to 5 consecutive days of leave twice in any given calendar month. Tyson argues the designation permits him to take up to 5 consecutive days of leave twice in any given thirty-day period. As a matter of interpretation, the plain meaning of "1-2 times a month" is 1-2 times in any calendar month. If Tyson had intended to allow Whittington up to 5 consecutive days of leave twice in any 30-day period, it could have approved FMLA leave "1-2 times in any 30-day period." Plain meaning aside, the Designation Notice uses the "30-day period" language at two points in its very next section. Doc. 39-15, at 2 ("You have a right to request this information once in a 30-day period (if leave was taken in the 30-day period).") When a document uses two different phrases in close proximity to each other, the Court should assign them different meanings, if possible. Allied Sales Drivers and Warehousemen, Local. No. 29, Intern. Broth. Of teamsters v. [*19]  Sara Lee Bakery Grp., 746 F.3d 342, 348 (8th Cir. 2014) (citing Taracorp, Inc. v. NL Indus., Inc., 73 F.3d 738, 744 (7th Cir. 1996) ("[W]hen parties to the same contract use such different language to address parallel issues . . . , it is reasonable to infer that they intend this language to mean different things."). Thus, the Designation Notice allowed for up to two 5-day periods of absence per episode per calendar month.
A second preliminary question is whether all of Whittington's leave between February 12 and March 6 was covered by the December 2017 certification. At oral argument, Whittington's counsel represented that although Whittington sought FMLA leave from February 12 to February 16, 2018, that week of leave was necessitated by a fever, not anything related to his anxiety or depression. Whittington argues that because this week of leave was not due to the mental illnesses justifying the December 2017 certification, it should not be considered when assessing whether his FMLA absences constituted a significant change in circumstance. However, Dr. Beegle's Return-to-Work Note asked that Whittington's absences be excused from February 12 to March 5 because his medications needed adjustment. Doc. 37-21 (Beegle Note). Dr. Beegle was a psychiatrist, and her note pertained to adjustments in how Whittington [*20]  was being medicated for symptoms of his anxiety and depression. Whittington has pointed to no evidence that contradicts Dr. Beegle's note. Thus, there is no genuine issue as to whether Whittington's absences from February 12 to February 16 were related to his anxiety and depression. Dr. Beegle's note also establishes that Whittington's absence from February 12 to March 6 was caused by a single episode of illness.
The Court now turns to the question of whether Tyson's request for recertification was reasonable as a matter of law. In Graham v. BlueCross BlueShield of Tenn., Inc., the Sixth Circuit held an employer's request for recertification was reasonable when the employee's 28 days of FMLA absence far exceeded her previous record for longest FMLA absence of six days. 521 Fed.Appx. 419, 424 (6th Cir. 2013). In Andrews v. CSX Transportation, Inc., a Florida district court held an employer's request for recertification was reasonable when the record showed a recent "significant up-tick" in absences, when she used 24 days of FMLA leave over a seven-month period after using only 16 days of FMLA leave in the prior year. 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 119155, 2009 WL 5176462, at *7-8 (M.D. Fla. Dec. 20, 2009).
Whittington attempts to distinguish these cases by pointing out that in both, the previous certifications [*21]  did not quantify how much leave was permitted—they only stated the need for "intermittent" leave going forward. Graham, 521 Fed.Appx., at 421 ("On July 2, Graham's physician amended the certification, but stated that he could not "give a clear frequency or duration [for her absences] at this time."); Andrews, 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 119155, 2009 WL 4176462, at *7 ("[T]he previous certifications for Bell's intermittent leave stated that the duration of her need for intermittent leave was "unknown."). In contrast, Dr. Beegle's certification in this case contained a concrete estimate of how much medical leave would be needed—1-2 episodes per month, 4-5 days in duration, for a year. Whittington's argument, however, is rejected because in Smith v. City of Nile, 505 Fed. Appx.482, 485 (6th Cir. 2012), the Sixth Circuit found that a request for recertification was reasonable when the employee's doctor predicted a need for 2 days during the relevant time period, but the employee had taken 6 days during that time. In support of its conclusion, the Sixth Circuit cited to the same Department of Labor's example of an early request for recertification that Tyson also relies on. Thus, even in cases where there is a concrete estimate of how much leave will be needed, the Sixth Circuit has found as a matter of law that it is reasonable for an employer [*22]  to seek recertification when the actual leave taken is at least twice as much as the amount originally predicted.
Whittington has not identified any reason why the Department of Labor's example is not analogous here as well. In December 2017, Whittington's doctor predicted that Whittington would need FMLA leave 1-2 times per 1-2 months for the next year, with a duration of 4-5 days per episode. Instead, Whittington sought FMLA leave from February 12 to February 28, 2018—a 13-day string of work absences in a single month spread over 17 total days. As discussed above, there is nothing in the record to suggest that this was anything other than a single episode and that the leave requested was at least double the amount of time predicted by his doctor in the December recertification. Whittington argues that his leave was in fact for two separate episodes but there is nothing in the factual record to support that argument. Again, Dr. Beegle's stated that the leave was needed to adjust medication and Whittington provided no admissible evidence to the contrary.
Whittington also argues that the Department of Labor example is not persuasive because it only suggests what might be a reasonable [*23]  basis for an early recertification request. The Court rejects that argument because the use of the word might by the Department of Labor recognizes that there could be additional facts that would make the request unreasonable. Here, Whittington provides no such additional facts. Tracking the approach of Andrews, Graham, and Niles, the recertification request by Tyson was reasonable as a matter of law because no reasonable juror could find that Whittington's absence from February 12 to February 28 was not a significant change in circumstances.

3. March 2018 Termination
In Count IV, Whittington also claims that Tyson interfered with his FMLA rights by terminating him for failing to return the March 6 request for recertification by the deadline set by Tyson. This claim is clearly based on the assumption that Tyson's March 6 request for recertification was itself an interference with Whittington's FMLA rights. Doc. 39, at 26 (Suggestions in Support of Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment). Therefore, Whittington's claim fails because the Court has already found as a matter of law that the March 6 request for certification was reasonable as a matter of law.
For the foregoing reasons, [*24]  Whittington's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment is denied and Tyson's Motion for Summary Judgment on Count IV is granted.

B. FMLA Retaliation (Count V)
Whittington claims he was terminated in retaliation for reporting his serious medical conditions to Tyson in August 2017 and requesting FMLA leave in March 2018. Tyson claims it is entitled to summary judgment on this claim because there is no evidence of a causal connection between his termination and the two aforementioned protected activities. Tyson alternatively argues it has supplied legitimate non-discriminatory reasons as to why it terminated Whittington, and that Whittington has not produced evidence creating a genuine fact issue as to whether those non-discriminatory reasons were pretextual.
Tyson may not retaliate against an employee for invoking their FMLA rights, meaning it may not consider their use of FMLA leave as a negative factor in an employment action, including termination. Darby v. Bratch, 287 F.3d 673, 679 (8th Cir. 2002) (citing 29 U.S.C. § 2612(a)92). If there is no direct evidence of FMLA retaliation, the claim may still succeed using indirect evidence under the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework. 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). Under that framework, Whittington must first establish a prima facie [*25]  case that (1) he engaged in a protected activity; (2) he suffered a materially adverse employment action; and (3) there was a causal connection between the protected activity and the adverse employment action. Smith v. Allen Health Sys., Inc., 302 F.3d 827, 832 (8th Cir. 2002). If Whittington can establish a prima facie case of retaliation, the burden shifts to Tyson to produce evidence of a legitimate, non-discriminatory reason for its decision to terminate him. Id. at 833. If Tyson meets this burden of production, the burden shifts to Whittington to produce evidence that creates both a genuine issue of fact as to whether Tyson's proffered non-discriminatory reasons for termination were pretext and creates a reasonable inference that Tyson acted in retaliation. Id. (citing Erickson v. Farmland Indus., Inc., 271 F.3d 718, 726 (8th Cir. 2001)).
Whittington asserts two protected activities that he contends are causally connected to Tyson's termination decision: (1) his decision to report his medical conditions to Tyson in August 2017; and (2) his decision to request FMLA leave in March 2018. Doc. 1., at 13, ¶ 99-100; Doc. 41, at 41-42.
As to the first protected activity, the record establishes that Whittington reported his medical conditions of anxiety and depression to Tyson in August 2017, more than seven months before his termination. Doc. 41, at 9 ¶ 11. Bell immediately told Whittington he would soon be eligible for FMLA leave. Id. Between August 2017 and his termination, Tyson certified Whittington's disability status twice, in both instances on the same day it received the completed medical forms. In total, it approved 27 days of FMLA leave relating to Whittington's anxiety and depression. Considering the amount of time that passed between the date he reported his conditions and the date of his termination, [*26]  the sheer amount of leave Tyson approved in that intervening period, and the lack of any evidence connecting Whittington's decision to report his illnesses in August 2017 and his termination, no reasonable juror could conclude that Tyson terminated Whittington because of his request for FMLA leave in August 2017.
As to the second protected activity, Whittington argues he was terminated in retaliation for requesting FMLA leave in March 2018, even though Tyson's Termination Form states he was terminated because he failed to return from leave on March 9 as expected and failed to communicate with Tyson after his failure to return. In support of his argument, Whittington points to the email Bell sent to Karen Williams on April 6, 2018, as direct evidence that Tyson terminated him at least in part for taking FMLA leave. Doc. 41-2. In that email, Bell informs Williams, another HR employee, that she spoke to Whittington that day and told him "he was terminated for not contacting HR nor did he return the FMLA in a timely manner." Id. Whittington contends that this email shows Whittington was terminated in part because of his failure to timely recertify his FMLA eligibility by March 21, 2018, [*27]  allegedly in violation of 29 C.F.R. § 825.308.
For the reasons explained above, Tyson's March 2018 recertification request was lawful. Therefore, under § 825.308, Whittington had 15 days from March 6, 2018—until March 21—to certify his eligibility for FMLA leave. His failure to certify by that date left his absences unprotected by the FMLA. 29 C.F.R. § 825.313(c). Thus, in context, Bell's email is not inconsistent with Tyson's Termination Form that states Whittington was terminated because he failed to return to work on March 9. Rather, the email explains to Whittington that none of his absences were covered by FMLA leave, and as a result he was not excused from his obligation to return to work on March 9. Further, it is just not logical to interpret the email to mean that Whittington was fired because he requested a benefit under the FMLA.
The Court further finds that Whittington has not established a prima facie case of retaliation under the McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework because he has not shown a causal connection between his termination and his request for FMLA benefits. But even if Whittington had made a prima facie case, Tyson has proffered two non-discriminatory reasons for terminating Whittington on March 23, 2018—first, [*28]  for not communicating with Tyson and, second, for not returning from leave on March 9. The record establishes that Whittington neither returned from leave on March 9, as he stated he would in his Leave of Absence Application, nor did he communicate with Tyson after March 14. Tyson has produced evidence that its reasons for termination were indeed legitimate and non-discriminatory in that Whittington plainly violated its attendance policies in two ways: First, by not timely returning from leave. Doc. 41-11, at 5 ("Termination of employment may occur if a team member does not return to work at the end of the approved LOA"). And second, by creating the impression he had abandoned his job by not communicating with Tyson employees who contacted him to explain his absence and his failure to communicate with HR about the FMLA recertification requirement by March 21, a deadline he was aware of. ("Three consecutive days absent without notifying the company will be considered job abandonment.") Doc. 37-3 (Attendance Policy).
Once Tyson produced evidence of a non-discriminatory reason for Whittington's termination, the burden shifted to Whittington to produce "enough admissible evidence to raise [*29]  genuine doubt as to the legitimacy of [Tyson's] motive[.]" Strate v. Midwest Bankcentre, Inc., 398 F.3d 1011, 1021 (8th Cir. 2005) (internal citations omitted). Whittington cites Bell's email as evidence that Tyson's reasons for termination were pretext, claiming Bell's email was inconsistent with the reasons for termination given in the Termination Form. But as previously found, Bell's email was not inconsistent with Tyson's Termination Form. Further, the Eighth Circuit affirmed summary for the employer in Wierman v. Casey's General Stores 638 F.3d 984, 995 (8th Cir. 2011) even where there were some discrepancies about the reason for the employee's termination. The Eighth Circuit held the discrepancies "[did] not undermine [the employer's] consistent reason for terminating [the employee], which was that she was violating the company's employee discount policy." Id. at 996. The Eighth Circuit distinguished Wierman's situation, where factual discrepancies appeared as part of a consistent explanation for termination, from a situation where an employer provided totally inconsistent explanations. See EEOC v. Trans States Airlines, Inc., 462 F.3d 987, 995 (8th Cir. 2006); Allen Health Sys. Inc., 302 F.3d, at 835.
On this record, no reasonable juror could find that Tyson's reason for terminating Whittington was just a pretext to hide discrimination, given his failure to return to work on March 9 as expected and his continuing absence thereafter, [*30]  his failure to respond to Tyson employees who were trying to contact him about his job and his failure to communicate with HR before missing a deadline he was aware of. This is particularly so given Tyson's prior efforts to tell Whittington about his qualification for FMLA leave, Tyson's willingness to grant FMLA leave when FMLA requirements were satisfied, and Tyson keeping Whittington's job open more than a month after Whittington was first absent.
Whittington suggests at various points in his briefing that he did call Tyson's telephone line to report his absences and at some unknown point, he spoke to an unidentified Tyson employee about his problems getting a note from Dr. Beegle, but those facts are insufficient to create an inference of pretext. They do not explain Whittington's failure to contact Tyson after March 14 when he could no longer report his absences through Tyson's automated system. Nor do they explain why he did not contact HR personnel about issues that he had specifically discussed with HR personnel previously. Nor do they explain why Whittington did not respond to Tyson personnel when they reached out to him.
Because Tyson met its burden to supply a legitimate, [*31]  non-discriminatory reason for terminating Tyson and because Whittington did not create a genuine issue of fact as to whether those reasons were pretextual, Tyson's Motion for Summary Judgment is granted as to Count V.

C. ADA Failure to Accommodate (Count I)
Whittington claims Tyson failed to accommodate his disabilities in violation of the ADA. Whittington argues that he requested reasonable accommodation when he asked for time off to recover from symptoms of his depression and anxiety and that Tyson refused to accommodate him. Doc. 1, at 5 ¶ 37. Whittington also argues that Tyson refused to engage in an interactive process to accommodate his reasonable request for accommodation when it refused to allow him to resume work on March 6, 2018 because Dr. Beegle's note did not comply with Tyson's Leave of Absence policy. Id. ¶ 39. Tyson moves for summary judgment on this claim, arguing there is no genuine issue of material fact as to whether its Leave of Absence policy violated the ADA or whether it provided a reasonable accommodation to Whittington.
An employer cannot discriminate against an employee due to their disabilities. 42 U.S.C. § 12112(a). To succeed on an ADA claim, the employee must prove that (1) [*32]  they had a disability; (2) they suffered an adverse employment action; (3) they are a qualified worker; and (4) their employer failed to accommodate the disability. Gardea v. JBS USA, LLC, 915 F.3d 537, 541 (8th Cir. 2019); Hustvet v. Allina Health Sys., 910 F.3d 399, 410 (8th Cir. 2018). Only the fourth element is at issue in this case. To demonstrate a failure to accommodate, Whittington must show (1) Tyson knew about his disability; (2) he requested accommodations for his disability; (3) Tyson did not make a good faith effort to assist him in seeking an accommodation; and (4) he could have been reasonably accommodated but for Tyson's lack of good faith. Hustvet, 910 F.3d, at 410.
Tyson's Leave of Absence policy required employees returning from FMLA or non-FMLA medical leave to produce a doctor's note stating whether the returning employee had any remaining restrictions and, if they did, what those restrictions were. Doc. 41-11, at 5 (Leave of Absence policy). The return-to-work provision was nothing new to Whittington. In August and December 2017, Whittington was asked to provide such a note, and in both cases provided one. Doc. 37-12 (First Return to Work note); Doc. 37-18 (Second Return to Work note). Dr. Beegle's note produced by Whittington on March 6, 20 18, did not comply with company policy because it did not state [*33]  whether Whittington was able to return to work with or without accommodation—only that his absences between February 12 and March 5 should be excused because his medications were being adjusted. Doc. 37-21 (March Beegle Note).
As part of his claim, Whittington describes Tyson's return-to-work policy as requiring a doctor's note stating the employee could return to work "without restrictions." This description is inaccurate. Tyson's return-to-work policy required a doctor's note "indicating that they are able to resume work, with or without reasonable accommodation." Doc. 41-11, at 3 (Leave of Absence Policy). Whittington relies on a statement by Bell made in deposition, when she said "they have to return to work with no restrictions or to full duty[.]" 37-8 (Bell Depo.), at 96:18-21. Yet her very next sentence clarified the policy: "[A]nd if they have restrictions, we need to know what they are so we can try to accommodate them." Id., at 96:21-23. There is no admissible evidence that a "no restrictions" return-to-work policy was ever applied to Whittington.
Whittington claims the Leave of Absence policy was a per se ADA violation because it "does not allow a case-by-case assessment of an individual's [*34]  ability to perform essential functions of the individual's job, with or without accommodation." Heise v. Genuine Parts Co., 900 F. Supp. 1137, 1154 n.10 (D. Minn. 1995). But as part of the interactive ADA process, an employee must provide relevant details of their disability to their employers. Kowitz v. Trinity Health, 39 F.3d 742, 746 (8th Cir. 2016) (quoting EEOC v. Convergys Customer Mgmt. Grp., Inc., 491 F.3d 790 795 (8th Cir. 2007)). Tyson argues that its return-to-work policy existed precisely so it could engage in an interactive accommodative process with its employees, if necessary. Without information that an accommodation was necessary, Tyson would not know that an interactive accommodative process was needed. Thus, Tyson's policy was compatible with the ADA in that it required employees to provide relevant details of their disability after periods of medical leave. See Kowitz, 39 F.3d, at 746. It was Whittington, not Tyson, who declined to engage in that process when he failed to produce a doctor's note detailing his restrictions or lack thereof or failed to communicate with HR about any problem he had getting the note. See Enica v. Principi, 544 F.3d 328, 339 (1st Cir. 2008) ("Although the degree of interaction required varies . . . the process requires open communication by both parties[.]"). Whittington points to no evidence that Tyson operated in bad faith in applying its Leave of Absence policy—and indeed, in both August and December 2017, Tyson [*35]  applied the policy to Whittington without issue, allowing him to promptly return to work after producing an acceptable note from Dr. Beegle.
Although Tyson knew by virtue of the prior certifications the basic circumstances of Whittington's disabilities, no reasonable jury could find Tyson's decision to apply its Leave of Absence policy in this instance to be an ADA violation. The symptoms of illnesses often change over time depending on their progression and modifications in treatment strategy. It is consistent with the ADA for an employer to seek information from a doctor as to an employee's restrictions following a three-week medical absence, especially when that absence was due to medication adjustments and when that employee worked in the knife room.
Whittington's citation to Heise does not convince the Court otherwise. In that case, a district court found a per se ADA violation when another company policy forbade an employee from returning before they were "100% cured." Heise, 900 F.Supp., at 1054. Tyson's Leave of Absence policy is on its face distinguishable from its rigid 100%-cured requirement. Tyson requires a doctor's note stating its returning employee's restrictions, if any, precisely so it can reasonably [*36]  accommodate those who are still restricted in some way (which is to say those who are less than 100% cured) based on a case-by-case assessment of the employee's abilities and restrictions. Doc. 41-11, at 5 (Leave of Absence Policy).
As a matter of law, Tyson's request for a doctor's note in conformance with its Leave of Absence policy did not constitute a failure-to-accommodate violation. Furthermore, there is no evidence that Tyson engaged in the ADA process in bad faith or refused to accommodate Whittington. For these reasons, the Court grants Tyson's Motion for Summary Judgment on Count I of Whittington's claim.

D. ADA Wrongful Termination (Count II)
Whittington claims Tyson discriminated against him by terminating him because of his anxiety and depression and that this is a violation of the ADA. Doc. 1, at 7 ¶ 55. Tyson moves for summary judgment, arguing that even if Whittington had made a prima facie case for disability discrimination, Tyson has established a non-discriminatory reason for Whittington's termination—failing to return from leave and not communicating with Tyson—and that there is no genuine issue of material fact as to whether these reasons were pretextual.
To establish [*37]  a wrongful termination claim under the ADA, an employee must prove they were (1) disabled within the meaning of the ADA; (2) a qualified individual under the ADA; and (3) terminated because of their disability. Walz v. Ameriprise Financial, Inc., 779 F.3d 842, 845 (8th Cir. 2015). If the employee establishes a prima facie claim of wrongful termination, the burden shifts to the employer to provide a non-discriminatory reason for the termination. Bailey v. Amsted Indus. Inc., 172 F.3d 1041, 1044 (8th Cir. 1999) (citing McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973). If a non-discriminatory reason for termination is established, the burden shifts to the employee to produce sufficient evidence that the reason was pretextual. Wheeler v. Aventis Pharmaceuticals, 360 F.3d 853, 858 (8th Cir. 2004).
In support of his ADA termination claim Whittington argues that he has "already established the Defendant failed to accommodate his disability" and "[b]ecause Plaintiff's termination was directly linked to that failure, there exists a genuine dispute of fact as to whether Defendant terminated Plaintiff's employment because of his disability." Doc. 41, at 40. Because the Court has found as a matter of law that Tyson did accommodate Whittington's disability, his claim that he was terminated because of his disability also fails. Further, nowhere does Whittington articulate specific evidence that suggests that Tyson decided to fire him because [*38]  of his anxiety and depression. Therefore, he has failed to make a prima facie ADA termination claim.
Nor has Whittington presented evidence of pretext, even if a prima facie ADA termination claim could be found in the record. As previously discussed, Tyson has provided a non-discriminatory reason for terminating Whittington — his failure to return to work on March and his failure to communicate with Tyson. Tyson's attendance policy stated: "Three consecutive days absent without notifying the Company will be considered job abandonment." Doc. 37-3 (Attendance Policy). The record shows that by March 23, Whittington had not notified the company of his absence for seven consecutive workdays—more than enough to justify termination. Furthermore, Tyson's Leave of Absence policy stated, "Termination of employment may occur if a team member does not return to work at the end of the approved LOA" or "if the person fails to obtain an extension of the Leave prior to its expiration[.]". Doc. 41-11, at 5. It is undisputed that Whittington did not return to work on March 9 as expected.
To counter this evidence, Whittington points to his calls into Tyson's automated line to report his absence and his [*39]  statement that he notified some unidentified Tyson employee that he could not get a note from Dr. Beegle. But calling into an automated line to report an absence is not the same thing as obtaining an excuse for the absence. Further, as discussed above, this evidence does not explain Whittington's failure to contact Tyson after March 14 when he could no longer report his absences through Tyson's automated system. Nor does Whittington present evidence why he did not contact Tyson personnel about issues that he had specifically discussed with Tyson personnel previously; nor does it explain why Whittington did not respond to Tyson personnel when they reached out to him.
Because there is no genuine issue of material fact as to whether Tyson established legitimate non-discriminatory reasons for its decision to terminate Whittington, and because Whittington did not meet his burden in producing sufficient evidence that those reasons were pretextual, Tyson's Motion for Summary Judgment is granted as to Count II.

E. ADA Retaliation (Count III)
Whittington claims he was terminated in retaliation for requesting reasonable accommodations for his disabilities in violation of the ADA. Doc. 1, at 10 [*40]  ¶ 69-72. Whittington claims his requests for limited time off to recover from symptoms of anxiety and depression were requests for reasonable accommodation under the ADA, and that Whittington's termination decision was causally connected to these leave requests. In briefing, Whittington specifically cites his request for leave from February 12 through March 5, 2018, as the request for accommodation that provoked Tyson to retaliate. Doc. 41, at 41.
To prevail on an ADA retaliation claim, a plaintiff must prove (1) he engaged in a protected activity; (2) he suffered a materially adverse employment action; and (3) there was a causal connection between the protected activity and the adverse employment action. Lors v. Dean, 746 F.3d 857, 867 (8th Cir. 2014) (quoting Logan v. Liberty Healthcare Corp., 416 F.3d 817, 880 (8th Cir. 2005). It requires a but-for causal connection between the protected activity and the termination. Oehmke v. Medtronic, Inc., 844 F.3d 748, 758 (8th Cir. 2016). Tyson does not dispute that Whittington's request for leave was a protected activity under the ADA or that his termination was an adverse employment action. Tyson moves for summary judgment on the causality element, arguing "It is evident that Plaintiff was not terminated in retaliation for requesting this accommodation . . . as Tyson approved Plaintiff's leave on two prior occasions [*41]  and did not assess attendance points or take any other action against Plaintiff because of his leaves." Doc. 37, at 27. The McDonnell Douglas burden-shifting framework applies to this claim as well. Stewart v. Indep. School Dist. No. 196, 481 F.3d 1034, 1042 (8th Cir. 2007).
Tyson has proffered two legitimate non-discriminatory reasons for terminating Whittington on March 23, 2018—specifically, that he was terminated for not communicating with Tyson and for not returning from leave on March 9. In rebuttal, Whittington points to Tyson's allegedly unlawful request for (1) recertification of his FMLA eligibility and (2) a proper doctor's note on March 6 as a condition of returning to work as circumstantial evidence that he was actually terminated for requesting an ADA accommodation in the form of a leave of absence for his illnesses. Doc. 41, at 41. However, for the reasons explained above, Tyson's requests for FMLA recertification and a doctor's note detailing his work restrictions or lack thereof were lawful and reasonable as a matter of law, in light of Whittington's lengthy absence and Tyson's ADA process as described in its Leave of Absence policy. As such, these requests for documentation do not create a genuine issue of fact as to whether Tyson's reasons [*42]  for termination were merely pretext for ADA retaliation. Lors, 746 F.3d, at 868. Therefore, Tyson's Motion for Summary Judgment is granted as to Count III.

III. CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated above, the Court denies Plaintiff's Motion for Partial Summary Judgment. The Court grants Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment on Counts I, II, III, IV, and V.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
/s/ Nanette K. Laughrey
NANETTE K. LAUGHREY
United States District Judge
Dated: November 2, 2020
Jefferson City, Missouri


End of Document

