Wilf v. Bd. of Regents of the Univ. Sys. of Ga.
United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta Division
October 15, 2012, Decided; October 15, 2012, Filed
CIVIL ACTION FILE NO. 1:09-cv-01877-RLV-GGB

Reporter
2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 193700 *
SAMI S. WILF, Plaintiff, v. THE BOARD OF REGENTS OF THE UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF GEORGIA; KATHRYN FULLER-SEELEY in her individual and official capacity as Associate Professor of Communication at Georgia State University; DAVID CHESHIER in his individual and official capacity as Chair of the Department of Communication of Georgia State University; RODNEY PENNAMON in his individual and official capacity as Director of the Office of Disability Services of Georgia State University; and MARK BECKER in his official capacity as President of Georgia State University, Defendants.
Subsequent History: Adopted by, Motion denied by, Motion granted by, Dismissed by, in part, Objection overruled by Wilf v. Bd. of Regents of the Univ. Sys. of Ga., 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 200024 (N.D. Ga., Feb. 21, 2013)
Prior History: Wilf v. Bd. of Regents of the Univ. Sys. of Ga., 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 134269 (N.D. Ga., Sept. 28, 2009)
Counsel:  [*1] Sami S. Wilf, Plaintiff, Pro se, Boise, ID.
For The Board of Regents of the University System of Georgia, Kathryn Fuller-Seeley, in her individual and official capacity as Associate Professor of Communication at Georgia State University, David Cheshier, in his individual and official capacity as Chair of the department of Communication of Georgia State University, Rodney Pennamon, in his individual and official capacity as Director of the Office of Disability Services of Georgia State University, Defendants: Laura Louise Lones, Attorney General's Office-Atl, Department of Law, Atlanta, GA.
Judges: GERRILYN G. BRILL, UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE.
Opinion by: GERRILYN G. BRILL
Opinion



FINAL REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION AND ORDER
Plaintiff Sami S. Wilf ("Plaintiff") is proceeding in this action pro se. This matter has been referred to the undersigned United States magistrate judge for a report and recommendation on all pending motions. [Doc. 160]. This case is before the Court on the following motions:
1) Plaintiff's Motion for Reconsideration [Doc. 158];
2) Plaintiff's Motion to Seal Plaintiff's Supplemental Response [Doc. 169];
3) Plaintiff's Motion Requesting the Court to Consider his Submissions [Doc. 178]; and
4) Defendants' [*2]  Motion to Dismiss in Part and for Summary Judgment [Doc. 134].

I. BACKGROUND
Plaintiff is a 26-year-old former undergraduate student at Georgia State University ("GSU"), a Board of Regents for the University System of Georgia ("Board of Regents") institution in Atlanta, Georgia. Plaintiff attended GSU from 2006 until he graduated in May 2011 with a Bachelor of Science degree in Computer Science.
For the 2009 spring semester, Plaintiff signed up to take five classes at GSU for 19 credits. One of the five classes was a film survey course (Film 2700, History of Motion Pictures) taught by Dr. Kathryn Fuller-Seeley, an associate professor in GSU's Communications Department. The film course was a large survey class with approximately 120 students. In teaching the class, Dr. Fuller-Seeley used lecture outlines that she had prepared to reinforce her spoken comments and film clip analysis. During class, the outline for that class was projected on a large screen in the classroom. The key points were highlighted in all capital letters or underlined. Each lecture covered and paraphrased material from a chapter in the textbook.
As a child, Plaintiff was diagnosed with depression, bipolar spectrum disorder, [*3]  and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder ("ADHD"), and he has a long history of being treated for those conditions. At the beginning of the 2009 spring semester, Plaintiff registered with GSU's Office of Disability Services ("ODS") and was approved to receive certain accommodations for his classes, including extended time on tests, occasional extension of due dates on assignments, and testing in a distraction-reduced environment at the ODS. The ODS offered the additional accommodation of lecture outlines, if approved by the professor, but Plaintiff declined that accommodation. Plaintiff neither asked to receive — nor was he provided — a note-taker for his classes.
The ODS instructed Plaintiff to meet with each of his professors -- including his film professor -- to discuss his approved accommodations, fill out the necessary testing forms, and return the forms to the ODS before any testing occurred. Plaintiff made several attempts to meet with Dr. Fuller-Seeley at her office before his first test on January 28, 2009, but was unable to do so. Plaintiff did not timely return the required forms to the ODS, did not take his first test, and received a zero on the test.
A week after he [*4]  missed his test, Plaintiff emailed Dr. Fuller-Seeley and asked her to provide him with an electronic copy of all of her lecture outlines for the film class. She asked to meet with him in person to discuss his testing needs. A week later, he sent her another email asking for her lecture outlines. When Plaintiff did not receive a positive response, Plaintiff sent an email to Dr. Fuller-Seeley's department chair, Dr. David Cheshier, complaining that, in Plaintiff's view, having to hand-copy the film professor's lecture outlines projected during class was just busy work, not learning, and he saw no reason why the outlines could not be posted online or emailed to him. Dr. Fuller-Seeley, however, declined to do so, citing her long-standing policy not to email lecture notes to her students and other academic concerns.1 Based on supporting academic research and literature on the issue, Dr. Cheshier agreed with Dr. Fuller-Seeley's decision and declined to obligate her to circulate her lecture outlines. Because Plaintiff did not receive the accommodation of receiving Dr. Fuller-Seeley's lecture outlines, he decided not to (and did not) take the second exam scheduled for February 25, 2009.
At the beginning of March, the ODS, at Plaintiff's request, provided Plaintiff with a second accommodation letter that approved the same accommodations as the first letter, plus "copies of lecture notes as approved by professor." Plaintiff met with Dr. Fuller-Seeley and provided her the second accommodation letter, but Dr. Fuller-Seeley still did not approve providing Plaintiff with her lecture outlines. Throughout the remainder of the semester, Plaintiff continued to demand that he be provided with Dr. Fuller-Seeley's lecture outlines (in numerous emails to GSU administrators and in a meeting with staff in the ODS in April), and threatened repeatedly to file a lawsuit for failure to accommodate his disabilities, under Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Rehabilitation Act, if he did not receive the outlines. In GSU's various meetings and emails with Plaintiff, GSU declined Plaintiff's demands for the outlines, but suggested other alternative accommodations to Plaintiff (including tape recording his film professor's lectures and/or finding a volunteer student note-taker). However, Plaintiff did not avail himself of those alternative options. Plaintiff received [*6]  a 58 ("F") on his third exam and 60 ("D") on his final exam. At the end of the semester, Plaintiff failed the film course and did not meet GSU's requirements for graduation that semester.
In the summer of 2009, after the semester ended, Plaintiff filed the instant lawsuit in federal court, alleging that the Board of Regents failed to accommodate his claimed disabilities, in violation of Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Rehabilitation Act. The lawsuit also alleges that the Board of Regents and three GSU individual defendants, including Plaintiff's film professor, Dr. Fuller-Seeley, retaliated against him in violation of the same disability statutes by falsifying his grades, by denying a grade appeal, by lying in emails about his requested accommodations, and other actions.
On November 14, 2011, after two years of litigation, Defendants filed the instant motion to dismiss in part and for summary judgment on all of Plaintiff's claims. Plaintiff has also filed a number of motions that are fully briefed and ripe for consideration by the Court. As stated above, I have been asked to prepare a report and recommendation on all pending motions. My rulings and/or recommendations [*7]  follow.

II. PRELIMINARY MOTIONS

A. Plaintiff's Motion for Reconsideration
Plaintiff has filed a motion [Doc. 158] asking the Court to reconsider its decision [Doc. 154] to strike Plaintiff's motion for summary judgment [Doc. 143]. Under the Local Rules of this Court, motions for reconsideration may not be filed as a matter of routine practice. LR 7.2(E), NDGa. Generally, a motion for reconsideration should not be used to reiterate arguments that have been made previously, but such a motion should be reserved for extraordinary circumstances, such as the discovery of new evidence, an intervening development or change in the law, or the need to correct a clear error or prevent a manifest injustice. See Adler v. Wallace Computer Servs., Inc., 202 F.R.D. 666, 675 (N.D. Ga. 2001). A reconsideration motion may not be used to offer new legal theories or evidence that could have been presented with the previously-filed motion or response, unless a reason is given for failing to raise the issue at that time. Id. (citation omitted).
In Plaintiff's motion for reconsideration, Plaintiff has not presented any newly discovered evidence, intervening development or change in controlling law, or need to correct a clear error of law or fact. Id.; Bryan v. Murphy, 246 F. Supp. 2d 1256, 1258-59 (N.D. Ga. 2003) (citations omitted). The motion simply [*8]  repackages arguments that Plaintiff has previously made to the Court and describes computer problems which have no bearing on the Court's earlier decision. Because Plaintiff has not met the standard, Plaintiff is not entitled to a reconsideration of the Court's earlier ruling. Bryan, 246 F. Supp. 2d at 1259 (citing Deerskin Trading Post, Inc. v. United Parcel Serv. of Am., Inc., 972 F. Supp. 665 (N.D. Ga. 1997) (Hull, J.)).
Accordingly, I recommend that Plaintiff's Motion for Reconsideration [Doc. 158] be DENIED.

B. Plaintiff's Motion to Seal Supplemental Response
Pursuant to the Protective Order issued in this matter [Doc. 132], Plaintiff has submitted a motion to seal [Doc. 169] Plaintiff's supplemental response [Doc. 170] to Defendants' motion to dismiss in part and for summary judgment. Plaintiff's motion to seal appearing reasonable, I recommend that the motion [Doc. 169] be GRANTED nunc pro tunc.

C. Plaintiff's Motion for Court to Consider Submissions
On March 30, 2012, Defendants filed their reply brief [Doc. 174] in support of their motion for summary judgment. In the brief, Defendants argue that the Court should not consider Plaintiff's late-filed and over-the-page-limit initial and supplemental briefs that Plaintiff filed in response to Defendants' motion. Defendants have also objected to the Court relying [*9]  on Plaintiff's amended response [Doc. 172] to Defendants' Statement of Material Facts [Doc. 135] because it is an unsworn statement. Defendants further object to Plaintiff's submission of unauthenticated documents as inadmissible hearsay, specifically, Exhibits 2, 3, 6, and 9 to Plaintiff's response [Doc. 155] to Defendants' Statement of Material Facts.
On April 2, 2012, Plaintiff filed a sworn affidavit [Doc. 179-1], attempting to remedy Defendants' objections to his unsworn amended response [Doc. 172] and unauthenticated exhibits submitted with his response to Defendants' Statement of Material Facts. Plaintiff also filed a motion [Doc. 178] asking the Court to consider all of his late-filed submissions in response to Defendants' motion for summary judgment. Defendants' objections and Plaintiff's Motion Requesting the Court to Consider his Submissions [Doc. 178] are currently before the Court.
On January 4, 2012, Plaintiff was ordered to file his response to Defendants' motion for summary judgment no later than February 13, 2012. [Doc. 154, Order]. This was after a lengthy extension from the original deadline in late November 2011. All pending and future motions were then referred to [*10]  the undersigned magistrate judge for a report and recommendation. [Doc. 160]. Thereafter, Plaintiff sought — and was granted — an additional extension of time from February 13 to February 21, 2012 to file his response to Defendants' motion to dismiss in part and for summary judgment. My order granting the requested extension expressly informed Plaintiff that no further extensions would be granted. [Doc. 161]. Nonetheless, Plaintiff -- without explanation or motion requesting a further extension from the Court — filed a 35-page response on February 28, 2012. [Doc. 166]. The response exceeded the Court's page limit by ten pages and it was filed one week late.
Three weeks after that, on March 19, 2012, Plaintiff — again without asking the Court's permission — filed a 12-page supplemental response and 43 pages of exhibits [Doc. 170] under seal. In a footnote, Plaintiff gave the following explanation: "I wrote this supplemental brief mainly to raise the arguments made in Section I and II above, but I decided to also add what I did not have time to add in my response brief." [Doc. 170 at 5 n.4].
This Court "enjoy[s] broad discretion in deciding how best to manage the cases before [it]." See Chudasama v. Mazda Motor Corp., 123 F.3d 1353, 1366 (11th Cir. 1997). The [*11]  local rules of this Court allow three filings in relation to a given motion: the motion itself, a response, and a reply. LR 7.1, NDGa. Any further filing requires leave of court. Id. Similarly, Local Rule 56.1(A) states that with regard to a motion for summary judgment, "the parties shall not be permitted to file supplemental briefs and materials, with the exception of a reply by the movant, except upon order of the court." LR 56.1(A).
The Court has considered the parties' briefs and the arguments and objections contained therein. Because the efficiency of judicial administration has not been prejudiced by the delay, Plaintiff is proceeding pro se, and the Court prefers to consider and rule on the merits of this case, I will exercise my discretion to accept and consider Plaintiff's late-filed (and over-the-page-limit) responses to the extent they otherwise comply with the requirements of the federal and local rules. Accordingly, Plaintiff's Motion Requesting the Court to Consider his Submissions [Doc. 178] is GRANTED, and Defendants' objections are overruled for purposes of this motion to dismiss in part and for summary judgment.

III. DEFENDANTS' MOTION TO DISMISS IN PART
In Plaintiff's operative complaint entitled "Corrected [*12]  Third Amended Complaint" [Doc. 42], Plaintiff asserts three causes of action. Count I seeks declaratory and injunctive relief and compensatory damages against the Board of Regents for alleged violations of Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act ("ADA"), 42 U.S.C. § 12131, et seq. Count II seeks declaratory and injunctive relief and compensatory damages against the Board of Regents for alleged intentional discrimination in violation of the Rehabilitation Act (the "Rehabilitation Act"), 29 U.S.C. § 794, et seq. Plaintiff has voluntarily dismissed Count III (Violation of Substantive Due Process). [Doc. 43]. Count IV asserts, inter alia, that the Board of Regents and three GSU employees (Kathryn Fuller-Seeley, in her individual and official capacity as associate professor of GSU's Department of Communication; David Cheshier in his individual and official capacity as chair of GSU's Department of Communication; and Rodney Pennamon, in his individual and official capacity as director of GSU's ODS) (the "Individual Defendants") retaliated against Plaintiff, in violation of the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act. [Corr. Third Am. Compl. at 32-34].
In his Corrected Third Amended Complaint, Plaintiff seeks the following injunctive and declaratory [*13]  relief: (1) an injunction requiring removal of his History of Motion Pictures grade from his college transcript; (2) an injunction requiring the issuance to Plaintiff of a Bachelor of Science degree in Computer Science from GSU; (3) a declaration that certain acts are illegal; and (4) an injunction ordering that new policies be implemented to correct the alleged illegalities. [Id. at 34]. Defendants argue that this Court lacks subject matter jurisdiction over Plaintiff's claims for declaratory and injunctive relief because after Plaintiff filed the instant lawsuit, he graduated from GSU.
Article III of the United States Constitution requires that a plaintiff's claim be live not just when he first brings suit, but throughout the litigation. Tucker v. Phyfer, 819 F.2d 1030, 1034 (11th Cir. 1987)(citations omitted). The plaintiff "must demonstrate a 'personal stake in the outcome' and show that he 'has sustained or is immediately in danger of sustaining some direct injury' as the result of the challenged official conduct and the injury or threat of injury must be both 'real and immediate,' not 'conjectural' or 'hypothetical.'" City of Los Angeles v. Lyons, 461 U.S. 95, 101-02, 103 S. Ct. 1660, 75 L. Ed. 2d 675 (1983)(citations omitted). A past injury is not enough to establish standing; it must be accompanied by a present and continuing threat of injury. Id. at 102. Thus, in ADA and Rehabilitation [*14]  Act cases, "a plaintiff lacks standing to seek injunctive relief unless he alleges facts giving rise to an inference that he will suffer future discrimination by the defendant." See Shotz v. Cates, 256 F.3d 1077, 1081 (11th Cir. 2001).
The party invoking federal jurisdiction bears the burden of proving standing. Bischoff v. Osceola County, Fla., 222 F.3d 874, 878 (11th Cir. 2000) (citing Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 561, 112 S. Ct. 2130, 2136, 119 L. Ed. 2d 351 (1992)). "Moreover, each element of standing 'must be supported in the same way as any other matter on which the plaintiff bears the burden of proof, i.e., with the manner and degree of evidence required at the successive stages of the litigation.'" Id. Where, like here, standing is raised at the summary judgment stage, the plaintiff may not rest on "mere allegations." Id. (citing Lujan, 504 U.S. at 561, 112 S. Ct. at 2137). "Instead, the plaintiff must set forth by affidavit or other evidence specific facts, ... which for purposes of the summary judgment motion will be taken to be true." Id. (internal quotation marks and other citations omitted).
Here, Plaintiff does not allege a real and immediate threat of future discrimination. Moreover, in Plaintiff's initial response to Defendants' motion to dismiss in part and for summary judgment, Plaintiff has not addressed Defendants' standing argument at all. In this district, failure to respond to arguments relating to a [*15]  claim in the plaintiff's initial response to the motion constitutes abandonment of the claim. See Wilkerson v. Grinnell Corp., 270 F.3d 1314, 1322 (11th Cir. 2001) (deeming claim abandoned where argument was not presented in initial response to motion for summary judgment); see also White v. Ga. Dep't of Motor Vehicle Safety, No. 1:06-CV-0124-TWT, 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 36523, 2006 WL 1466254, at *1 (N.D. Ga. May 19, 2006) ("[I]t is well-accepted in this district that the failure to respond to arguments relating to a claim constitutes abandonment of the claim.").
Even if Plaintiff did not abandon his claims for injunctive and declaratory relief, Plaintiff has failed to satisfy the redressability element of the standing inquiry. Plaintiff's claim that this Court order removal of his film class grade from his school records was dismissed in an earlier order. [See Doc. 53 at 8-9]. It is undisputed that Plaintiff graduated from GSU with a degree in computer science in May 2011. [Doc. 155, Pl.'s Resp. to Defs.' Stmt. of Mat. Facts ("DSMF") ¶ 8]. The record does not reflect that Plaintiff is currently enrolled at GSU or at any other Board of Regents school. See Pederson v. Louisiana State Univ., 213 F.3d 858, 874 (5th Cir. 2000) ("As is so often the case in suits for injunctive relief brought by students, graduation or impending graduation renders their claims for injunctive relief moot. ... Because the [*16]  named plaintiffs will not benefit from a favorable ruling on the question implicating injunctive relief, we hold that this question is moot as to them."); Schanou v. Lancaster County Sch. Dist. No. 160, 62 F.3d 1040, 1043 (8th Cir. 1995) (holding, on mootness grounds, that a request for injunctive relief no longer presented a live controversy after the plaintiff student had graduated); see also Roberts v. Madigan, 921 F.2d 1047, 1052 (10th Cir. 1990)(holding that injunctive relief could not redress plaintiff's injury because plaintiff was no longer in the classroom where the prospective injunctive relief would apply). Although Plaintiff now argues that at some point in the future, he might decide to apply to graduate school at GSU if GSU would agree to waive its grade point average requirement (which he concedes he does not satisfy) [Doc. 170 at 1-2; Ex. 5], Plaintiff has not shown that the likelihood of future discrimination is "real and immediate" rather than merely "conjectural, hypothetical, or contingent." Shotz v. Cates, 256 F.3d at 1081-82.
Accordingly, for the reasons stated, I recommend that Defendants' motion to dismiss in part Plaintiff's claims for declaratory and injunctive relief [Doc. 134] be GRANTED. Tucker, 819 F.2d at 1034 n.3 (stating that the mootness doctrine usually requires a court to dismiss an action in which, because of events occurring after the plaintiff [*17]  filed the suit, any relief the court might grant would be of no utility to the plaintiff).

IV. DEFENDANTS' MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT

A. Legal Standard
Summary judgment is proper when no genuine issues of material fact are present and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). The movant carries its burden by showing the court that there is "an absence of evidence to support the nonmoving party's case." Celotex v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 325, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986).
"Only when that burden has been met does the burden shift to the nonmoving party to demonstrate that there is indeed a material issue of fact that precludes summary judgment." Clark v. Coats & Clark, Inc., 929 F.2d 604, 608 (11th Cir. 1991). The nonmovant is then required "to go beyond the pleadings" and to present competent evidence in the form of affidavits, answers to interrogatories, depositions, admissions and the like, designating "specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial." Celotex, 477 U.S. at 324; Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c). "Mere conclusions and unsupported factual allegations are legally insufficient to create a dispute to defeat summary judgment." Bald Mountain Park, Ltd. v. Oliver, 863 F.2d 1560, 1563 (11th Cir. 1989). Resolving all doubts in favor of the nonmoving party, the Court must determine "whether a fair-minded jury could return a verdict for the plaintiff on the evidence presented." Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 252, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986).

B. Facts
In light of [*18]  the foregoing summary judgment standard, the Court finds the following facts for the purpose of resolving Defendants' motion for summary judgment only.
Plaintiff is a former student at GSU, a Board of Regents institution. [DSMF ¶¶ 1, 3, 8-9]. In late 2008, Plaintiff decided to register with GSU's Office of Disability Services ("ODS"). [Id. ¶ 11]. To support his request for disability services, Plaintiff provided medical documentation from his physician, Dr. Guy H. Sommers, who treated Plaintiff for chronic bipolar spectrum mood disorder, depression, and ADHD from February 2008 until November 2008. [Id. ¶¶ 12-14, 118; Doc. 136, Deposition of Plaintiff Sami Wilf ("Pl.'s Dep.") Exs. 2-3]. Dr. Sommers provided a letter to GSU explaining that Plaintiff "struggles with energy, anxiety, and concentration and attention span problems which waxes and wanes." [Pl.'s Dep. Ex. 2]. The letter recommended that "[w]hen appropriate it will be helpful to [Plaintiff] to get some extra time for test taking and for preparation of some of his assignments." [Id.]. Dr. Sommers testified that based on his professional training, experience, and treatment of Plaintiff, he did not think that Plaintiff needed any other [*19]  accommodations to receive the benefit of his education, such as written outlines, summaries, or bibliographies. [Doc. 137 ("Sommers Dep.") at 48-50]. Dr. Sommers did not recommend that Plaintiff be provided with a note-taker; nor did he diagnose or treat Plaintiff for any handwriting-related disability, difficulty, or impairment. [Sommers Dep. Exs. 2-3; Pl.'s Dep. at 64-66].
In the spring semester of 2009, Plaintiff took five classes at GSU for 19 credits. One of the classes that Plaintiff signed up to take that semester was Film 2700, History of Motion Pictures (hereinafter, "the Film class"), taught by Individual Defendant Dr. Kathryn Fuller-Seeley, an Associate Professor (and as of April 2009, full Professor) in GSU's Communications Department. [DSMF ¶¶ 25-26; Doc. 8-4 ("Fuller-Seeley Aff.") ¶ 2]. Dr. Fuller-Seeley has taught university level courses for over 21 years. [Fuller-Seeley Aff. ¶ 2]. Plaintiff had previously taken — and failed — the Film class with a different GSU professor. [DSMF ¶ 59].
On January 7, 2009, Plaintiff met with Teresita Warren ("Warren"), a coordinator with GSU's ODS, and they agreed that Plaintiff should receive the following accommodations: (1) double time [*20]  on objective examinations; (2) double time on essay exams; (3) double time on math exams; (4) occasional extension of due dates (1-2 days extra); and (5) testing in a distraction-reduced environment. [Id. ¶¶ 27-28]. Although Warren also offered lecture outlines, if approved by professors, Plaintiff declined the accommodation. [Pl.'s Dep. at 18-19]. Plaintiff and Warren both signed and dated the "Confidential Student Accommodation Letter" form listing the approved accommodations ("Accommodation Letter"), and Warren provided Plaintiff with five copies of the Accommodation Letter and a Request for Individualized Testing Accommodations ("RITA") form for each class. [DSMF ¶ 29; Pl.'s Dep. Exs. 4-5]. Warren instructed Plaintiff to meet with each of his instructors to complete the RITA forms. [Pl.'s Dep. at 21]. Warren also advised Plaintiff that it was his responsibility to provide each professor with a copy of the Accommodation Letter for their signature and then he was to return the signed Accommodation Letters to the ODS. [Doc. 8-1 ("Warren Aff.") ¶ 7].
The Film class was a three-credit class that met on Mondays and Wednesdays from 3:00 p.m. to 4:15 p.m. [Pl.'s Dep. Ex. 22]. The Film class [*21]  syllabus was distributed on the first day of class, and informed the students that "[a]ttendance for this course is essential." [Id.]. Not counting exam dates, the Film class was scheduled to meet for 27 classes. The syllabus stated that with the exception of cases of extreme hardship, makeup tests would not be given, and the student's grade would be zero if a test was missed and written documentation excusing the absence was not provided. If approved by the professor, a student would be allowed to take one makeup test on the day of the final exam. [Id.]. Grading was on a 100 point scale and included three exams, each worth 20 percent of the final class grade, two written assignments worth 7.5 percent apiece, and a final comprehensive exam worth 25 percent of the final grade. [Id.].
Between January 7, when Plaintiff received the RITA forms, and the date of the first test in his Film class on January 28, Plaintiff made three attempts to find Dr. Fuller-Seeley's office to deliver the RITA form to the professor before the first exam. On the first attempt, Plaintiff could not find the professor's office. On the second two attempts, Dr. Fuller-Seeley was not in her office.2 [Pl.'s Dep. at 23-25].
On January [*22]  28, the day of the first exam, Plaintiff asked a GSU employee in the Communications Department to place a partially-completed RITA form in Dr. Fuller Seeley's mailbox, which the professor did not receive until after the exam. [Pl.'s Resp. to DSMF ¶ 33]. Plaintiff did not provide Dr. Fuller-Seeley with a copy of his Accommodation Letter at that time. [Fuller-Seeley Aff. ¶ 11]. On the RITA form that Plaintiff left for Dr. Fuller-Seeley, Plaintiff had signed Line 9, which acknowledged that his signature "indicates I am responsible for knowing the exam schedule on this form, and that I am responsible for knowledge of any changes to this testing schedule." [DSMF ¶¶ 34-35; Pl.'s Dep. Ex. 7]. Plaintiff did not take the first exam. [DSMF ¶¶ 33, 68].
In teaching the Film class, Dr. Fuller-Seeley used lecture outlines that she prepared to reinforce her spoken comments and film clip analysis.3 During class, the outline for that class was projected on a large screen in the classroom. The outlines averaged 2-3 pages. They were typed in 14 point bold font, and totaled a little over 500 words per lecture. [Fuller-Seeley Aff. ¶ 7]. The key points were highlighted in all capital letters or underlined. [*23]  [Id.]. Each lecture covered and paraphrased material from a chapter in the textbook. [DSMF ¶¶ 38-40].
Students were encouraged to take notes during Dr. Fuller-Seeley's lectures, but were not required to do so. Some students took notes from Dr. Fuller-Seeley's lecture outlines; some took more comprehensive notes during her lectures; and other students took very few or no notes at all. [Fuller-Seeley Aff. ¶ 6]. Students were permitted to use laptops in the classroom to assist in taking notes. At the last class before the final two exams, Dr. Fuller-Seeley made her lecture outlines available for students to copy and she also allowed students to come to her office to copy outlines for lectures that they missed.4 [Doc. 141 ("Fuller-Seeley Dep.") at 49-50]. She also posted study guides on the GSU ULearn dedicated website for the class to use a week before each exam. [DSMF ¶ 67; Fuller-Seeley Aff. ¶ 9]. The study guides were typically 2-3 pages long and could be read online or printed out. [Fuller-Seeley Aff. ¶ 9].
On Saturday, February 7, 2009, at 1:50 a.m., Plaintiff emailed Dr. Fuller-Seeley to say that he had tried to meet her during her office hours, but kept missing her. He asked if she [*24]  had received the RITA form that he had dropped off and asked if it was possible for her to email him a copy of all of her lecture notes. [Pl.'s Dep. Ex. 8]. At 8:37 a.m. on February 7th, Dr. Fuller-Seeley responded, "Dear Sami, good to hear from you. You and I need to meet in person (how about right at the end of class in our classroom?) to discuss your needs for testing, I cannot make any arrangements until we talk. Thanks." [Id.]. The next two classes took place on Monday, February 9, and Wednesday, February 11. On February 12, 2009, Plaintiff replied, via email, "Is it possible for you to e-mail me ... all the notes? Officially the accomodation [sic] is 'Use of class note-taker' but I noticed the notes are in an electronic format that can easily be e-mailed to me." [Id.]. Plaintiff's Accommodation Letter did not list as an approved accommodation "use of class note-taker." [Pl.'s Dep. Ex. 4].
In her affidavit, Dr. Fuller-Seeley states that Plaintiff came to her office on February 12, 2009 to discuss his accommodations and testing needs, but he still did not provide her with a copy of his Accommodation Letter. [Fuller-Seeley Aff. ¶ 13]. She states that she filled out the RITA form [*25]  in consultation with and in the presence of Plaintiff, and discussed with him that she was permitting him to make up the first exam at the ODS office at any time during the next week. Dr. Fuller-Seeley states that she also entered the makeup test information on the RITA form, and faxed the form to the Office of Disability Services, along with a copy of the makeup exam for Plaintiff to take at the ODS, but Plaintiff failed to take the makeup exam during the week of February 16, 2009. [Id. ¶¶ 13-14].
Plaintiff denies that he met with Dr. Fuller-Seeley on February 12th (he says he met with her after class on February 9th) and avers that she never communicated to him when he could take the first exam at the ODS. [Doc. 155-2, Declaration of Sami S. Wilf ("Wilf Decl.") ¶¶ 9-10]. It is undisputed that Plaintiff never took the first exam (or a makeup test for the first exam), and received a grade of zero for that exam. [DSMF ¶¶ 68, 71].
On February 20, 2009, Plaintiff emailed the chair of GSU's Department of Communications, Dr. David Cheshier, to complain about his Film professor, Dr. Fuller-Seeley. [Doc. 5 at 9]. In the email, Plaintiff stated that he had been unable to meet in person with [*26]  Dr. Fuller-Seeley to discuss his disability accommodations because she was not in her office during her posted office hours. [Id.]. Plaintiff also stated that, "She has failed to give me my testing accomodations [sic] and has outright ignored my request for class notes in two e-mails. Other than me requesting the notes as a part of my accomodation as specified by the office of disability services, I see no reason why notes that are projected onto the board from the computer (probably typed with microsoft word) must be hand copied when they can be uploaded to an online gsu site or webct. Hand copying these notes is nothing but busy work, it isn't learning. Even the laws of Georgia advocate the usage of internet technology — O.C.G.A. § 20-3-77.1. Please help me resolve this conflict." [Id.].
In a reply email, Dr. Cheshier asked for more information about what had transpired regarding the ODS and Plaintiff's recommended testing accommodations. [Id. at 8-9]. Dr. Cheshier also discussed his view (and supporting academic literature) that a "classroom incentive structure aimed at inducing students to take careful notes on their own" is not "busy work, but actually central to the learning process." [Id.]. Based on the academic [*27]  research on that point, Dr. Cheshier declined to obligate Dr. Fuller-Seeley to circulate her lecture notes. Dr. Cheshier inquired whether the ODS had certified that Plaintiff be exempted from any notetaking and if so, if that directive had been conveyed to Prof. Fuller-Seeley. Dr. Cheshier suggested that Plaintiff's frustration was likely the result of a miscommunication. He then forwarded the email to Dr. Fuller-Seeley for her review and response. [Fuller-Seeley Aff. ¶ 15].
In response to the email forwarded by Dr. Cheshier, Dr. Fuller-Seeley wrote to Plaintiff (with a copy to Dr. Cheshier), agreeing that there was a failure to communicate. [Doc. 5 at 8]. She told Plaintiff that she had made testing arrangements the prior week with the ODS after speaking with Plaintiff about the RITA form that he had left in her mail box. She invited him to contact her to speak with her again, but informed him that it was her stated policy not to email lecture notes to any students. She said, "I have announced often in class that missed notes need to be gotten from another student in the class. I do post exam study guides on ULearn, however. And unless I have official material from the Office of Disability [*28]  Services about your specific needs, I need to abide by those guidelines." [Id.].
At 4:03 p.m. on February 20, 2009, Plaintiff emailed Warren about getting an additional accommodation "of attaining copies of instructor's notes/overheads." [Id. at 10]. Plaintiff stated, "I haven't had this problem before as all my other instructors have made their overhead notes available online, but one of my professors this semester is refusing to do so." [Id.]. Warren replied, "Please feel free to come by and sign your new accommodation letter. As I mentioned before[,] copies of lecture notes must be approved by your professor." [Id.].
The Film class's second exam was scheduled for February 25, 2009. Plaintiff failed to take the second exam on February 25, 2009, and admits that he never contacted Dr. Fuller-Seeley or the ODS to arrange to take the second exam in a distraction-reduced environment at the ODS. [Pl.'s Resp. to DSMF ¶¶ 72-73]. Plaintiff alleges that he refused to take the exam without first being properly accommodated by receiving copies of his professor's lecture outlines. [Corr. Third Am. Compl. ¶ 30]. Plaintiff earned 10 points on an extra credit assignment, so instead of zero, he received a grade [*29]  of 10 (out of 100) for the second exam. [Pl.'s Resp. to DSMF ¶ 74; Fuller-Seeley Aff. ¶ 16]. Plaintiff alleges that after the second exam, he became depressed because he was not being "accommodated as he liked." [Corr. Third Am. Compl. ¶ 30].
On March 9, 2009, the ODS provided Plaintiff with a second accommodation letter. [DSMF ¶ 41; Pl.'s Dep. Ex. 9 ("Second Accommodation Letter")]. The Second Accommodation Letter provided Plaintiff with the same accommodations as the first letter, plus "Copies of lecture notes as approved by professor." [Pl.'s Dep. Ex. 9]. When Plaintiff stopped by Dr. Fuller-Seeley's office just prior to class on March 9th to give her the new accommodation letter, Dr. Fuller-Seeley advised Plaintiff that she did not approve providing him with her lecture notes. [Fuller-Seeley Aff. ¶ 17].
In Dr. Fuller-Seeley's view, providing Plaintiff with the lecture outlines for her large survey class would be unfair to the other students, and, based on her prior experience, passing out her lecture outlines led to poor class attendance and lower grades; not handing out her outlines encouraged class attendance and more active engagement of the students in class. [Fuller-Seeley Dep. [*30]  at 15-16, 43, 89, 91]. Dr. Fuller-Seeley believed, based on her experience and on widely published teaching research, that a multi-faceted approach enhanced student learning. [Fuller-Seeley Aff. ¶ 8]. Dr. Fuller-Seeley found that if students listened to her spoken lectures, viewed film clips, took notes, guided by seeing a copy of her lecture outline, and followed up by reading the textbook and the study guides that were available online prior to each exam, her students were able to attain a firm grasp of the course concepts because their various modes of information gathering (aural, visual, writing, and reading) had all been engaged. [Id.].
Dr. Fuller-Seeley suggested that she and Plaintiff speak with her department's academic advisor, Carmella Patillo, to get some guidance. [Id. ¶ 17]. Because class was about to start, the conversation with Dr. Fuller-Seeley, Patillo and Plaintiff was brief. Dr. Fuller-Seeley signed the Second Accommodation Letter, but noted with her initials that she did not approve providing copies of her lecture notes. [Id. ¶ 19].
On March 26, 2009, Plaintiff emailed Dr. Ronald Henry, GSU Provost, to complain that his Film professor had refused to provide copies [*31]  of her overhead lecture notes "[d]espite showing her a copy of my accommodation letter provided by the Office of Disability Services." [Pl.'s Dep. Ex. 10]. Plaintiff stated, "The amount of time and energy spent on copying the notes consumes the entire class period, leaves little time to pay attention to the lecture, and fails to increase my retentiveness. This reminds me of back in elementary school when whenever I got in trouble I was forced to copy something a million times on the chock [sic] board. The only difference is that now I have to copy without even being in trouble! It's automatic punishment." [Id.]. Plaintiff continued, "I have not asked any other students for notes because I have no friends, I'm an introvert, and most importantly it is the teacher's responsibility to accommodate me. I have grown resentful of Dr. Fuller-Seeley and her style of teaching where even with a lack of concentration it is impossible to ignore/forget flagrant comments such as managing to fit 'poor stupid octo-mom' into the lecture or comparing newspapers creating false information to Bush starting the Iraq war. Last thing I need is a liberal teacher going off on tangents, and it ruins the rest of the class [*32]  for me." [Id.]. Plaintiff concluded with the following: "As it is the law and GSU's policy to adhere to the letter and spirit of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and Section 504 of the 1973 Rehabilitation Act, I must have my ailments accommodated for with receiving copies of the overhead notes. After much ambivalence, I have come to the conclusion tha[t] if this issue isn't resolved within the university system, then it will be through the courts. Sami Wilf." [Id.]. Dr. Henry sent a reply email the following day, informing Plaintiff that he had referred Plaintiff's situation back to the ODS for resolution and would follow up to ensure progress. [Doc. 5 at 13].
The third exam was scheduled for March 30, 2009. Several days in advance, Dr. Fuller-Seeley emailed a copy of the third exam to the ODS for Plaintiff to take at the ODS with a distraction-reduced environment and double time for the exam. Instead of taking the test at the ODS, Plaintiff decided to take the March 30th exam in the Film class classroom, and received a score of 58. [Pl.'s Dep. at 101; Fuller-Seeley Aff. ¶ 20]. Plaintiff testified during his deposition that he did not take the test at the ODS because "it was just a waste [*33]  of time trying" and it was too far to walk to his teacher's office and to the ODS for the RITA forms. [Pl.'s Dep. at 101-02]. Plaintiff now claims that he was not aware that he could have taken the third exam at the ODS testing facility. [Wilf Decl. ¶ 6].
On March 30, 2009, Warren emailed Plaintiff to say that she had spoken to Dr. Fuller-Seeley about his accommodations, and Dr. Fuller-Seeley had informed Warren that she had met with Plaintiff, along with another staff/faculty member of the Communications Department, to discuss why it was her policy not to give out her lecture notes. Dr. Fuller-Seeley also informed Warren that Plaintiff had missed the first two exams and he had not provided Dr. Fuller-Seeley with his accommodation letter until after midterms. [Pl.'s Dep. Ex. 11 at 2]. Warren reiterated to Plaintiff that the ODS could not change the policy of a professor's class and that it had been noted on his Second Accommodation Letter that approval from the professor was appropriate when releasing lecture notes. She asked Plaintiff if he had checked on his professor's policy on recording lectures. [Id.].
Plaintiff emailed his response to Warren on March 31, and explained that he [*34]  did not take the second exam because his professor had failed to provide him with her lecture notes on which the examination was based. [Id. at 1]. Plaintiff stated, in part, "This whole scheme of copying notes is flaud [sic] from the start. You have some people having to hand copy all the notes, you have some people typing them up on their laptops and sending copies exclusively to their friends, you have others selling theirs, many students don't show up because they leech off a friend typing the notes. If you are like myself and don't have friends to receive notes from when a session is missed then it's tough luck. This is a broken system that I will not put up with. I know my rights and I will not give on this issue. As stated above, I will not take any further examinations without receiving the overhead notes displayed in class. I cannot afford to spend more time on this issue. After this semester I will begin the litigation process if I'm not properly accomodated [sic] for in accordance with the laws having jurisdiction over this university." [Id.].
Plaintiff's first paper assignment for the Film class was due on March 30, 2009. Plaintiff wrote a paper on the following topic: "Watch a [*35]  current film in a movie theater. Pay attention to the use of sound to create or enhance human emotions (like tension, fear, joy). Write a 1-2 page paper on the use of sound in order to become attentive to the effects." [DSMF ¶ 77; Doc. 5 at 21]. Dr. Fuller-Seeley testified that she explained in class that the papers should address the specifics of the film or films being discussed. [Fuller-Seeley Dep. at 64-65, 164]. Plaintiff disputes that Dr. Fuller-Seeley ever explained any of the assignments in class. [Wilf Decl. ¶ 5]. Plaintiff testified, however, that he missed some classes; he was not sure if he missed more than five classes, but thought it was less than ten (out of 27). [Pl.'s Dep. at 96].
In any event, Plaintiff turned the paper in three days late and did not discuss the use of sound in a specific film or even mention a specific film; rather, he generically discussed the use of sound. [DSMF ¶ 79]. Plaintiff testified that he watched the Tyler Perry film, "Madea Goes to Jail," but he could not recall whether he saw the film before or after he wrote his paper. [Pl.'s Dep. at 109-112]. Although Dr. Fuller-Seeley's policy was to deduct 10 points per day for assignments that were [*36]  turned in late, she deducted a total of 10 points for tardiness from Plaintiff's grade because his Second Accommodation Letter had provided that he could have an "[o]ccasional extension of due dates (1-2 days extra)." [Pl.'s Dep. Exs. 9, 28; Fuller-Seeley Aff. ¶ 21]. She deducted an additional 20 points from the grade for failing to properly complete the assignment. Plaintiff's final score on the paper was 70 out of a possible 100 points. [DSMF ¶ 80].
After Dr. Fuller-Seeley returned the paper to Plaintiff, they had a meeting in her office to discuss his grade and understanding (or misunderstanding) of the assignment. Dr. Fuller-Seeley testified that during the meeting, Plaintiff spoke loudly and rudely and stood very close to her. [Fuller-Seeley Dep. at 32]. She perceived Plaintiff to be rude and angry, and she felt threatened by his demeanor and conduct. She informed Plaintiff that she no longer would meet with him alone and that any further conversations with her would need to happen in the presence of Dr. Cheshier or someone from the ODS. [Id. at 32-33, 125, 130; Fuller-Seeley Aff. ¶ 22].
In mid April 2009, at Plaintiff's request, Plaintiff met with Ms. Warren and her supervisor, Individual Defendant Rodney Pennamon [*37]  (Director of the ODS and the ADA and Rehabilitation Act compliance officer at GSU), to discuss Dr. Fuller-Seeley's refusal to provide Plaintiff with copies of her lecture outlines. [Pl.'s Dep. at 39]. Plaintiff again complained that copying the lecture outlines was "busy-work." [Doc. 123 ("Warren Dep.") at 44]. Plaintiff recalls Warren and Pennamon offering to provide a note-taker, or at least offering to ask Dr. Fuller-Seeley to make an announcement in Film class for a student volunteer to be a note-taker, and the ODS would supply NCR paper for the three remaining Film class sessions. [Pl.'s Dep. at 40, 42; Doc. 120 ("Pennamon Dep.") at 18, 57]. Plaintiff was also offered the option of tape recording the Film class. [DSMF ¶¶ 51-52]. ODS has 20-30 tape recorders available and provides them to disabled students who request them. [Id. ¶ 53]. There is some disagreement in the record and deposition testimony about whether Plaintiff accepted or rejected the option of arranging for a note-taker. However, all parties agree that no note-taker was ever provided, that Plaintiff never requested Dr. Fuller-Seeley's assistance in obtaining a note-taker, and Plaintiff never asked for a tape recorder [*38]  or recorded any of Dr. Fuller-Seeley's lectures, even though Dr. Fuller-Seeley had told Plaintiff in her first meeting with him that he could record her lectures. [Pl.'s Resp. to DSMF ¶¶ 50, 52, 55; Pl.'s Dep. at 36-37].
On April 16, 2009, Plaintiff received an email from Rodney Pennamon summarizing GSU's positions on the accommodation issues that Plaintiff had raised during his meeting with Pennamon and Warren. [Doc. 5 at 27]. The email stated, in part, that "[y]our disability does not prevent you from taking notes in class or from making arrangements to get notes from other students in class during your frequent absences. You have been provided with several options ... all of which you have rejected because the only solution you find acceptable is to be given hard or electronic copies of all of the instructor's personal notes. You have stated that copying notes is busy work and punishment work and that you don't wish to make friends from whom you could obtain notes. The reasons you have given are not related to or supported by your disability. Your refusal to take required class exams (for all of which the professor has given you extended time to complete in our office) is also not related [*39]  to or supported by your disability. You cannot expect to do well in a class you rarely attend and in which you refuse to take the steps necessary to learn and be examined on the class material. ... Upon consultation, Legal Affairs has indicated support for our position that you have received reasonable accommodations in Film 2700." [Id.].
In Plaintiff's view, Pennamon's email was "hostile" and "contain[ed] many false accusations against Plaintiff," including that he had rejected the option of a note-taker. [Corr. Third Am. Compl. ¶¶ 55, 57]. Plaintiff alleges that the email caused him so much grief, anger and depression that it caused him to perform below his academic potential in all of his courses, not just the Film course. [Id. ¶ 55].
On April 17, 2009, Plaintiff sent an email to Mark Becker, the president of GSU, with the heading, "last notice before filing civil action." [Doc. 5 at 28]. The email stated that Plaintiff's meeting with Rodney Pennamon had "pushed [Plaintiff] over the edge," and he threatened to file a lawsuit in the Fulton County State Court if certain things did not occur by the 24th of April, including, inter alia, that he receive the overhead lecture notes for his Film 2700 [*40]  class; that Pennamon be replaced as GSU's ADA compliance officer "with someone that has actually read and understands the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and will follow all recommendations made by the U.S. Department of Education on how to compensate postsecondary students with disabilities"; and that Plaintiff be compensated for all of the time that Plaintiff had spent on the matter, including, but not limited to, a three week extension of all homework due dates and examination dates. [Id.].
On April 18th, Plaintiff sent President Becker another email, stating that his Film professor needed to be fired and that Plaintiff had decided to go ahead and file a lawsuit. [Id. at 29]. Plaintiff told President Becker that Rodney Pennamon had emailed Plaintiff "with a bunch of lies one of them being that I rejected the option of a note taker. This is totally false. I said I would be ok with that and then stated how it still is illogical for someone to copy down the teacher's overhead notes verbatim and provide me their copy when it would be effortless for the teacher to do it herself." [Id.]. Plaintiff continued, stating, in part, "I have tried copying [*41]  the overhead notes like everyone else but it is unbearingly painful in an irrational manner that I can only describe as being a disorder of the chemistry in my brain. When trying to copy the notes, the focus in my brain switches from the classroom subject to constantly in my head repeating to myself over and over 'Why do I have to be a human copy machine? Why do I have to spend all class period copying such lengthy notes? Why can't the teacher just post them online like all my other teachers have done in the 4 years of me being at GSU? Why is this teacher being so stubborn? Why does everything have to turn into a power struggle?' ... For the sake of finishing this semester and receiving my Bachelors of Computer Science could you PLEASE over rule the teacher and provide me with the lecture over head notes?" [Id. at 30].
On April 20, 2009, President Becker responded to Plaintiff, via email, and explained that GSU was required to provide reasonable accommodations, "but this does not mean that you must be provided your instructor's class notes. ... The University has taken the appropriate steps to ensure you were accommodated according to the law and considers the matter closed." [Id. at 29].
On April 22, [*42]  2009, Plaintiff timely submitted his second written assignment and earned a perfect score of 100 points on the paper. [DSMF ¶ 83; Fuller-Seeley Aff. ¶ 23].
April 27, 2009 was the last class day of the Film class. As Dr. Fuller-Seeley had done before the third exam, she brought one copy of each of her typed lecture outlines from the previous three weeks to class and allowed any student that wanted to to review and take notes from her lecture outlines at the end of class, but the students were instructed that she had only one set of her outlines and the outlines were not supposed to leave the classroom. [Fuller-Seeley Aff. ¶ 24]. Dr. Fuller-Seeley avers in her affidavit that as several students were reviewing and copying her outlines, Plaintiff took three days' worth of outlines and left the classroom with the outlines. [Id.; Pl.'s Dep. at 103; Fuller-Seeley Dep. at 116-19]. Plaintiff testified that he used those outlines to study for his final exam. [Pl.'s Dep. at 103-04].
Plaintiff took his final exam on April 29, 2009 in the ODS and received a 58 on the exam. [Pl.'s Dep. Ex. 29]. However, Dr. Fuller-Seeley gave every student two extra points because one of the test questions was unclear, [*43]  so Plaintiff's final exam grade was 60. [Fuller-Seeley Dep. at 13-14; Pl.'s Resp. to DSMF ¶¶ 87-88]. For the entire semester, Plaintiff received a grade of 41 on a scale of 100 and failed the Film course. [DSMF ¶ 91].
After the semester ended, Plaintiff filed a grade appeal with Individual Defendant Dr. Cheshier, the department chair, concerning the paper that Plaintiff had written for his Film class for which he received a grade of 70. [Pl.'s Dep. Ex. 30]. Plaintiff claimed that the assignment was ambiguous as to whether the paper was supposed to address the general use of sound in movies or the specific use of sound in a current film. Plaintiff objected to Dr. Fuller-Seeley's deduction of 20 points from his grade because he had interpreted an ambiguous assignment differently from what the professor had intended. In his email to Dr. Cheshier, Plaintiff stated that he considered Dr. Fuller-Seeley's refusal to change his grade to be "an act of discrimination. There is no other logical explanation other than that." [Id.].
The grade appeal was investigated and adjudicated by Dr. Cheshier. Dr. Cheshier found that Dr. Fuller-Seeley's scoring of the paper was "within the normal standards appropriate [*44]  to this level class," and fully consistent with the grades given to the other students in the class as well as the other grades that Plaintiff had received in the class, especially given the late submission of the paper (three days after the paper was due) and the professor's announced policy of deducting 10 points per day. [Pl.'s Dep. Ex. 31]. He also concluded that when read in context, the most reasonable interpretation of the assignment was that the student was to write about the film he or she had been asked to see, and that the instructions were sufficiently clear to convey this idea. [Cheshier Dep. at 18]. After investigating the matter, Dr. Cheshier concluded that there was no evidence of animus, arbitrariness, or unfairness in the feedback and grade that Plaintiff had received on the assignment, and upheld the grade. [DSMF ¶¶ 94, 102-03; Pl.'s Dep. Ex. 31].
Plaintiff claims that the actions of the Defendants caused him to be depressed, and this caused him to have other problems, including academic difficulties in his other classes,5 inability to graduate in the spring of 2009 (thus delaying his entry into the job market), and difficult interactions with his family. [Corr. Third [*45]  Am. Compl. ¶¶ 32-35, 39-42, 44-45, 48, 55-56, 60-65, 68, 88-89, 111; Pl.'s Dep. at 139, 141-43, 145, 151, 154-56, 170, 177-80].
It is undisputed, however, that Plaintiff has a long history of depression (since about age seven), bipolar spectrum disorder, ADHD, and academic struggles pre-dating the spring 2009 semester. [DSMF ¶¶ 105-18]. For example, Plaintiff failed three classes at GSU in 2006, had a grade point average of 0.79 the second semester of 2006, and was not in good standing. [Id. ¶¶ 106-07]. For the summer semester 2007, Plaintiff received a grade of D in one class and was not in good standing. For the spring semester 2008, Plaintiff had a GPA of 1.86. [Id. ¶¶ 107-08]. It is also undisputed that Plaintiff did not seek or attempt to find a job that started in the summer of 2009. [Pl.'s Dep. at 11]. Nor did Plaintiff see a counselor or therapist for treatment or counseling from December 2008 until at least the end of July 2011. [Pl.'s Dep. at 88-89; Sommers Dep. at 9, 38].

C. Discussion

1. Discrimination Claims Under the ADA and Rehabilitation Act
In Counts I and II of his Corrected Third Amended Complaint, Plaintiff alleges that he is a qualified individual with a disability, [*46]  within the meaning of Title II of the ADA and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act, because he has ADHD and depression, conditions that he alleges substantially limit certain major life activities, including his educational activities. [Corr. Third Am. Compl. ¶¶ 82, 94]. Plaintiff alleges that the Board of Regents subjected him to intentional discrimination, in violation of those statutes: (1) by denying him the opportunity to take his first Film class examination in a distraction-reduced environment at the ODS; and (2) by refusing to provide him either copies of Dr. Fuller-Seeley's lecture outlines or, in the alternative, a note-taker, to "level the playing field." [Id. ¶¶ 86, 96].
Title II of the ADA broadly prohibits discrimination by public entities against individuals with disabilities: "[N]o qualified individual with a disability shall, by reason of such disability, be excluded from participation in or be denied the benefits of the services, programs, or activities of a public entity, or be subjected to discrimination by any such entity." 42 U.S.C. § 12132. Similarly, the Rehabilitation Act provides, in pertinent part, that:
No otherwise qualified individual with a disability ..., shall, solely by reason of her or his disability, be [*47]  excluded from the participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance....
29 U.S.C. § 794(a).
The Rehabilitation Act and the ADA utilize similar statutory language and are generally construed similarly. See 42 U.S.C. § 12133 ("The remedies, procedures, and rights set forth in [the Rehabilitation Act] shall be the remedies, procedures, and rights this subchapter provides...."); 42 U.S.C. § 12134(b) (directing ADA regulations to be consistent with Rehabilitation Act regulations); see also Cash v. Smith, 231 F.3d 1301, 1305 & n.2 (11th Cir. 2000) ("Cases decided under the Rehabilitation Act are precedent for cases under the ADA, and vice-versa."). Although there are subtle differences between the two disability acts, none of the distinctions between the two acts is relevant here. Accordingly, unless otherwise noted, the Court will consider Plaintiff's ADA and Rehabilitation Act claims together. Cash, 231 F.3d at 1305 (stating that discrimination claims under the Rehabilitation Act are governed by the same standards used in ADA cases [see 29 U.S.C. § 794(d)] and therefore the two claims may be discussed together).

a. Eleventh Amendment and Sovereign Immunity
As a threshold matter, Defendants argue that Plaintiff's money damages claims of discrimination and retaliation [*48]  against the Board of Regents brought under Title II of the ADA are barred by the Eleventh Amendment and sovereign immunity. [Doc. 134-1 at 21-32]. However, the Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit and the district judge assigned to this case have held otherwise. See Association for Disabled Americans, Inc. v. Florida Int'l Univ., 405 F.3d 954, 959 (11th Cir. 2005)(holding that the prohibitions of Title II of the ADA apply to state universities); Wilf v. Board of Regents, U.S. Dist. Ct., N.D. Ga., Case No. 1:09-cv-1877-RLV-GGB, Doc. 53 at 5, 2010 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 147276 July 6, 2010 Order (rejecting the Board of Regents' Eleventh Amendment immunity argument based on the Court's reading of Ass'n for Disabled Ams.).
Defendants argue that Plaintiff's money damages claims of discrimination and retaliation against the Board of Regents under the Rehabilitation Act are also barred by the Eleventh Amendment and sovereign immunity. [Doc. 134-1 at 33-35]. However, the Eleventh Circuit held in Garrett v. University of Alabama at Birmingham Board of Trustees, 344 F.3d 1288, 1290-93 (11th Cir. 2003) (per curiam), that state agencies (including state universities) that accept federal funding waive Eleventh Amendment immunity for Section 504 Rehabilitation Act claims. Id. (concluding that "Section 2000d-7 unambiguously conditions the receipt of federal funds on a waiver of Eleventh Amendment immunity to claims under section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act. By continuing to accept federal funds, the state agencies have waived their immunity."). In [*49]  his Corrected Third Amended Complaint, Plaintiff has alleged that the Board of Regents and GSU accept federal funds. [Corr. Third Am. Compl. ¶¶ 95-96]. The Board of Regents and GSU have not denied that they receive federal funds. Plaintiff's allegations are sufficient to overcome Defendants' Eleventh Amendment immunity defense to Plaintiff's Section 504 Rehabilitation Act claims. See Garrett, 344 F.3d at 1293 (holding that by continuing to accept federal funds, the state agencies had waived their immunity).
Accordingly, based on the cited authority, I will assume for purposes of this motion for summary judgment that the Eleventh Amendment and sovereign immunity do not bar Plaintiff's claims of disability discrimination under Title II of the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act.

b. Whether the Statutes Require Accommodation
Plaintiff alleges and argues that the Board of Regents at all relevant times had an affirmative duty to make reasonable accommodations in its policies, practices, and/or procedures when necessary to avoid discrimination on the basis of disability, under the ADA (in accordance with its implementing regulations), and under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act (and its implementing regulations). [Corr. Third Am. Compl. ¶¶ 83, 93].
Defendants argue that neither [*50]  Title II of the ADA nor the Rehabilitation Act require accommodation. [Defs.' Br., Doc. 134-1 at 11-14]. Defendants point out that Title I of the ADA expressly requires "accommodation," and Title III requires "modification," but there is no similar statutory language in Title II requiring accommodation or modification. [Id. at 12-14 (citing 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A) (Title I); 42 U.S.C. § 12182(b)(2)(A)(ii) (Title III); 42 U.S.C. § 12132 (Title II); Bircoll v. Miami-Dade County, 480 F.3d 1072, 1082 n.13 (11th Cir. 2007))]. Defendants argue that the Rehabilitation Act also lacks comparable statutory language that requires accommodation of disabilities. [Id. (citing Section 794(a) of the Rehabilitation Act)]. Defendants argue, therefore, that because nothing in the language of Title II and the Rehabilitation Act requires accommodation of disabilities, Plaintiff's failure-to-accommodate claims fail.
Defendants' argument is not supported by the controlling case law. In Tennessee v. Lane, 541 U.S. 509, 532-33, 124 S. Ct. 1978, 158 L. Ed. 2d 820 (2004), the United States Supreme Court expressly found that Title II of the ADA includes an affirmative obligation to accommodate, within the limits of practicability. See id. In addition, the Eleventh Circuit noted in Bircoll that the DOJ regulations for Title II impose the requirement of "reasonable modifications" to procedures to avoid the discrimination prohibited by Title II. Bircoll, 480 F.3d at 1082 n.13 (citations omitted). [*51]  Accordingly, for purposes of this motion for summary judgment, Defendants' statutory argument is rejected.

c. Private Right of Action
Defendants next argue that the implementing regulations for the Rehabilitation Act and the ADA exceed the rights created by the statutes and do not provide a private right of action; therefore, Plaintiff may not pursue his Rehabilitation Act or ADA claims. [Doc. 134-1 at 15]. However, courts have found that Title II of the ADA and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act are enforceable through a private right of action. See, e.g., American Ass'n of People with Disabilities v. Harris, 647 F.3d 1093, 1101 (11th Cir. 2011)(stating that 42 U.S.C. § 12132 "provides private parties with a private right of action to enforce the ADA's protections"); see also Lane, 541 U.S. at 532 (holding that private plaintiffs could enforce Title II with respect to inaccessible courthouses); Barnes v. Gorman, 536 U.S. 181, 185, 122 S. Ct. 2097, 153 L. Ed. 2d 230 (2002)(stating that Title II and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act "are enforceable through private causes of action"); Olmstead v. L.C. ex rel. Zimring, 527 U.S. 581, 597, 119 S. Ct. 2176, 144 L. Ed. 2d 540 (1999)(holding that mentally disabled plaintiffs could sue state health officials under Title II to receive community-based treatment)(other citations omitted); Frame v. City of Arlington, 657 F.3d 215, 224 (5th Cir. 2011) (listing cases, including United States v. Georgia, 546 U.S. 151, 154, 126 S. Ct. 877, 163 L. Ed. 2d 650 (2006)("Title II authorizes suits by private citizens for money damages against public entities that violate [Title II].")).
At Congress's direction, [*52]  the Department of Justice ("DOJ") has promulgated regulations implementing Title II's prohibition against discrimination. See Olmstead, 527 U.S. at 591 (citing § 12134(a)); Bircoll, 480 F.3d at 1081. Congress further directed that the Title II implementing regulations "shall be consistent with this chapter and with the coordination regulations ... applicable to recipients of Federal financial assistance under [§ 504 of the Rehabilitation Act]." Olmstead, 527 U.S. at 591. The regulations are the agency's interpretation of the statute, and they are therefore to be given "controlling weight" unless they are procedurally flawed, substantively arbitrary and capricious, or plainly contradict the statute. Shotz v. City of Plantation, Fla., 344 F.3d 1161, 1179 (11th Cir. 2003); see also Shotz v. Cates, 256 F.3d at 1080 n.2 (citing United States v. Morton, 467 U.S. 822, 834, 104 S. Ct. 2769, 81 L. Ed. 2d 680 (1984)).
The regulations implementing Title II of the ADA provide that:
A public entity shall make reasonable modifications in policies, practices, or procedures when the modifications are necessary to avoid discrimination on the basis of disability, unless the public entity can demonstrate that making the modifications would fundamentally alter the nature of the service, program, or activity.
28 C.F.R. § 35.130(b)(7). The Eleventh Circuit has noted that, "The ADA's 'reasonable modification' principle ... does not require a public entity to employ any and all means to make auxiliary aids and [*53]  services accessible to persons with disabilities, but only to make 'reasonable modifications' that would not fundamentally alter the nature of the service or activity of the public entity or impose an undue burden." Bircoll, 480 F.3d at 1082 (citing Lane, 541 U.S. at 531-32). See also Ass'n for Disabled Ams., 405 F.3d at 959 (same); School Bd. of Nassau County v. Arline, 480 U.S. 273, 287 n.17, 107 S. Ct. 1123, 94 L. Ed. 2d 307 (1987) (noting that under the Rehabilitation Act, an "[a]ccommodation is not reasonable if it either imposes 'undue financial and administrative burdens' on a grantee ... or requires 'a fundamental alteration in the nature of [the] program'") (citations omitted).
To the extent that Title II's implementing regulations "simply apply" Title II's substantive ban on disability discrimination and do not prohibit conduct that Title II permits, they are also enforceable through Title II's private right of action. See Frame, 657 F.3d at 224 n.24 (citing Alexander v. Sandoval, 532 U.S. 275, 284-85, 121 S. Ct. 1511, 149 L. Ed. 2d 517 (2001)). "This is because when Congress intends a statute to be enforced through a private right of action, it also 'intends the authoritative interpretation of the statute to be so enforced as well.'" Id. Defendants have not established that the implementing regulations prohibit conduct that the statutes permit. This Court, therefore, rejects Defendants' argument that the regulations exceed the statutory authority of Title II and the Rehabilitation Act, [*54]  and, thus, are not enforceable. [Doc. 134-1 at 15].
In any event, the Court finds that Plaintiff's citations to the ADA's and the Rehabilitation Act's implementing regulations in his Corrected Third Amended Complaint merely amplify his statutory claims under the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act, which do afford a private right of action. See Haddad v. Dudek, 784 F. Supp. 2d 1308, 1325-26 (M.D. Fla. 2011)(stating that under Olmstead, failure to provide services to a qualified individual may constitute a form of discrimination under the relevant statutory scheme, and the purpose of the implementing regulations is to provide standards for compliance with the statutes). For the reasons stated, the Court will consider Plaintiff's disability discrimination claims as alleged under Title II of the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act and the statutes' implementing regulations applying the statutes' substantive ban on disability discrimination.

d. Analysis
A disability discrimination claim (under the ADA and/or the Rehabilitation Act) can be based on either a conventional "disparate treatment" theory, or a theory that the defendant failed to make "reasonable accommodations," or both. See Forbes v. St. Thomas Univ., Inc., 768 F. Supp. 2d 1222, 1227 (S.D. Fla. 2010), aff'd, 456 F. App'x 809 (11th Cir. 2012); Schwarz v. City of Treasure Island, 544 F.3d 1201, 1212 n.6 (11th Cir. 2008)(stating that the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act recognize disparate [*55]  treatment and reasonable accommodation theories). Disparate treatment involves discriminatory intent and occurs when a disabled person is singled out for disadvantage because of his disability. Forbes, 768 F. Supp. 2d at 1227. By contrast, a failure-to-make-reasonable-accommodations claim requires no animus and occurs when a covered entity breaches its affirmative duty to reasonably accommodate the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified person. Id.; see also Henrietta D. v. Bloomberg, 331 F.3d 261, 275-76 (2d Cir. 2003) (listing cases that discuss both disparate treatment and failure-to-make-reasonable-accommodation theories under the ADA). Here, it is clear from Plaintiff's complaint and summary judgment submissions that his claims concern GSU's alleged failure to reasonably accommodate his learning and psychological impairments or conditions, and he is not asserting a disparate treatment claim.6 Therefore, I will focus my analysis and discussion on Plaintiff's failure-to-accommodate claims.
In order to establish a prima facie case of disability discrimination for failure to accommodate under Title II of the ADA (and the Rehabilitation Act), Plaintiff must prove: (1) that he is a qualified individual with a disability; (2) that he was excluded from [*56]  participation in or denied the benefits of a public entity's services, programs, or activities, or was otherwise discriminated against by the public entity; and (3) that the exclusion, denial or benefit, or discrimination was by reason of the plaintiff's disability. American Ass'n of People with Disabilities, 647 F.3d at 1101; Shotz v. Cates, 256 F.3d at 1079 (citing 42 U.S.C. § 12132); Ellis v. England, 432 F.3d 1321, 1326 (11th Cir. 2005) (Rehabilitation Act). Where, like here, there is an absence of direct evidence of discrimination, the Court analyzes discrimination claims under the burden-shifting framework announced in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 93 S. Ct. 1817, 36 L. Ed. 2d 668 (1973), and refined in Texas Dep't of Cmty. Affairs v. Burdine, 450 U.S. 248, 101 S. Ct. 1089, 67 L. Ed. 2d 207 (1981).
To maintain a claim under the ADA (and the Rehabilitation Act), Plaintiff must first demonstrate that he suffers from a "disability," defined as "a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities ... or being regarded as having such an impairment."7 42 U.S.C. § 12102(2)(A), (C); Slomcenski v. Citibank, N.A., 432 F.3d 1271, 1280 (11th Cir. 2005). A person is a "qualified individual with a disability" if he is "an individual with a disability who, with or without reasonable modifications to rules, policies, or practices, the removal of architectural, communication, or transportation barriers, or the provision of auxiliary aids and services, meets the essential eligibility requirements for the receipt of services or the participation [*57]  in programs or activities provided by a public entity." 42 U.S.C. § 12131 (ADA); 29 U.S.C. § 794(a)(Rehabilitation Act); 29 U.S.C. § 705(20); see Wolfe v. Postmaster Gen., 488 Fed. Appx. 465, 2012 WL 3792091, at *1 (11th Cir. 2012)(stating that the Rehabilitation Act has adopted the ADA's definition of "disability"); see also Ellis v. Morehouse Sch. of Med., 925 F. Supp. 1529, 1540 (N.D.0 Ga. 1996)(stating that a qualified individual with a disability is "an individual who, with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions or meet the essential requirements of the program in which [he] participates or in which [he] desires to participate.'").
The "qualified individual with a disability" aspect of Plaintiff's claim is not seriously disputed. Plaintiff has a well-documented history of bipolar spectrum disorder, depression, and ADHD, all of which have been held to constitute a mental impairment under the ADA. See, e.g., Price v. Facility Mgmt. Group, Inc., 403 F. Supp. 2d 1246, 1254 (N.D. Ga. 2005) (noting that bipolar disorder has been held to constitute a mental impairment under the ADA); Pritchard v. Southern Co. Servs., 92 F.3d 1130, 1132 (11th Cir. 1996) (recognizing that depression constitutes a mental impairment); Knapp v. City of Columbus, 192 F. App'x 323, 328 (6th Cir. 2006) (finding that ADHD qualifies as a "physical or mental impairment," and learning qualifies as a major life activity under the ADA). Plaintiff has alleged that these impairments substantially limit the major life activity of learning (or more precisely, "educational activities"). [Corr. Third Am. Compl. [*58]  ¶ 82].
Defendants do not concede that Plaintiff is a qualified individual with a disability, but they have not seriously challenged Plaintiff's assertion, attempted to refute his diagnoses, or disputed that GSU's Office of Disability Services accepted Plaintiff's medical documentation in support of his request for disability services, and authorized Plaintiff to receive the approved disability accommodations that were listed in his two accommodation letters. In addition, the record shows that Plaintiff apparently met or satisfied the essential requirements of GSU's undergraduate Computer Science program, as he graduated from GSU in May 2011 with a Bachelor of Science degree in Computer Science. [Pl.'s Dep. at 9; DSMF ¶ 8]. Because Defendants have not meaningfully challenged Plaintiff's status as a qualified individual with a disability, the Court will assume for purposes of this motion for summary judgment that Plaintiff has satisfied element one of his prima facie case.
The next issue to be addressed is whether GSU provided reasonable accommodations. A qualified individual with a disability is not entitled to the accommodation of his choice, but only to a reasonable accommodation. Shannon v. Postmaster Gen. of U.S. Postal Serv., 335 F. App'x 21, 25 (11th Cir. 2009) [*59] (citing Stewart v. Happy Herman's Cheshire Bridge, Inc., 117 F.3d 1278, 1285-86 (11th Cir. 1997)). The plaintiff has the burden of proving that an accommodation is reasonable. Id. (citing Willis v. Conopco, Inc., 108 F.3d 282, 285 (11th Cir. 1997)).
Courts have explained that in the academic setting, "reasonable accommodations" jurisprudence contemplates an interactive process between the student and the school, under which both sides have a responsibility to bring the issue of reasonable accommodations front and center. See, e.g., Forbes, 768 F. Supp. 2d at 1231-32 (stating that federal law "does not require a university to provide every accommodation that might help a disabled student perform better. Schools need only provide accommodations that they deem reasonable"). The initial burden is on the student, who must identify his disability, provide supporting medical documentation, and make a case for specific accommodations. Id. (citing Stern v. Univ. of Osteopathic Med. and Health Sciences, 220 F.3d 906 (8th Cir. 2000); Taylor v. Principal Fin. Group, Inc., 93 F.3d 155, 165 (5th Cir. 1996)(stating that where the disability, resulting limitations, and necessary reasonable accommodations "are not open, obvious and apparent ... as is often the case when mental disabilities are involved, the initial burden rests primarily upon the [individual], or his health-care provider, to specifically identify the disability and resulting limitations, and to suggest the reasonable accommodations.")). In order to be a reasonable accommodation, any modifications requested in a program must be related to the disability. [*60]  See Stern, 220 F.3d at 908 (citing Amir v. St. Louis Univ., 184 F.3d 1017, 1029 (8th Cir. 1999) (ADA claim)).
Then the school is required to consider the request and make a reasoned decision to grant or deny it. Forbes, 768 F. Supp. 2d at 1231. "Because academic faculties have a special understanding about which aspects of the educational experience can be modified, a school's decision about accommodations will be upheld unless it is plainly not based on professional judgment." Id.
The United States Supreme Court has concluded that courts are ill-suited to evaluate academic decisions made by university administrators and faculty members. See Regents of Univ. of Michigan v. Ewing, 474 U.S. 214, 226, 106 S. Ct. 507, 88 L. Ed. 2d 523 (1985) ("[A] federal court is not ... suited to evaluate the substance of the multitude of academic decisions that are made daily by faculty members of public educational institutions — decisions that require an expert evaluation of cumulative information and are not readily adapted to the procedural tools of judicial or administrative decisionmaking.")(internal brackets and quotation marks omitted). Accordingly, "[w]hen judges are asked to review the substance of a genuinely academic decision, ... they should show great respect for the faculty's professional judgment." Id. at 225. University faculties are to be given "the widest range of discretion in making judgments as to the [*61]  academic performance of students...." Id. at n.11 (quoting Bd. of Curators of the Univ. of Missouri v. Horowitz, 435 U.S. 78, 96 n.6, 98 S. Ct. 948, 55 L. Ed. 2d 124 (1978) (Powell, J., concurring)). Federal courts have recognized and enforced these concepts in disability discrimination actions. See, e.g., Forbes, 768 F. Supp. 2d at 1233; Ellis, 925 F. Supp. at 1541-42. Nevertheless, judicial deference to the academic decisions is not absolute, as deference only attaches to decisions evincing some amount of reasoned consideration or professional judgment. Forbes, 768 F. Supp. 2d at 1233.
Here, Plaintiff's physician, Dr. Sommers, requested that Plaintiff receive the accommodations of "some extra time for test taking and for preparation of some of his assignments." [Pl.'s Dep. Ex. 2]. Dr. Sommers testified that he believed that the accommodations he recommended were all that Plaintiff needed to receive the benefit of his education. [Sommers Dep. at 49-50]. After meeting with Plaintiff in an interactive setting, Plaintiff and GSU's ODS (through Warren) agreed that Plaintiff should receive: (1) double time on objective examinations; (2) double time on essay exams; (3) double time on math exams; (4) occasional extension of due dates (1-2 days extra); and (5) testing at the ODS in a distraction-reduced environment. [DSMF ¶¶ 27-28]. Although Warren also offered lecture outlines, if approved [*62]  by professors, Plaintiff initially declined the accommodation. [Pl.'s Dep. at 18-19]. Overall, the undisputed evidence shows that Plaintiff was given every accommodation that his physician recommended, plus the additional accommodation of taking his exams in a distraction-reduced environment. [DSMF ¶ 28].
Plaintiff claims that GSU failed to accommodate him, first, by not advising him of a makeup date for his first exam, and then by refusing to provide copies of Dr. Fuller-Seeley's lecture outlines or a note-taker.
The record, however, indicates that Plaintiff is at least partially, if not wholly, responsible for failing to take his first exam. Plaintiff received his first Accommodation Letter, allowing him to have extra time for exams and to take those exams at the ODS in a distraction-reduced environment, on January 7, 2009. During his meeting on January 7th with Ms. Warren, she specifically advised Plaintiff that it was his responsibility to provide each professor with a copy of his Accommodation Letter for the professor's signature, to fill out a Request for Individualized Testing Accommodations form with each professor, and to return a signed copy of the Accommodation Letter and [*63]  RITA form for each class to the ODS. [Warren Aff. ¶ 7]. There is no evidence in the record indicating that Plaintiff ever provided the ODS with a copy of the first Accommodation Letter signed by Dr. Fuller-Seeley. Plaintiff's ODS file does not contain a copy of the January 7th Accommodation Letter bearing Dr. Fuller-Seeley's signature. [Id. ¶ 8].
In addition, Plaintiff testified that during the first three weeks of the semester, he never met in person with Dr. Fuller-Seeley to fill out the RITA form and discuss his approved accommodations, including taking his exams at the ODS; instead, he left the form in her mail box the day of the first exam. [Pl.'s Dep. at 25-27]. There were at least five sessions of Plaintiff's Film class between the time he picked up his Accommodation Letter and RITA forms and the first Film class exam. Plaintiff has not adequately explained why he did not approach Dr. Fuller-Seeley with his Accommodation Letter and RITA form before or after any one of those classes and either give the forms to her then or ask for a specific appointment or time to meet at her office to do so. But for whatever reason, Plaintiff apparently elected not to pursue those opportunities. [*64]  He then chose not to take the first (or second) exam.
Even assuming as true Plaintiff's version of events — that Dr. Fuller-Seeley told him that she would email him with the date and time that he could take the makeup test for the first exam, and she failed to do so — Plaintiff has failed to explain or address why he never followed up with the ODS or Dr. Fuller-Seeley about when he could take the test that he knew he had missed. If he had, he would have learned that Dr. Fuller-Seeley had completed the RITA form, sent a copy of the test to the ODS and informed the ODS that Plaintiff could take the makeup test anytime during the week of February 16, 2009. [Warren Aff. ¶ 8].
Even if Plaintiff's failure to take the first exam makeup test in February 2009 cannot be attributed solely to Plaintiff, the blame for failing to make arrangements to make up the first exam on the day of the final lies squarely with him. According to the class syllabus, Plaintiff could have made up the first exam on the day of the final by requesting to do so. [Doc. 5 at 7; Fuller-Seeley Aff. ¶ 4]. Plaintiff testified, however, that he never really looked at the syllabus (which quite clearly described this opportunity), [*65]  he then "forgot about it" and never asked Dr. Fuller-Seeley if he could make up his first exam on the day of the final. [Pl.'s Dep. at 115-17]. Plaintiff has failed to show how his multiple missed opportunities to take his first Film class exam constitute a failure on the part of GSU to reasonably accommodate him.
With regard to Plaintiff's allegation that GSU failed to accommodate his disabilities by failing or refusing to provide him with copies of Dr. Fuller-Seeley's lecture outlines or the accommodation of a note-taker, Plaintiff has failed to provide any affidavits, testimony, or other probative evidence showing or establishing that those accommodations were necessary to accommodate his disabilities. See Stern, 220 F.3d at 908 (granting summary judgment where plaintiff failed to establish that the modifications he requested were related to and would have accommodated his disability).
In support of Defendants' summary judgment motion, Defendants filed the depositions and medical records of Plaintiff's treating physician, Dr. Sommers [Doc. 137], and Plaintiff's former psychiatrist, Noel Timothy Rivers-Bulkeley, M.D. [Doc. 138, Rivers-Bulkeley Dep.]. Both doctors were deposed and neither testified that [*66]  Plaintiff required his professor's notes or lecture outlines to study in order to succeed academically. Nor did either doctor note any handwriting or note-taking-related disorders or difficulties, or testify that Plaintiff required the provision of a note-taker for his classes. Dr. Sommers testified that in his opinion, the accommodations that he identified in his letter to GSU were sufficient to allow Plaintiff to receive the benefits of his education. [Sommers Dep. at 48-50]. Ms. Warren with the ODS also averred that she believed that the accommodations that GSU offered were sufficient to provide Plaintiff with all of the benefits, services, programs and activities that GSU offered to non-disabled students. [Warren Aff. ¶ 6].
Apart from Plaintiff's personal opinion and speculation that the limitations imposed by his disability or disabilities required the reasonable accommodation of his professor's lecture outlines and/or that a note-taker be provided, Plaintiff has presented no medical evidence or expert testimony to substantiate his assertions. Plaintiff's conclusory allegations, speculation and unsubstantiated assertions are inadequate to satisfy the nonmovant's burden. The Eleventh [*67]  Circuit has consistently held that conclusory allegations without specific supporting facts have no probative value. Evers v. General Motors Corp., 770 F.2d 984, 986 (11th Cir. 1985)(citations omitted). Plaintiff has not created a genuine fact issue for trial that he required accommodations beyond those that were provided.
Even assuming that Plaintiff had some sort of disability related to listening and writing (which Plaintiff has never alleged or established), GSU reasonably accommodated it. Plaintiff alleges that he "could not concentrate and learn in class but could concentrate and learn well studying at home in solitude, free of any distraction." [Corr. Third Am. Compl. ¶ 86]. Plaintiff testified that Dr. Fuller-Seeley told him the first time he met with her that he could bring a tape recorder to class. [Pl.'s Dep. at 36-37]. After Plaintiff started complaining about having difficulties in Dr. Fuller-Seeley's class, Plaintiff was again offered the opportunity to tape record the class and/or to obtain a volunteer student note-taker. [DSMF ¶¶ 48-52]. Plaintiff could have tape-recorded Dr. Fuller-Seeley's lectures, taken whatever notes he wanted to take during class (using the lecture outlines projected overhead in the classroom, or not) or obtained [*68]  notes from another student, and then listened to the tape recordings at his leisure at home, along with studying his textbook and the exam study outlines posted on the GSU intranet a week before each exam. It is undisputed that Plaintiff never requested Dr. Fuller-Seeley's assistance in obtaining a note-taker, nor did he avail himself of the opportunity to tape record the class.8 [Pl.'s Resp. to DSMF ¶¶ 50-55].
The record is clear that Plaintiff failed to engage GSU in an interactive process after GSU offered him the accommodations of tape recording his professor's lectures or arranging for a note-taker, in that Plaintiff failed to provide GSU with any substantive reasons as to why the proffered accommodations were unreasonable given his medical needs or limitations. Instead, Plaintiff simply demanded that GSU capitulate and give him the lecture outlines that he demanded. See Stewart, 117 F.3d at 1286-87 (holding that summary judgment was appropriate where employee failed to engage in interactive process after employer offered accommodations). Courts have held that a party that obstructs or delays the interactive process is not acting in good faith. Crabill v. Charlotte Mecklenburg Bd. of Educ., 423 F. App'x 314, 323 (4th Cir. 2011).
In this case, the interactive process broke down because Plaintiff [*69]  resisted accepting any alternative reasonable accommodation other than being provided the lecture outlines that he insisted he was entitled to receive from his professor. However, "liability for failure to provide reasonable accommodations ensues only where the [defendant] bears responsibility for the breakdown. But where, as here, the [defendant] does not obstruct the process, but instead makes reasonable efforts both to communicate with the [student] and provide accommodations based on the information it possessed, ADA liability simply does not follow." See Beck v. Univ. of Wisconsin Bd. of Regents, 75 F.3d 1130, 1137 (7th Cir. 1996)(discussing the interactive process in the ADA employment context).
Defendants have submitted affidavits and documentary evidence demonstrating that GSU's Office of Disability Services developed a reasonable program to accommodate Plaintiff's disabilities, and put it in writing for timely distribution to the appropriate instructors. Plaintiff has presented no evidence whatsoever to demonstrate that these accommodations were inadequate or unreasonable. The record shows that throughout the spring semester of 2009, GSU provided all of the reasonable accommodations that Plaintiff had agreed in writing to receive, and repeatedly demonstrated [*70]  a willingness to discuss the provision of additional reasonable accommodations, if necessary, to help Plaintiff satisfy the Film class's academic standards. Under the circumstances, the Court finds that GSU met its burden (to the extent it had such a burden) to engage in an informal, interactive process with Plaintiff to determine appropriate reasonable accommodations. As stated above, a qualified individual with a disability is not entitled to the accommodation of his choice, only to a reasonable accommodation. Stewart, 117 F.3d at 1286 (citing Lewis v. Zilog, Inc., 908 F. Supp. 931, 948 (N.D. Ga. 1995)); Forbes, 768 F. Supp. 2d at 1232; see also Spychalsky v. Sullivan, No. CV 01-0958 (DRH) (ETB), 2003 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 15704, 2003 WL 22071602, at *11 (E.D. N.Y. Aug. 29, 2003) (stating that "a disabled plaintiff is not entitled to have all of his proposed accommodations adopted, immediately or otherwise, so long as the offered accommodations are 'reasonable' to avoid discrimination based on disability.")(citing Fink v. New York City Dep't of Personnel, 53 F.3d 565, 567 (2d Cir. 1995)).
Dr. Fuller-Seeley made the academic judgment that distributing a hard copy or electronic version of her lecture outlines to Plaintiff was not educationally appropriate in her class. After considering and discussing the issue, GSU deferred to Dr. Fuller-Seeley's professional and academic judgment. Plaintiff has provided no argument, case law, testimony, affidavits or other [*71]  probative evidence demonstrating that the judgment was "such a substantial departure from accepted academic norms as to demonstrate that the person or committee responsible did not actually exercise professional judgment." Regents of Univ. of Michigan v. Ewing, 474 U.S. at 225.
For all the reasons stated, Plaintiff has failed to satisfy the second element of his prima facie case. Even if Plaintiff had satisfied the second element — that he was excluded from participation in or denied the benefits of a public entity's services, programs, or activities, or was otherwise discriminated against by the public entity — which he has not, his claim still fails because he has not presented any argument or evidence establishing (or even attempting to show) that the exclusion, denial of benefit, or discrimination was by reason of his disability. American Ass'n of People with Disabilities, 647 F.3d at 1101 (italics added). Failure to satisfy Title II's causation requirement necessarily means that Plaintiff has also failed to satisfy the Rehabilitation Act's more stringent ("solely by reason of") causation requirement. See Schwarz, 544 F.3d at 1212 n.6 (citing 29 U.S.C. § 794(a)). Plaintiff has also failed to present any credible evidence or argument showing that the legitimate, non-discriminatory reasons proffered by Defendants [*72]  were false or a pretext for discrimination.
Because Plaintiff has failed to establish a prima facie case of discrimination under either the ADA or the Rehabilitation Act, and failed to provide sufficient probative evidence that would permit a reasonable fact finder to rule in his favor without engaging in speculation, I RECOMMEND that Defendants' motion for summary judgment on Plaintiff's failure-to-accommodate claims against the Board of Regents under the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act (Counts I and II) be GRANTED.

2. Retaliation Claims under the ADA and Rehabilitation Act
Count IV of Plaintiff's Corrected Third Amended Complaint alleges that the Board of Regents and the Individual Defendants retaliated against Plaintiff, in violation of the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act. [Corr. Third Am. Compl. at 32-34].
Defendants argue that the Rehabilitation Act does not prohibit retaliation in a non-employment setting, but even if it did, the Rehabilitation Act cannot impose liability on the Individual Defendants. [Doc. 174 at 13]. However, in Shotz v. City of Plantation, Fla., 344 F.3d 1161, 1174, 1186 (11th Cir. 2003), the Eleventh Circuit held that individuals may be sued in their personal capacities for retaliation under the ADA in the public services context (and, [*73]  by extension, the Rehabilitation Act, as it incorporates the anti-retaliation provision from the ADA). See also Higdon v. Jackson, 393 F.3d 1211, 1218-19 (11th Cir. 2004)(stating that the ADA recognizes retaliation claims against a public entity or its employees outside the employment context); Albra v. City of Fort Lauderdale, 232 F. App'x 885, 891 (11th Cir. 2007) (stating that the anti-discrimination provision of the Rehabilitation Act incorporates the anti-retaliation provision of the ADA).
Under the ADA's anti-retaliation provision, "[n]o person shall discriminate against any individual because such individual has opposed any act or practice made unlawful by this chapter." 42 U.S.C. § 12203(a). This anti-retaliation provision is similar to Title VII's prohibition on retaliation. Stewart, 117 F.3d at 1287. Accordingly, the Court will assess Plaintiff's retaliation claims pursuant to the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act under the same framework used for Title VII retaliation claims. Id.
To establish a prima facie case of retaliation, a plaintiff must show that: (1) he engaged in statutorily protected expression; (2) he suffered an adverse action; and (3) the adverse action was causally related to the protected expression. Shotz v. City of Plantation, Fla., 344 F.3d at 1180. "To establish a causal connection, a plaintiff must show that the decision-makers were aware of the protected conduct and that the protected [*74]  activity and the adverse action were not wholly unrelated." Gupta v. Florida Bd. of Regents, 212 F.3d 571, 590 (11th Cir. 2000) (citation, quotation marks and alterations omitted), abrogated on other grounds by Burlington N. and Santa Fe Ry. Co. v. White, 548 U.S. 53, 68, 126 S. Ct. 2405, 165 L. Ed. 2d 345 (2006).
Once the plaintiff establishes a prima facie case of retaliation, the burden shifts to the defendant to articulate a non-retaliatory reason for its treatment of the plaintiff. See Goldsmith v. Bagby Elevator Co., 513 F.3d 1261, 1277 (11th Cir. 2008). If the defendant presents a legitimate explanation for its actions, the burden then returns to the plaintiff to show that the explanation is pretextual. Id. The plaintiff bears the ultimate burden of proving retaliation by showing that the reason provided by the defendant is a pretext for prohibited retaliatory conduct. Id.
Plaintiff alleges that he engaged in protected conduct when he advocated for the disability accommodation of being provided with copies of Dr. Fuller-Seeley's lecture outlines for Plaintiff's Film class and when he complained to the superiors of Dr. Fuller-Seeley, Dr. Cheshier, and Rodney Pennamon (specifically, to President Becker and Dr. Henry) about not being provided with the outlines and not being able to take his first exam in the ODS's distraction-reduced testing room. [Corr. Third Am. Compl. ¶ 105; Pl.'s Resp. Br., Doc. 166 at 20; Pl.'s [*75]  Dep. at 130-32].

a. Individual Defendant Rodney Pennamon
With regard to Individual Defendant Rodney Pennamon, Plaintiff alleges that Pennamon retaliated against him, on account of Plaintiff's protected activity, by intentionally making false statements to President Becker, and by making false statements in the email that he sent to Plaintiff on April 16, 2009, including that Plaintiff had rejected the option of receiving notes from a note-taker. [Corr. Third Am. Compl. ¶ 106]. In response to Defendants' motion for summary judgment, however, Plaintiff has not addressed his retaliation claim against Individual Defendant Pennamon, or responded in any way to Defendants' argument that Plaintiff cannot prove a retaliation claim against Pennamon. Accordingly, I recommend that the district court deem Plaintiff's retaliation claim against Individual Defendant Pennamon under the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act (in his individual and official capacities) abandoned. Wilkerson, 270 F.3d at 1322; White, 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 36523, 2006 WL 1466254, at *1.

b. Individual Defendant Dr. David Cheshier
Plaintiff next alleges that Individual Defendant Dr. Cheshier retaliated against Plaintiff by "knowingly allowing Defendant Fuller-Seeley to falsify Plaintiff's homework grade and by denying [*76]  Plaintiff's grade appeal" that Plaintiff submitted after the end of the spring 2009 semester.9 [Corr. Third Am. Compl. ¶ 108]. Plaintiff alleges that the explanation and reasoning given by Dr. Cheshier for denying Plaintiff's grade appeal is pretextual because, "among many other reasons, the statement is very generic." [Id.]. Plaintiff acknowledges that even if Dr. Cheshier had granted his grade appeal and added 20 points to the score of 70 that he received on his paper assignment, it likely would not have made a difference in his final grade for the class. [Doc. 166 at 28].
In Plaintiff's response brief to Defendants' motion for summary judgment, Plaintiff argues that the only reasons he can think of for why Dr. Cheshier ruled the way he did on Plaintiff's grade appeal are incompetence or retaliatory animus, or both. In a footnote, Plaintiff explains that he had considered voluntarily dismissing Dr. Cheshier from the lawsuit, but changed his mind because he could not make sense of the reasoning that Dr. Cheshier used in denying the grade appeal. [Doc. 166 at 28 n.16].
Summary judgment is due to be granted on Plaintiff's retaliation claim against Dr. Cheshier. Even assuming that Plaintiff [*77]  could show that the denial of Plaintiff's grade appeal constituted an adverse action (which Plaintiff has not established), Plaintiff has completely failed to address the causal connection element of his prima facie claim. Plaintiff has neither alleged nor established that Dr. Cheshier was aware of Plaintiff's alleged protected activity, and that there was some causal relationship between the two events. Instead, Plaintiff presents what amounts to a re-hash of the arguments that he initially submitted in his grade appeal to Dr. Cheshier and in Plaintiff's subsequent follow-up emails concerning the denial of his appeal. [Pl.'s Dep. Ex. 32].
The record shows that Plaintiff initially complained to Dr. Cheshier on February 20, 2009 that Dr. Fuller-Seeley had failed to give Plaintiff his approved testing accommodations and she was ignoring his requests for her lecture outlines. Plaintiff's next correspondence with Dr. Cheshier was the grade appeal that Plaintiff filed with Dr. Cheshier on June 1, 2009. Plaintiff has failed to produce any evidence from which a reasonable jury could find a causal connection between Plaintiff's initial complaint in February 2009 and Dr. Cheshier's response [*78]  to Plaintiff's grade appeal, which was dated June 17, 2009, approximately four months later. [Pl.'s Dep. Ex. 31].
A temporal proximity of four months does not allow a reasonable inference of a causal relation between the protected expression and the adverse action. See Clark County Sch. Dist. v. Breeden, 532 U.S. 268, 273-74, 121 S. Ct. 1508, 149 L. Ed. 2d 509 (2001)(relying on cases that held a three month period and a four month period were insufficient to support causation); Higdon, 393 F.3d at 1220-21 (finding that a temporal proximity of three months did not allow a reasonable inference of a causal relation between the protected expression and the adverse action). Plaintiff's arguments are insufficient to establish a prima facie retaliation claim under the ADA or the Rehabilitation Act.
Even if Plaintiff could establish a causal connection, he has provided no evidence tending to show that the reasons given by Dr. Cheshier for denying Plaintiff's grade appeal were a pretext for discriminatory retaliation. Accordingly, for all the reasons stated, I recommend that Defendants' motion for summary judgment as to Plaintiff's discriminatory retaliation claims against Dr. Cheshier in his official and individual capacities under the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act be granted.

c. Individual Defendant Dr. Fuller-Seeley [*79] 
Plaintiff next alleges that his Film professor, Individual Defendant Dr. Fuller-Seeley, retaliated against him on account of his protected activity: (1) by making false statements to the ODS so that Plaintiff would not receive appropriate accommodations; (2) by falsifying his Film class paper assignment grade "through knowingly manipulating the interpretation of the assignment" and refusing to change the grade on his paper; (3) by refusing to meet with Plaintiff alone in her office unless Dr. Cheshier or an ODS representative was present; and (4) by lying to this Court under penalty of perjury that Plaintiff made an "F" on his final examination, when he in fact made a "D." [Corr. Third Am. Compl. PP 107-09].

1. Making False Statements to the ODS
On March 30, 2009, Warren emailed Plaintiff to tell him that she had spoken with Dr. Fuller-Seeley concerning accommodations in her class, and had been informed that Plaintiff had missed his first two exams, and that Plaintiff did not provide Dr. Fuller-Seeley with any accommodation letter until after midterms. [Pl.'s Dep. Ex. 11]. Warren also stated that during her discussion with Dr. Fuller-Seeley, Dr. Fuller-Seeley mentioned her policy not [*80]  to give out copies of her lecture notes to students, but stated that she provides the class with study guides before each exam and also provides lecture notes for students to copy if they missed a class. [Id.]. Plaintiff testified in his deposition that Dr. Fuller-Seeley never told him that he could stay after class to copy her lecture outlines, so he "knew" that statement was not true. [Pl.'s Dep. at 133-34]. He concluded, therefore, that Dr. Fuller-Seeley lied to the ODS when she said that she provided lecture outlines to students who missed class. [Id. at 134].
Plaintiff has apparently dropped this part of his retaliation claim, as his response brief does not address or even mention Defendants' argument concerning this allegation. Nor has Plaintiff alleged, argued, or established that the "lie," even if made, constitutes an adverse action and was causally connected to any protected activity. Thus, Plaintiff has failed to establish a prima facie case of retaliation with regard to this claim. Accordingly, Defendants are entitled to summary judgment on this claim of retaliation against Dr. Fuller-Seeley, in her official and individual capacities, under the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act.

2. Falsifying [*81]  Plaintiff's Film Class Paper Assignment Grade
Plaintiff next alleges that Dr. Fuller-Seeley retaliated against him, in violation of the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act, by manipulating the interpretation of his Film class paper assignment (on the use of sound in a current film) and falsifying his grade, and then refusing to change the grade. [Corr. Third Am. Compl. ¶ 107(2) & (3)]. However, like Plaintiff's "false statement" retaliation claim above, Plaintiff has failed to address, respond to, or in any way attempt to rebut Defendants' argument concerning Plaintiff's allegations. Nor has Plaintiff pointed to any probative evidence to support his claim. Thus, Plaintiff has failed to establish a prima facie case of retaliation with regard to his paper assignment grade and Dr. Fuller-Seeley's refusal to change the grade.
Even if Plaintiff had stated a prima facie case, Plaintiff has failed to raise a genuine factual question as to whether Dr. Fuller-Seeley's proffered reason (that Plaintiff failed to complete the assignment properly and turned it in three days late) is false and a mere pretext for unlawful retaliation. See Crawford v. City of Fairburn, Ga., 482 F.3d 1305, 1308 (11th Cir. 2007)(to survive a motion for summary judgment, plaintiff must rebut each [*82]  of the legitimate, nondiscriminatory reasons proffered by the defendant); Hairston v. Gainesville Sun Publ'g Co., 9 F.3d 913, 921 (11th Cir. 1993); [see also Pl.'s Resp. to DSMF ¶ 80]. Accordingly, Defendants are entitled to summary judgment on this claim.

3. Refusing to Meet Alone with Plaintiff
After Dr. Fuller-Seeley returned the disputed paper to Plaintiff, Plaintiff went to her office to complain about the grade he had received and, according to Dr. Fuller-Seeley, he angrily demanded to know why his writing assignment had received such a low grade. [Fuller-Seeley Aff. ¶ 22]. Dr. Fuller-Seeley testified that Plaintiff spoke loudly and rudely to her and stood very close to her, and she felt so threatened by his conduct that she told him that she no longer would meet with him alone. [Fuller-Seeley Dep. at 31-33, 36, 54, 56, 79, 123-25, 130-31].
Defendants argue that Plaintiff has failed to establish that refusing to meet with Plaintiff alone amounts to a legally cognizable adverse action. As Defendants point out, an action "is not adverse merely because the [plaintiff] dislikes or disagrees with it." Doe v. DeKalb County Sch. Dist., 145 F.3d 1441, 1449 (11th Cir. 1998)(citations omitted). If an action has no "tangible negative effect," it is not an adverse action. Higdon, 393 F.3d at 1219. As the Eleventh Circuit has repeatedly stated, the civil [*83]  rights laws were not intended to be a "civility code." Id. at 1220.
In response, Plaintiff denies that Dr. Fuller-Seeley felt threatened because she never expressly told Plaintiff that she felt threatened by his conduct (even though he concedes she told him she would no longer meet with him alone); nor did she take any action against Plaintiff pursuant to GSU's "disruptive student conduct" guidelines and policies. [Pl.'s Resp. Br. at 21-22]. Plaintiff testified that the harm that he suffered was a waste of his money because he did not get the quality of education that he had paid for. [Pl.'s Dep. at 143]. Plaintiff insists that banning him from meeting in her office unless Dr. Cheshier or an ODS representative was present was retaliation, but he has failed to explain why or how. Nor has he established a prima facie case of retaliation with regard to this claim or allegation.
Even if he had, Plaintiff's claim still fails because he has failed to raise a genuine factual question as to whether Dr. Fuller-Seeley's proffered reasons are false and a mere pretext for unlawful retaliation. Plaintiff has offered no probative evidence showing that Dr. Fuller-Seeley did not honestly feel uncomfortable and/or [*84]  threatened by Plaintiff's behavior. See Elrod v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 939 F.2d 1466, 1470 (11th Cir. 1991) (stating that the ultimate issue regarding pretext is not whether the plaintiff actually violated the rule, but whether the defendant believed that the plaintiff violated the rule); Rojas v. Florida, 285 F.3d 1339, 1342 (11th Cir. 2002)("We are not interested in whether the conclusion is a correct one, but whether it is an honest one.").
For the reasons stated, I recommend that Defendants' motion for summary judgment be granted on Plaintiff's retaliation claim against Dr. Fuller-Seeley, in her individual and official capacities, under the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act for refusing to meet alone with Plaintiff.

4. Lying to Court About Plaintiff's Final Exam Grade
Finally, Plaintiff alleges that Dr. Fuller-Seeley retaliated against him, in violation of the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act, by willfully lying to the Court in her affidavit that Plaintiff made an "F" (58 points out of a possible 100) on his final exam, when he actually made a "D" (60 points on a 100 point scale). In Dr. Fuller-Seeley's affidavit filed with this Court, she averred that Plaintiff earned a 58 on his final multiple choice exam. [Fuller-Seeley Aff. ¶ 25]. She later testified that at the time she prepared her affidavit, she had [*85]  misplaced her grade book, and 58 was the score that was marked on the actual exam in her files. [Fuller-Seeley Dep. at 13]. Once she found her grade book, she saw that she was mistaken because she had added two points to all of the students' final exam grades because of a poorly drafted question that nearly every student had missed. [Id. at 13-14]. Dr. Fuller-Seeley testified that after adding the two extra points, Plaintiff's correct final exam score was 60, which is reflected in her grade book. [See Grade Book, Doc. 155-6 at 6-7, Ex. 5 to Pl.'s Resp. to DSMF].
Although Plaintiff argues for multiple pages about the grade discrepancy and its possible import, he has not shown or established that Dr. Fuller-Seeley did anything more than make a mistake in her affidavit to the Court, which was later corrected by way of her sworn deposition testimony. Nor has he shown how he was harmed by the mistake, other than to assert that he was "enraged" by Dr. Fuller-Seeley's error. [Pl.'s Dep. at 145].
Like his other claims of retaliation, Plaintiff has failed to establish a prima facie case of discriminatory retaliation under the ADA or the Rehabilitation Act against Dr. Fuller-Seeley (or GSU) with regard to [*86]  Dr. Fuller-Seeley's affidavit and Plaintiff's final exam score. Nor has Plaintiff shown that Defendants' proffered explanations are false and a mere pretext for unlawful retaliation. Accordingly, Defendants are entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's claim of retaliation under the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act against Dr. Fuller-Seeley in her individual and official capacities with respect to Plaintiff's final exam score.

Id. Defendant Board of Regents
Plaintiff alleges that the Board of Regents retaliated against Plaintiff through the retaliatory actions of Individual Defendants Pennamon, Cheshier, and Fuller-Seeley. [Corr. Third Am. Compl. ¶ 110]. Thus, Plaintiff is asserting that the Board of Regents is liable for the Individual Defendants' alleged misconduct under the theory of respondeat superior. See T.W. ex rel. Wilson v. School Bd. of Seminole County, 610 F.3d 588, 604 (11th Cir. 2010) (stating that the ADA permits a school board to be held liable for the actions of its agents, and assuming, arguendo, that the Rehabilitation Act also "permits respondeat superior liability"). Even assuming that the Rehabilitation Act, like the ADA, permits the Board of Regents to be held vicariously liable for the Individual Defendants' actions, Plaintiff's claims fail because [*87]  no reasonable jury could conclude that the Individual Defendants intentionally discriminated or retaliated against Plaintiff by reason of his disability. Because summary judgment is warranted on Plaintiff's underlying retaliation claims against the Individual Defendants, the Board of Regents is also entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiff's retaliation claims. Accordingly, I recommend that summary judgment be entered with regard to Plaintiff's claims of retaliation under the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act against the Board of Regents.

3. Failure to Prove Causation and Damages
Plaintiff has alleged that Defendants' wrongful actions caused him to be depressed, which caused him to develop other difficulties in his life, including problems in his other classes at GSU, difficult interactions with his family, failure to graduate from college on time, and resulting inability to get a job as a college graduate in the summer of 2009. Defendants argue that given Plaintiff's pre-existing mental conditions (including depression, bipolar spectrum disorder, and ADHD) and previous lackluster academic performance, summary judgment is warranted on the additional ground that Plaintiff has failed to [*88]  establish causation and damages. To make this showing, Defendants argue that Plaintiff was required — but failed — to present expert testimony showing that his alleged injuries were caused by Defendants' actions rather than caused by Plaintiff's pre-existing conditions. [Doc. 134-1 at 50-51].
Plaintiff has failed to address or to even acknowledge Defendants' arguments concerning lack of expert testimony and proof of causation and damages. Accordingly, Plaintiff has provided no basis for the Court to reject these grounds for finding in Defendants' favor. Nevertheless, because Plaintiff has failed to establish a prima facie case of disability discrimination and/or retaliation under Title II of the ADA and the Rehabilitation Act, the Court need not (and does not) reach Defendants' arguments concerning causation and damages.

D. Remaining Defendant Mark Becker
Mark Becker, in his official capacity as president of GSU, is still listed as a defendant on the docket for this case. My review of the record, however, indicates that while Plaintiff's Corrected Third Amended Complaint initially maintained a claim against GSU President Mark Becker in his official capacity [Doc. 42 PP 100-103, Count [*89]  III], Plaintiff subsequently voluntarily dismissed that claim (and Mark Becker as a defendant). [Doc. 43; see also Order dated February 16, 2010, Doc. 46 at 3]. In the parties' summary judgment briefing papers that I have reviewed and considered, no mention was made by any party that Plaintiff was bringing a claim against Mark Becker, in his official capacity. Accordingly, to the extent Mark Becker is still listed as a defendant in this lawsuit, I recommend that he be dismissed.

V. CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated, it is ORDERED that Plaintiff's Motion Requesting the Court to Consider his Submissions [Doc. 178] is GRANTED.
It is RECOMMENDED:
1) that Plaintiff's Motion for Reconsideration [Doc. 158] be DENIED;
2) that Plaintiff's Motion to Seal [Doc. 169] "Plaintiff's Supplemental Response to Defendants' Motion to Dismiss in Part and for Summary Judgment" be GRANTED nunc pro tunc;
3) that Defendants' Motion to Dismiss in Part and for Summary Judgment [Doc. 134] be GRANTED; and
4) that Mark Becker, in his official capacity as President of GSU, be dismissed from this lawsuit.
IT IS SO ORDERED AND RECOMMENDED, this    th day of October, 2012.
/s/ Gerrilyn G. Brill
GERRILYN G. BRILL
UNITED STATES [*90]  MAGISTRATE JUDGE


End of Document

