Winston v. Pritzker
United States District Court for the District of Wyoming
April 20, 2017, Decided; April 21, 2017, Filed
Case No. 15-CV-37-ABJ

Reporter
2017 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 218077 *
DEBORAH L. WINSTON, Plaintiff, v. PENNY PRITZKER, Secretary of the United States Department of Commerce, Defendant.
Subsequent History: Affirmed by Winston v. Ross, 725 Fed. Appx. 659, 2018 U.S. App. LEXIS 4788 (10th Cir. Wyo., Feb. 27, 2018)
Judges:  [*1] Alan B. Johnson, United States District Judge.
Opinion by: Alan B. Johnson
Opinion



ORDER ON DEFENDANT'S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
This matter comes before the Court on Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment. ECF No. 29. Having considered the pleadings, the applicable law, the parties' written submissions, and materials offered in support of their respective positions, the Court FINDS and ORDERS as follows:

Undisputed Facts
Winston was as an Administrative Support Assistant (ASA) at the Cheyenne Weather Forecast Office for the Central Region of the National Weather Service. Defendant's Ex. A at 001318. For the majority of Winston's time as an ASA, Steven Apfel was the Meteorologist in Charge (MIC) for the Cheyenne Weather Forecast Office.
Winston suffers from Hashimoto's Thyroiditis, an autoimmune disease. See Ex. A at 001360. "The symptoms include poor concentration and/or memory, fatigue, digestive issues (nausea, vomiting, cramps, etc.), muscle aches, tenderness, stiffness, swelling and pain in the joints, depression, and frequent illnesses (colds, flu, sinus infections, etc.)." (Letter from osteopathic physician Jonathan Singer describing Ms. Winston's symptoms and her course of treatment). Winston has [*2]  suffered from Hashimoto's Thyroiditis since 2005. See id. at 001361. Winston also suffers from sciatica. Ex. A at 1329.
On January 4, 2012, Defendant placed Winston on a leave restriction based on her taking excessive leave. Ex. C at 941-43. The notice states that between January 4, 2012 and April 2012, Winston took 176 hours of sick leave, had a zero sick leave balance five times, and took 268.25 hours of annual, credit, and compensatory time off. Id. The notice recognizes that Winston has been ill or has needed to take care of her family members, but that her excessive leave raises concerns about her reliability and that attendance at work is an essential function of her position. Id. The restriction required Winston to (1) request prior approval of annual leave at least two workdays in advance or two hours in advance if it is an emergency, (2) notify the MIC or the acting MIC two hours prior to her taking sick leave and submit a medical statement from a doctor that specified the diagnosis, prognosis, incapacitation date, and return to duty date, (3) request leave without pay by filling out a specific form and providing a medical statement if it is for health reasons. Id. This restriction was [*3]  effective for a year. Id.
On April 6, 2012, Winston sought to obtain leave under the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA) for her health condition. See Ex. B at 00054-55 (FMLA application). In her FMLA application, Winston admitted that the duration of her hypothyroidism was lifetime and that "at times" she was unable to perform her job functions due to the condition. See Ex. B at 00055. Defendant granted her request for FMLA leave. See Ex. A at 01320.
On May 1, 2012, Winston received notification that her application to be a leave share participant for her medical emergency had been granted beginning on March 29, 2012 and ending in March 29, 2013. Ex. M. The notice advises Winston that she is responsible for seeking her own leave donors and that with her supervisor's approval she may use the leave donations the same way and for the same purposes as her regular sick leave. Id.
On July 11, 2012, Winston informally requested a change in her core duty hours due to her Hashimoto's Thyroiditis. See Ex. C at 000961. She requested to work from "9:00 AM to 5:30 PM with [her] core hours being 9:30 AM to 3:30 PM[.]" Id. This informal request for accommodation was approved on August 1, 2012. See id. at 000962.
On [*4]  August 3, 2012, Winston filed a formal request for accommodation with the Reasonable Accommodation Coordinator at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). See Ex. C at 000927-29. Winston requested the same alternative work schedule (from 9:00-5:30 with core hours of 9:30-3:30) which had already been informally granted and she sought to "Telework 2 days per weeks[.]" Id. She also requested an ergonomic chair and keyboard for her home in anticipation of being allowed to telework. Id.
In support of her request, Winston provided a list of proposed duties she could perform via telework and two letters from Dr. Harnish, her treating physician. Id. at 930 and Ex. A at 1329. In a letter dated April 10, 2012, Dr. Harnish detailed Winston's diagnosis of Hashimoto's Thyroiditis, its symptoms, the need to find a proper medication, the time it would take for a patient to adjust to the medication and improve (6-8 weeks), Dr. Harnish's work with Winston to regulate her medication to minimize symptoms, the severity of Winston's condition, and that Winston would be dealing with this condition for the rest of her life. Ex A. at 1329. Dr. Harnish stated that she hoped the symptoms could be managed [*5]  within the next year. Id. In a supplemental letter, dated August 2, 2012, Dr. Harnish stated that a change in Winston's work hours to 9:00 to 5:30 and working at home two days a week would benefit Winston "medically and allow [her] to continue her employment and therefore are medically necessary." Ex. C at 930.
On August 30, 2012, Ms. Winston added a new request based on the same condition. This request was for "intermittent time off to deal with flare ups of my condition and manage symptoms." Ex. C at 000934-35. She reiterated that her condition would last the rest of her life and that the "flare ups are difficult to predict." Id. at 000935.
On September 13, 2012, Defendant, via the Deputy Director for the National Weather Service (NWS), responded to the August 3, 2012 request and granted a continued "flexible work schedule, 9:00-5:30 with your core hours being 9:30 a.m. — 3:30 p.m." Ex. C at 000932. The response advised Winston that she could use any accrued sick or annual leave (in accordance with the requirements of her leave restriction), or leave pursuant to the FMLA, to attend medical appointments. Id. Defendant denied Winston's request to telework two days per week because the essential functions [*6]  of the position she occupied require providing "support to the manager and staff on a full range of administrative program areas, serving as the receptionist for the office, personally handling routine matters and routing telephone calls and visitors to the appropriate staff members[.]" Id; See also Ex. D at 00070 (Performance Plan Critical Element 4 described, in part, as including the role of "receptionist for the office, personally handling routine matters and routing telephone calls and visitors to appropriate staff members . . . . [ensuring] that outgoing mail is properly prepared and coordinat[ing] the service for delivery and pickup in the office for Postal Service, FEDEX, and other shipping and delivery"). Defendant, however, notified Winston that she could apply to telework on an intermittent or episodic basis for specific work projects in accordance with the NOAA Telework policy. Id.
On September 28, 2012, Defendant responded to Winston's August 30, 2012 request for intermittent leave and agreed to consider leave without pay (in addition to annual, sick, or FMLA leave) "for flare-ups when [her] leave will not suffice, and where it is administratively feasible." Ex. C at 000937. [*7]  Defendant, however, denied the "request for episodic Leave Without Pay [because] unscheduled leave without any notice is not a reasonable accommodation." Id. at 000936.
On October 26, 2012, Winston sent a letter to Defendant requesting reconsideration of her reasonable accommodation request in which she proposed an accommodation of working for six hours in the office and two hours via telework per work day. Ex. A at 944. Defendant responded to her on November 6, 2012 and requested Winston to provide a list of her proposed duties to be performed while teleworking. Id. On November 13, 2012, Winston sent an email withdrawing her application for telework. Id.
On November 6, 2012, the MIC, Steven Apfel, issued Winston a letter of caution for mistakes Winston made on the time and attendance records. Ex. E.; see also Rydel Plaintiff's attachment to Rydel's deposition. The letter of caution states that when Apfel pointed out Winston's mistakes, Winston failed to take responsibility, and spoke in an unprofessional tone. Id. It further states that if Winston's illness caused her to make mistakes, she should seek counseling and assistance through the Agency's Employee Assistance Program. Id. The letter also [*8]  states that it is non-disciplinary and will not be placed in Winston's personnel file. Id.
On November 28, 2012, Winston filed a grievance with her union. Ex. E. She claimed she was being unlawfully discriminated against in violation of the Rehabilitation Act. Id. Winston, through her union representative, asserted that she informed Apfel that she made mistakes at work because she was working while she was sick, the letter of caution lacked any evidence, that Apfel disregarded Winston's medical condition, and that he discriminatorily restricted her leave via a leave oversight letter. Id. Winston listed her remedy requested as a quiet cubicle during the last Friday of the pay period and the first Monday or Tuesday of the pay period and that Apfel remove the letter of caution and the leave oversight from Winston's file. Id. Winston states in her interrogatories that her grievance was successful and both documents were rescinded. Attachment to Winston Affidavit at 16.
On June 5, 2013, Winston made her initial contact with the Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) office where she complained that she was denied a reasonable accommodation for her medical disability and that because of her age [*9]  she was not elected to participate in the Leave Donor Program. See Ex. F at 000104-105.10. Winston alleged that the first date of discrimination was May 15, 2013. The outcome of the complaint is unclear to the Court based on Exhibit F (the EEO Counselor's report). The Court assumes the outcome was a no cause finding because the report states, "date of notice of right to file issued" is June 23, 2013. Ex. F. The Court is assuming this means that Winston received a notice of her right to file suit.
On July 1, 2013, Winston revised and renewed her request for a revised duty schedule, specifically asking to work only on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday for eight hours per day. Ex. C at 000948-50. Winston stated she needed this accommodation "to accommodate rest and recuperation with new medications[.]" See Ex. C at 000948-50. In support of her request, Winston provided a doctor's note from Dr. Sainer describing Winston's diagnosis of Chronic Immune Deficiency Syndrome and a prescription for a three day work schedule. See Ex. C at 000951-52. Dr. Sainer's July 9, 2013 letter clarifies that Winston seeks this accommodation for ninety days with a reevaluation at that time. Id. at 952.
On July 15, 2013, the [*10]  MIC put a note in Winston's file that listed Winston's absences during the prior 12 consecutive pay periods and noting that the backup time keeper was required to complete the time and attendance duties. Ex. A at 1362.
On August 13, 2013, Defendant (through the NWS Deputy Director) approved the "use of leave without pay, donated leave, or accrued annual and sick leave . . . to cover [Ms. Winston's] absence from duty on Tuesdays and Thursdays for a period of 90 days[.]" Ex. C at 954. Defendant denied the request to the extent it sought "additional unspecified amount of time-off each time a flare-up occurs." Id. Defendant informed Winston that although this accommodation was being provided "for this 90-day period of time, further extensions of this arrangement may be denied as the Agency cannot continue to have only a part-time presence in [the] position indefinitely." Id.
Sometime in the fall of 2013, Defendant transferred Steven Apfel to another office and Defendant appointed an interim MIC, Nezette Rydel. Winston Affidavit, ¶7. The reasons for Apfel's transfer are not clear, but Winston asserts it was due to his poor management and his creation of his hostile work atmosphere. Winston [*11]  Affidavit, ¶8.
Between August 13 and November 11 (90 days), Winston worked 24 of the 65weekdays (1 federal holiday, 15 eight-hour days, and 8 days of less than eight hours).1 See Ex. G at 001477-85. Winston's attendance significantly diminished between September 16 and October 4th when for three weeks she only worked one day a week. Id. Winston did not work at all between October 23 and November 11 (the end of the 90-day period). Id.
On October 29, 2013, Winston sent an email to the acting MIC and the Deputy Director wherein she advised "I have had multiple discussions with my doctor. . . and as much as I want to get better and keep my job, it does not look likely." Ex. A at 001369. Winston informed her supervisors that even one day of work made her exhausted to the point of being unable to fully function on the job for at least two days afterwards. See id. (claiming she "pushed" through the day on a Monday, but was still not recovered by Wednesday and could not make it through a full day of work on Wednesday).
In this email, Winston notified her supervisors that she planned to apply for a disability retirement and that she was advised that it would be permitted for her to take LWOP while [*12]  her application was processed. See id. at 001370. Defendant advised her that it would consider her "new request" but that she should abide by the August 13, 2013 grant of her request to work three-days a week until her request was processed. Id.
On November 15, 2013, Dr. Harnish wrote a letter on behalf of Winston. It stated "decreased concentration, memory problems, and severe fatigue are the primary symptoms that do not allow [Winston] to perform her job." Ex. A at 001368. Dr. Harnish acknowledged that "[s]everal strategies have been tried to accommodate her symptoms including revised work schedules, recovery time away from work but each time she returns to work her symptoms worsen and she is unable to perform the responsibilities of her job." Id. In Dr. Harnish's opinion, there was no expectation of future improvement and that Ms. Winston was an "appropriate candidate for disability and disability retirement." Id.
On November 20, 2013, Defendant sent an email to Winston explaining that her 90-day accommodation had expired because in her original request her doctor said she would be re-evaluated in 90 days and Winston had not submitted any additional medical documentation. Ex. A at 956. Ferrera [*13]  notified Winston that she would need to submit additional requests with medical documentation to continue her accommodation. Ex. A at 957.
On February 17, 2014, Ms. Winston filed her formal EEO complaint. See Ex. H at 00025. In it she alleged the accommodations she had been provided for her disability were inadequate, that she had been subjected to a hostile work environment for the previous three years, and that she was being forced to quit because of her disability. See id. The outcome of the EEO complaint is unclear from the record before the Court.
On March 5, 2014, the acting MIC provided Winston with notice of proposed removal for medical inability to perform the duties of her position. See Ex. A at 001321. The acting MIC recounted, generally, the history of Winston's employment and advised Winston that the agency "concludes you must be separated from your current position and from Federal service for medical disability." Ex. A at 001322.
On March 21, 2014, Winston, through her attorney, responded to the notice of proposed removal for medical inability alleging that the letter was retaliatory in response to Winston filing her EEO Complaint and unlawful. See Ex. A at 001324-25. Specifically, [*14]  Winston responded that the Defendant's harassment of Winston aggravated her disability and Defendant improperly removed from the leave donor program, Defendant never processed her re-application into the program, and thus denied her compensation. Id. Winston did not dispute her medical inability to perform her job duties. Id.2
On September 8, 2014, Defendant provided Winston the final decision to separate her from service for her inability to perform the essential functions of her position. See Ex. I at 000001-6. The acting Deputy Director concluded that he had "no other choice but to sustain the proposed separation for medical inability to perform the duties of your position." Id. Winston's termination was effective October 23, 2014.

Standard of Review
Summary judgment is appropriate where "there is no genuine dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law." Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). A dispute of fact is genuine if a reasonable juror could resolve the disputed fact in favor of either side. See Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 106 S. Ct. 2505, 91 L. Ed. 2d 202 (1986). A dispute of fact is material if under the substantive law it is essential to the proper disposition of the claim. Adler v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 144 F.3d 664, 670 (10th Cir. 1998). When the Court considers the evidence presented by the parties, [*15]  "[t]he evidence of the non-movant is to be believed, and all justifiable inferences are to be drawn in the non-movant's favor." Anderson, 477 U.S. at 255.
The party moving for summary judgment has the burden of establishing the nonexistence of a genuine dispute of material fact. Lynch v. Barrett, 703 F.3d 1153, 1158 (10th Cir. 2013). The moving party can satisfy this burden by either (1) offering affirmative evidence that negates an essential element of the nonmoving party's claim, or (2) demonstrating that the nonmoving party's evidence is insufficient to establish an essential element of the nonmoving party's claim. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)(1)(A)—(B).
Once the moving party satisfies this initial burden, the nonmoving party must support its contention that a genuine dispute of material fact exists either by (1) citing to particular materials in the record, or (2) showing that the materials cited by the moving party do not establish the absence of a genuine dispute. See id. The nonmoving party must "do more than simply show that there is some metaphysical doubt as to material facts." Matsushita Elec. Indus. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 586, 106 S. Ct. 1348, 89 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1986). Rather, to survive a summary judgment motion, the nonmoving party must "make a showing sufficient to establish the existence of [every] element essential to that party's case, and on which that party will bear [*16]  the burden of proof at trial." Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S. Ct. 2548, 91 L. Ed. 2d 265 (1986). Further, when opposing summary judgment, the nonmoving party cannot rest on allegations or denials in the pleadings but must set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine dispute of material fact for trial. See Travis v. Park City Mun. Corp., 565 F.3d 1252, 1258 (10th Cir. 2009).
When considering a motion for summary judgment, the court's role is not to weigh the evidence and decide the truth of the matter, but rather to determine whether a genuine dispute of material fact exists for trial. Anderson, 477 U.S. at 249. Credibility determinations are the province of the fact-finder, not the court. Id. at 255.

Parties' arguments
Winston alleges that her superiors knew that she suffered from Hashimoto Thyroiditis; she requested a reasonable accommodation, and her supervisors failed to provide such an accommodation. Am. Compl. ¶ ¶12-14. Winston further alleges that her superiors required her to follow certain leave restrictions, scrutinized her use of leave and her attendance, required her to provide written evidence of her sickness and disability, reprimanded her for her performance through "letters of caution" and negative evaluations, denied her training opportunities, denied her family medical leave, denied her sick leave requests, confronted her [*17]  inappropriately, denied her the opportunity to take leave time to vote, terminated her use of the "donor leave program", and issued a "proposed removal for the medical inability to perform duties of position." Am. Compl. ¶15. Winston alleges that she was forced to seek federal disability as a result of Defendant's actions. Amended Compl. ¶ 11.3 Winston brings claims for disability discrimination and retaliation under 42 U.S.C. § 12117(a). Am. Compl. ¶¶ 10-15. Winston requests reinstatement, back pay, front pay, attorney's fees and costs, and damages in excess of $350,000. Defendant moves for summary judgment on each claim.

1. Retaliation
Defendant contends that Winston cannot prevail on her retaliation claim because most of the negative experiences she alleges she endured during her employment predate her protected activity and were mere petty slights or minor annoyances. Defendant further contends that Winston cannot establish a causal connection between her participation in a protected activity and any adverse actions. Thus, Defendant concludes that Winston cannot prevail on this claim.
In response, Winston argues that her disability discrimination claim under the Rehabilitation Act focuses on Defendant's [*18]  discriminatory and unilateral decision to remove Plaintiff from the Volunteer Leave Donor Program.
Regarding her retaliation claim, Winston asserts that Defendant retaliated against Winston in the following ways: (1) issuing her a leave restriction in January 2012 after Winston requested an accommodation in November 2011; (2) Apfel's increased scrutiny and harassment of Winston after she requested an accommodation demonstrated by the letter of caution, poor evaluations, and the onerous requirement Apfel imposed on Winston to take sick leave; and (3) shorting her check by 80% shortly after she filed her union grievance. Winston concludes that viewing the evidence in the light favorable to Winston, that any employee would be dissuaded from requesting an accommodation if he or she knew that it would be followed by a leave restriction letter, a letter of caution, increased scrutiny and harassment. Winston argues that there is a causal connection because all the adverse actions took place after Winston requested reasonable accommodations. Winston focuses on the leave restriction notice, the poor evaluation, the letter or caution, and the shorted check. Winston concludes that the sheer volume [*19]  of adverse actions and the concurrent protected actions of plaintiff give rise to an unmistakable inference of retaliatory intent, which is prohibited by law.
In reply, Defendant argues that Winston does not allege a prima facie case of retaliation. First, Defendant argues that evidence does not support Winston's assertion of when she first engaged in protected activity. Defendant argues that to constitute protected activity, Winston must convey to the employer his or her concern that the employer engaged in unlawful discrimination. Defendant argues that if Winston relies on her request for accommodation as her protected activity, her first request was in July 2012 and the leave restriction letter was issued almost six months prior in January 2012. Defendant contends that retaliatory conduct must come after the protected activity.
Defendant then argues that the majority of alleged retaliatory actions asserted by Winston are actually petty slights and annoyances, and not personnel actions as required by the Rehabilitation Act. Defendant contends that retaliatory conduct is only actionable if it alters the employee's compensation, terms, condition, or privileges of employment or adversely [*20]  affects his status as an employee. Defendant urges that increased scrutiny, repeated requests for medical certifications and criticizing a $20.00 expenditure do not rise to an actionable adverse employment action.
Next, Defendant focuses on the letter of caution. It contends that this is not retaliatory in nature because it was not disciplinary in nature and was never put in her personnel file and thus cannot be deemed to have altered Winston's compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment or to have been materially adverse to her.
Regarding the "poor performance evaluation," Defendant argues that Winston stated in her interrogatories hat her performance reviews showed that she met or exceeded the performance plan. Even if the attending comments were critical of her behavior, Defendant contends that Winston has not established that these comments constitute an adverse employment action.
Finally, Defendant argues that Winston failed to demonstrate the proper nexus between her protected activity and the alleged adverse actions. Defendant urges that Winston failed to show that any adverse action, particularly the letter of caution and the leave restriction notice, would not [*21]  have taken place but for Defendant's retaliatory motive. Defendant urges that the letters provide proper justifications for their issuances. Defendant concludes that it is entitled to summary judgment on Winston's retaliation claim.
The standard for retaliation claims under the Rehabilitation Act is the same as the standard for retaliation claims under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Jarvis, 500 F.3d at 1125. In the absence of direct evidence, [Plaintiff] may rely upon the burden-shifting framework of McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S. 792, 802-04, 93 S.Ct. 1817, 36 L.Ed.2d 668 (1973). She can establish a prima facie case by showing: (1) that she engaged in protected activity; (2) that she suffered a materially adverse action by [defendant-employer] either after or contemporaneous with her protected activity; and (3) a causal connection between the protected activity and the adverse action.
Reinhardt v. Albuquerque Pub. Sch. Bd. of Educ., 595 F.3d 1126, 1131 (10th Cir. 2010).
Winston identifies two protected activities that she engaged in with Defendant: (1) requesting an accommodation and (2) filing a union grievance.4
The Supreme Court has held that an "adverse action" for purposes of a retaliation under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, "is not limited to discriminatory actions that affect the terms and conditions of employment." Burlington Northern, 548 U.S. at 64, 126 S.Ct. 2405, 165 L. Ed. 2d 345. To establish an adverse [*22]  action, "a plaintiff must show that a reasonable employee would have found the challenged action materially adverse, which in this context means it well might have dissuaded a reasonable worker from making or supporting a charge of discrimination." Id. at 68, 126 S.Ct. 2405 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). We have applied this same standard to retaliation claims under the ADA, and ADA standards apply to § 504 claims. See, e.g., Jones v. U.P.S., Inc., 502 F.3d 1176, 1193 (10th Cir.2007) (ADA claims); Jarvis, 500 F.3d at 1125 (Section 504 claims). We construe the phrase "adverse employment action" liberally and do not limit it to "monetary losses in the form of wages or benefits." Annett v. Univ. of Kan., 371 F.3d 1233, 1239 (10th Cir.2004) (quotation marks and citation omitted). Acts that carry "a significant risk of humiliation, damage to reputation, and a concomitant harm to future employment prospects" may be considered adverse actions, although "'a mere inconvenience or an alteration of job responsibilities' will not suffice." Id. (citation omitted).
Reinhardt v. Albuquerque Pub. Sch. Bd. of Educ., 595 F.3d 1126, 1133 (10th Cir. 2010).
Regarding the third element of retaliation, Winston must show that there was a causal connection between her protected activity (requesting an accommodation or filing a union grievance) and the adverse employment acts she alleges.
The Court will look to the second and third elements of Winston's claim [*23]  of retaliation in the context of each allegedly adverse employment action to determine if there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Defendant took an adverse action against Winston and as to whether the adverse action was causally connected to the protected activity.

(1) Defendant's issuance of Winston's unofficial leave restriction in January 2012.
On January 4, 2012, Defendant placed Winston on a leave restriction based on her taking excessive leave. Ex. C at 941-43. The Court assumes this is what Winston refers to as the "onerous requirement [Defendant placed] on Winston's ability to take leave." On April 6, 2012, Winston sought to obtain leave under the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA) for her health condition See Ex. B at 00054-55 (FMLA application). According to the record before the Court, this is the first accommodation Winston requested. Winston filed a union grievance on November 28, 2012. Ex. E.
Winston states "an abundance of evidence shows that the plaintiff requested reasonable accommodation numerous times during her employment, starting in 2011 when she told her supervisor about her need for sick leave to cope with her Hashimoto's Thyroiditis. This request, [*24]  [consisted] of discussions of plaintiff's need to use statutory sick leave, occurring in October, November, and December 2011." Winston's response in opposition, ECF No. 34 at 10. Winston does not cite any evidence in support of her statement that she requested accommodations in October, November, and December 2011. As the nonmoving party, Winston must support her contention that a genuine dispute of material fact exists by citing to particular materials in the record. She failed to do so in this instance.
Regardless of whether the issuance of a leave restriction letter is an adverse employment action, there are no genuine issues of fact as to whether a causal connection exists between Winston filing a union grievance or her request for an accommodation and the issuance of the leave restriction letter. As discussed above, the second element of a prima facie case of retaliation is whether Winston "suffered a materially adverse action by [defendant-employer] either after or contemporaneous with her protected activity." Reinhardt, 595 F.3d at 1131 (emphasis added). Winston has not provided any evidence that would create a genuine issue of material fact as to whether she requested an accommodation or filed a grievance [*25]  prior to Defendant issuing her a leave restriction. Thus, Winston's retaliation claim cannot go forward based on the leave restriction letter as the alleged adverse employment action.

(2) Winston's letter of caution
On April 6, 2012, Winston sought to obtain leave under the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA) for her health condition See Ex. B at 00054-55 (FMLA application). As detailed above, Winston requested accommodations several times between July 2012 and the fall of 2013.
On November 6, 2012, the MIC, Steven Apfel, issued Winston a letter of caution for mistakes Winston made on the time and attendance records. Ex. E.; see also Plaintiff's attachment to Rydel's deposition. The letter of caution states that when Apfel pointed out Winston's mistakes, Winston failed to take responsibility, spoke in an unprofessional tone. Id. It further states that if Winston's illness caused her to make mistakes, she should seek counseling and assistance through the Agency's Employee Assistance Program. Id. On November 28, 2012, Winston filed a grievance with her union. Ex. E.
"Disciplinary proceedings, such as warning letters and reprimands, can constitute an adverse employment action." Medina v. Income Support Div., New Mexico, 413 F.3d 1131, 1137 (10th Cir. 2005) (citing Roberts v. Roadway Express, Inc., 149 F.3d 1098, 1104 (10th Cir.1998); Marx v. Schnuck Markets, Inc., 76 F.3d 324, 329 (10th Cir.1996)). "A [*26]  reprimand, however, will only constitute an adverse employment action if it adversely affects the terms and conditions of the plaintiff's employment-for example, if it affects the likelihood that the plaintiff will be terminated, undermines the plaintiff's current position, or affects the plaintiff's future employment opportunities." Id.
Accordingly, the Court will look to whether there are genuine issues of fact regarding whether the letter of caution adversely affected the terms and conditions of Winston's employment or carries "a significant risk of humiliation, damage to reputation, and a concomitant harm to future employment prospects." Winston does not argue or cite to anything in the record to demonstrate that the letter of caution affected the terms and condition of her employment. Defendant did not put the letter in her personnel file. Moreover, Winston states that the letter of caution was rescinded by the agency after she filed her union grievance. Accordingly, the Court finds that a reasonable juror could not find that the letter of caution was materially adverse to her. As such, Winston's retaliation claim cannot go forward based on the letter of caution as the alleged [*27]  adverse employment action.

(3) Poor evaluations
In her response, Winston states, "After some of the requested accommodation[s] [were] granted, Mr. Apfel issued a performance evaluation very critical of her." In support of this, Winston cites to her answer to Defendant's interrogatory number four. Winston's answer is a lengthy narrative. The Court assumes that Winston is citing to the following remark in her answers to interrogatories:
In October, 2012, very soon after being granted accommodation, I received a Performance Appraisal for Fiscal. Year 2011 completed by Steve Apfel. Although it said that I met or exceeded the performance plan, the comments led me to believe that Mr. Apfel wished to be very critical of me without stimulating a grievance. He was critical of my handling of the budget, said that I was reluctant to assume duties as property contact, blamed me for problems caused by other employees, criticized errors on Time and Attendance records made during periods I missed due to my parents illness and death, and seemed to view me as the only person in the office that made a mistake. He mentioned some of my accomplishments, but ignored others.
Doc. 34-2. Winston's allegations [*28]  of poor evaluations are unsupported. Winston failed to set forth specific facts showing that she received a poor evaluation. There is not a genuine issue of fact as to whether Winston's interpretation of her positive evaluation carries "a significant risk of humiliation, damage to reputation, and a concomitant harm to future employment prospects." Winston's opinion that Apfel gave her a positive evaluation in order to avoid a grievance conflicts with an act of retaliation. The Court finds that there is not a genuine dispute of material fact for trial relying on "poor" evaluations as an adverse employment action.

(4) Issue with Winston's paycheck
Winston alleges that Defendant shorted her check by 80% "shortly after she filed her union grievance." Winston again cites to her answer to Defendant's interrogatory number four in support of this statement. In that response, she says
In April 2013, Mr. Apfel unilaterally acted to short my check. While processing Time and Attendance codes, the acting MIC, John Griffith, and I talked to Grant Vonletkemen in the Volunteer Leave Transfer Program, (Leave Donor Program), to verify that I could use the leave that was in my account which was 40 hours [*29]  of annual leave and 7.5 of sick leave. After talking with Grant, John approved advanced sick leave for the balance. Believing that my bank balance would cover my bills I issued payment — which were returned to my creditors as NSF. The first payment returned was my mortgage. I learned that I was only paid for 8 hours during pay period 5 after deductions, I had $43 deposited. I called Grant who said that a corrected T&A had been processed for me showing for 8 hours regular pay and 72 hours LWOP. I then called the office to ask John if he remembered the change and he said he did, but that Steve Apfel changed my T&A. He transferred me to Mr. Apfel who told me that he did it just before he went on leave because Region told him to, and he just didn't think to let me know. I then called Vicky Alexander at the Regional Office — Vicky knew nothing about it. She said there was nothing that could be done. If he had left it alone, leave donations would have covered the advanced leave in Pay Period 6. Mr. Apfel had the option to grant advance leave, but the fact that he took it away after the Acting MIC approved it, showed animus directly toward me.
The Court disagrees with Winston's contention [*30]  that Defendant "shorted her check." The more accurate description is that Defendant did not advance her sick leave, which would have allowed her to receive full pay for the pay period. The Court will not make a finding as to whether a denial of advanced sick leave could constitute an adverse employment action. Assuming for the sake of this analysis only, the Court will consider whether there is a genuine issue of material fact regarding whether a causal connection between the protected activity and the adverse employment action exists.
The "critical inquiry" at this prima facie stage is "whether the plaintiff has demonstrated that the [employer's] action occurred under circumstances which give rise to an inference of unlawful discrimination." Garrett v. Hewlett-Packard Co., 305 F.3d 1210, 1221 (10th Cir.2002) (quotations omitted). We have repeatedly recognized temporal proximity between protected conduct and termination as relevant evidence of a causal connection sufficient to "justify an inference of retaliatory motive." See, e.g., Haynes, 456 F.3d 1215, 1228. We have emphasized, however, that a plaintiff may rely on temporal proximity alone only if "the termination is very closely connected in time to the protected activity." Anderson v. Coors Brewing, 181 F.3d 1171, 1179 (10th Cir.1999) (emphasis in original).
Metzler v. Fed. Home Loan Bank of Topeka, 464 F.3d 1164, 1171 (10th Cir. 2006). A retaliatory motive [*31]  may be inferred when an adverse action closely follows protected activity. Chavez v. City of Arvada, 88 F.3d 861, 866 (10th Cir.1996). "Unless the termination is very closely connected in time to the protected activity, the plaintiff must rely on additional evidence beyond temporal proximity to establish causation." Anderson v. Coors Brewing Co., 181 F.3d 1171, 1179 (10th Cir. 1999) (citing Conner v. Schnuck Markets, Inc., 121 F.3d 1390, 1395 (10th Cir.1997)).
Winston has not provided any additional evidence beyond the temporal proximity to establish causation. Thus, the Court will look to when the protected activity occurred. According to the evidence before the Court, the most recent accommodation that Winston requested prior to April 2013 was on October 26, 2012. Winston also filed a grievance with her union on November 28, 2012. Ex. E. It is four months, four days between the last protected activity and the allegedly adverse employment action. The Tenth Circuit has previously held that a three-month period, standing alone, is insufficient to establish causation. Richmond v. ONEOK, Inc., 120 F.3d 205, 209 (10th Cir.1997). As such, the Court determines that there is not a question of fact regarding whether a causal connection exists between Winston's request for an accommodation or her union grievance and Defendant denying her advanced, paid sick leave instead of leave without pay.

(5) Repeated requests for medical certification, [*32]  harassment and increased scrutiny
In support of her argument that Apfel repeatedly requested medical certification, Winston asserts that on October 25, 2012, Apfel demanded re-certification of her condition and that he required her to provide a note from her doctor every time she stayed home sick. In support of her argument that she was harassed, Winston alleges that Apfel "demanded" things from her, criticized her work, generally treated her poorly, increased his scrutiny of her work, and got upset when speaking with her about her disability. Winston also alleges that Apfel's interim replacement told her that she didn't want to hear anything about the way that Apfel treated Winston and criticized Winston.
The Court finds this situation analogous to the plaintiff's allegations in Sanchez v. Denver Pub. Sch., 164 F.3d 527, 533 (10th Cir. 1998) even though the plaintiff's claims in that case were brought under Title VII. In Sanchez, the plaintiff identified many encounters with her supervisor in support of her contention that "she was subjected to retaliatory adverse employment action" including the fact that her supervisor required her to provide notes from doctors for sick leave while not requiring other employees to do so. In that case, the Tenth [*33]  Circuit held,
This conduct simply does not rise to the level of a materially adverse employment action sufficient to satisfy the second prong of the prima facie case. Courts considering the issue have held that "'unsubstantiated oral reprimands' and 'unnecessary derogatory comments'" such as those alleged here are not included within the definition of adverse action absent evidence that they had some impact on the employee's employment status. See, e.g., Robinson v. City of Pittsburgh, 120 F.3d 1286,1301 (3d Cir.1997); see also Sweeney v. West, 149 F.3d 550, 556-57 (7th Cir.1998). Retaliatory conduct other than discharge or refusal to rehire is thus proscribed by Title VII only if it alters the employee's "compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment," or "adversely affect[s] his [or her] status as an employee." It follows that "not everything that makes an employee unhappy" qualifies as retaliation, for "[o]therwise, minor and even trivial employment actions that 'an irritable, chip-on-the-shoulder employee did not like would form the basis of a discrimination suit.'"Robinson, 120 F.3d at 1300 (alteration in original) (quoting Smart v. Ball State Univ., 89 F.3d 437, 441 (7th Cir.1996)).
Id. Like in the court in Sanchez, this Court finds that although it is clear that Defendant's disagreeable conduct caused Winston distress, a reasonable juror could not find that Defendant's [*34]  conduct adversely affected the terms and conditions of Winston's employment or carried "a significant risk of humiliation, damage to reputation, and a concomitant harm to future employment prospects." The Court finds that Winston cannot rely on these general allegations as adverse employment action to support her retaliation claim.

(6) Denial of time off to vote
Winston states that after some of her requests for accommodations were granted, Mr. Apfel "denied her time off to vote." Winston's Response, ECF. No. 34 at 6. Winston again cites to her answer to interrogatory four, in which she states:
On October 29, 2012, I requested time off to vote the following Tuesday. Steve Apfel denied the request because, he said, I was on a gliding schedule, When I later forwarded a message from Frank Millman, Department of Commerce, saying that I qualified for one hour administrative leave for voting, Steve Apfel became extremely upset that I had sent a copy of the message to the Union.
Winston has not argued or provided any evidence in support of her claim that Apfel's denial of her initial request for time off to vote carried "a significant risk of humiliation, damage to reputation, and a concomitant [*35]  harm to future employment prospects." Defendant ultimately permitted her to take one hour of leave to vote. Although Apfel's initial denial forced Winston to ask Mr. Millman for approval, the Court finds that a reasonable juror could not resolve the disputed fact of whether this was an adverse employment action or a mere inconvenience in favor Winston. The Court finds that there is not a genuine dispute of material fact for trial relying on a denial of time off to vote, which Defendant ultimately approved, as an adverse employment action.
For the foregoing reasons, the Court hereby GRANTS Defendant's motion for summary judgment as to the retaliation claim.

2. Disability discrimination
Defendant argues that Winston cannot prevail on her claim for disability discrimination because she is not a qualified individual with a disability. Defendant bases this argument on Winston's admission and the opinion of her treating doctor that Winston could not perform the essential functions of her job with or without reasonable accommodations. Moreover, Defendant contends that Winston sought and received several reasonable accommodations throughout her tenure at the Department of Commerce. Defendant [*36]  urges that it only denied Winston unreasonable accommodations, which Defendant describes as "continued employment without being present for at least two days a week and an undetermined number of future episodic absences to be unilaterally determined as necessary by plaintiff herself." ECF. No. 30, p. 2.
In response, Plaintiff clarifies that her claim is "not based on the accommodation denied or provided at the time" but is based on Defendant's subsequent, unlawful removal of plaintiff's access to the Volunteer Leave Transfer Program and thus denying her a crucial federal benefit. Winston argues that the leave program allowed Winston to use annual leave when afflicted with unexpected episodes of the syndrome, constituting a medical emergency and sick leave was not available to her. Winston argues that in the fall of 2013, someone notified her that he or she donated leave to her. Winston asserts that she contacted "headquarters" and Defendant notified her that she was no longer a participant in the program and the donated leave had been returned to the donee. Winston argues that this was contrary to the policy because she did not receive notice that her participation in the program had [*37]  expired. Defendant notified her that she needed to reapply, and she did. Winston argues that the acting MIC, Rydell, did not forward her application. Winston argues that Defendant's denial of her ability to participate in the leave program combined with the "limited accommodation afforded her" forced Winston to apply for disability retirement.
Winston contends that she is put in an impossible situation because she was forced to apply for disability retirement and provide evidence that she was unable to continue working while she was attempting to demonstrate that she can fulfill her job duties effectively with a reasonable accommodation. Winston cites Cleveland v. Policy Management Systems Corp. Et Al. 526 U.S. 795, 119 S. Ct. 1597, 143 L. Ed. 2d 966 (1998) for the proposition that an employee's claim for disability retirement and a claim for a reasonable accommodation are not mutually exclusive and that an employee may seek both and explain why the employer's failure to accommodate the disability created the need for the application for disability retirement. Winston contends that Defendant's denial of (or failure to process) her reapplication for the leave donation program was a denial of a reasonable accommodation and forced her to apply for disability retirement. Winston concludes that [*38]  the Court should deny summary judgment on this claim.
In reply, Defendant argues that Winston is not an "otherwise qualified individual" because seeking pay without having to work indefinitely is not a reasonable accommodation. Defendant urges that the evidence demonstrates that Winston could not work. Defendant argues that Winston does not provide any authority for the proposition that receiving pay (through the leave donation program) indefinitely without working is a reasonable accommodation. Defendant contends that such a concept is unreasonable because even unpaid leave of an indefinite duration is not considered a reasonable accommodation. Defendant points out that Winston does not argue that there was any other accommodation that Defendant could have provided to her that would have allowed her to continue to work. Defendant concludes that Winston is not a qualified individual.
Next, Defendant argues that Winston's discontinuation of her participation in the leave donation program was due to Winston's failure to act, not Defendant's actions. Defendant argues that Winston was notified in her first approval of participation in the leave donation program, that her participation was [*39]  only approved for a year, and that she could seek an extension if she wished to participate for a longer period of time. Defendant contends that Winston knew that her participation could expire because she sought an extension and was granted an extension through September 2013. Regarding Winston's claims that the MIC failed to advance her request for an extension or her reapplication, Defendant contends:
Ms. Winston's claimed efforts to renew her participation in the VLTP are also contradicted by the objective evidence. Ms. Winston alleges her renewed application was not forwarded by her supervisor to the VLTP coordinator. (Doc. 34 at 15). First, as it was explained to her, it was Ms. Winston's obligation to submit the application to the VLTP coordinator. See (Ex. M at 000897) (email from Deputy Director Schwein instructing Ms. Winston to submit the VLTP documentation herself). Second, Ms. Winston did submit the VLTP form to the VLTP coordinator. See id. (November 26, 2013 email from Winston to the VLTP Coordinator with the attached renewed application and medical documentation). However, Ms. Winston's application was incomplete and had to be returned to her. See (Ex. M at 000897) (email [*40]  from the VLTP coordinator stating the application was being returned because it did not have a supervisor signature, nor did it state whether it had been approved or denied). Ms. Winston never resubmitted that renewal application.
Defendant concludes that the Court should grant summary judgment on Winston's disability discrimination claim.
Section 504(a) of the Rehabilitation Act, 29 U.S.C. § 794(a), states:
No otherwise qualified individual with a disability in the United States, as defined in section 705(20) of this title, shall, solely by reason of her or his disability, be excluded from the participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program receiving Federal financial assistance or under any program or activity conducted by any Executive Agency or by the United States Postal Service.
To establish a prima facie claim of disability discrimination under the Rehabilitation Act, Winston must demonstrate "(1) that [she] is disabled under the Act; (2) that [she] would be "otherwise qualified" to participate in the program; (3) that the program receives federal financial assistance (or is a federal agency); and (4) that the program has discriminated against the plaintiff." McGeshick v. Principi, 357 F.3d 1146, 1150 (10th Cir. 2004). The Rehabilitation [*41]  Act provides that the standards for a claim of employment discrimination alleging violations of the Rehabilitation Act are the same as those applied under title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 29 U.S.C. § 794(d).
It is undisputed that Winston is disabled under the Rehabilitation Act. Thus, she satisfies the first element of a prima facie case. The Government disputes that Winston is otherwise qualified. The ADA defines qualified individual with a disability as one who "with or without reasonable accommodation, can perform the essential functions of the employment position." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(8). In other words, one who cannot perform the essential functions of the job, even with a reasonable accommodation, is not an "otherwise qualified" individual. Jarvis v. Potter, 500 F.3d 1113, 1121 (10th Cir. 2007).
Discrimination under the ADA includes "not making reasonable accommodations to the known physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability ... unless [the employer] can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose undue hardship on the operation of the business of [the employer]." 42 U.S.C. § 12112(b)(5)(A). The ADA states that a reasonable accommodation may include "job restructuring, part-time or modified work schedules, reassignment to a vacant position, [*42]  acquisition or modification of equipment or devices, appropriate adjustment or modifications of examination, training materials or policies, the provision of qualified readers or interpreters, and other similar accommodations for individuals with disabilities." 42 U.S.C. § 12111(9).
The Court must determine whether there is a genuine issue of material fact as to whether Winston is qualified under the Rehabilitation Act (under the standards established by the ADA). The Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals has outlined a two-part test for determining whether a disabled individual is qualified under the ADA:
First, we must determine whether the individual could perform the essential functions of the job, i.e., functions that bear more than a marginal relationship to the job at issue. Second, if (but only if) we conclude that the individual is not able to perform the essential functions of the job, we must determine whether any reasonable accommodation by the employer would enable him to perform those functions.
Hudson v. MCI Telecommunications Corp., 87 F.3d 1167, 1168 (10th Cir. 1996). The ADA describes essential functions within its definition of qualified individual as follows: "consideration shall be given to the employer's judgment as to what functions of a job are essential, and if [*43]  an employer has prepared a written description before advertising or interviewing applicants for the job, this description shall be considered evidence of the essential functions of the job." 42 U.S.C.A. § 12111 (8). The Court will look to Winston's job description and Defendant's judgment as to what functions of her job were essential.
According to the job description, an ASA: (1) "Screens all incoming correspondence for the supervisor and makes distribution[;]" (2) "Receives telephone calls and visitors, referring callers directly to the supervisor or redirecting them to the appropriate staff member[;]" (3) "Exercises a high degree of judgment and tact when inquiring as to nature of business and determining those that require the personal attention of the supervisor and those that can be referred to other staff or faculty members[;]" and (4) Maintains the supervisor's calendar and schedules appointments upon own initiative based upon personal knowledge of supervisor's workload, priorities and interests." See Ex. J at 000915.
Looking at the record, it is clear that Defendant's judgment is that regular and reliable attendance is an essential function of Winston's position. Ex. C at 000932 (Letter from Deputy [*44]  Director stating that the position requires "interacting with the manager and staff members on a full range of administrative program areas, serving as the receptionist for the office, personally handling routine matters and routing telephone calls and visitors to the appropriate staff members as reflected in Critical Element #1, 2, 3, and 4 of your performance plan[.]"); Ex. C at 000936 (Letter from Deputy Director to Winston stating stated "[r]egular and reliable attendance is an essential function of your position."). The Court gives great weight to an employer's judgment about what functions are essential in a position. Hennagir v. Utah Dep't of Corr., 587 F.3d 1255, 1262 (10th Cir. 2009).
Winston does not dispute that an essential function of her position is attendance. Moreover, "[a]ttendance is generally an 'essential' function of any job." Cisneros v. Wilson, 226 F.3d 1113, 1129 (10th Cir. 2000), overruled on other grounds, Bd. of Tr.'s of Univ. of Ala. v. Garrett, 531 U.S. 356, 121 S. Ct. 955, 148 L. Ed. 2d 866 (2001). Thus, the Court finds that there are no disputed issues of fact related to whether regular attendance is an essential function of Winston's position.
The Court will now consider whether there are genuine issues of material facts as to whether Winston could perform her essential functions of her position and if not, whether she could have performed the essential functions with [*45]  a reasonable accommodation. It is clear from the record, and undisputed by Winston, that Winston was unable to work five full work days a week as an ASA. Thus, it is undisputed that Winston could not perform the essential functions of her position, i.e. attend work for 40 hours week, without an accommodation.
This leads the Court to consider whether Winston could perform the essential functions of her position with a reasonable accommodation.
Whether an accommodation is reasonable under the ADA is a mixed question of law and fact." Mason, 357 F.3d at 1122. When an employer moves for summary judgment in an ADA suit, courts use a burden-shifting framework to decide this issue. White v. York Int'l Corp., 45 F.3d 357, 361 (10th Cir.1995).
First, the employee "need only show that an 'accommodation' seems reasonable on its face, i.e., ordinarily or in the run of cases." Barnett, 535 U.S. at 401, 122 S.Ct. 1516, 152 L. Ed. 2d 589. A proposed accommodation is not reasonable on its face if it would not enable the employee to perform the essential function at issue. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o )(1)(ii) (defining "reasonable accommodations" to include those "that enable an individual with a disability who is qualified to perform the essential functions of that position"); Hennagir v. Utah Dep't of Corr., 587 F.3d 1255, 1264 (10th Cir.2009) (deeming proposed accommodations unreasonable because they would not enable the plaintiff [*46]  to perform the essential functions of a position).8
Second, if the employee presents a facially reasonable accommodation, "[t]he burden of production then shifts to the employer to present evidence of its inability to accommodate." Mason, 357 F.3d at 1122; White, 45 F.3d at 361. The employer "must show special (typically case-specific) circumstances that demonstrate undue hardship in the particular circumstances." Barnett, 535 U.S. at 402, 122 S.Ct. 1516.9
Third, "[i]f the employer presents such evidence, the employee has the burden of coming forward with evidence concerning her individual capabilities and suggestions for possible accommodations to rebut the employer's evidence." Mason, 357 F.3d at 1122. "As with discrimination cases generally, the plaintiff at all times bears the ultimate burden of persuading the trier of fact that he has been the victim of illegal discrimination based on his disability." White, 45 F.3d at 361; see also Hawkins, 778 F.3d at 894.
Osborne v. Baxter Healthcare Corp., 798 F.3d 1260, 1267-68 (10th Cir. 2015).
Under the burden-shifting framework, Winston must identify a facially reasonable accommodation. Winston identifies Defendant's alleged denial of Winston's request to be readmitted into leave program as the focus of this inquiry. Winston argues that she was unable to continue with her accommodated intermittent schedule because Defendant did not allow her to receive donated leave [*47]  and thus forced her into taking disability retirement. Winston does not allege a time certain that she would have been able to return to work had she been readmitted into the leave donation program. In essence, Winston argues that a facially reasonable accommodation would have been for Defendant to allow Winston to take paid leave, via leave donations, for an indefinite period.5
Looking to the standard outlined by the Tenth Circuit in Osbourne v. Baxter, the Court cannot find that there are genuine issues of fact in the record as to whether participation in a leave donor program is a facially reasonable accommodation. A proposed accommodation is not reasonable on its face if it would not enable the employee to perform the essential function at issue. See 29 C.F.R. § 1630.2(o)(1)(ii). Participating [*49]  in the leave donation program would only provide Winston paid leave, but it would not allow her to perform the essential functions of her job. As Defendants point out, even unpaid, indefinite leave is not a reasonable accommodation. See Hudson v. MCI Telecommunications Corp., 87 F.3d 1167, 1168 (10th Cir. 1996). Accordingly, paid, indefinite leave cannot be a facially reasonable accommodation.
It is undisputed that Defendant afforded Winston numerous accommodations, including intermittent time off and FMLA leave. After utilizing her accommodations, Winston acknowledged that, "I have had multiple discussions with my doctor. . . and as much as I want to get better and keep my job, it does not look likely." Ex. A at 001369. Winston informed her supervisors that even one day of work made her exhausted to the point of being unable to fully function on the job for at least two days afterwards. See id. (claiming she "pushed" through the day on a Monday, but was still not recovered by Wednesday and could not make it through a full day of work on Wednesday). In this email, Winston notified her supervisors that she planned to apply for a disability retirement and that she was advised that it would be permitted for her to take LWOP while her application was processed. [*50]  See id. at 001370. In her application for disability retirement, her supporting medical documentation stated that Winston's disability was permanent and prevented her from working in the position at all.
The Court understands Winston's argument that she should not be prevented from asserting that Defendant discriminated against her and denied her reasonable accommodations that would allow her to perform the essential functions of her position because Defendant's denial of her requests for reasonable accommodations forced her to apply for disability retirement and forced her to provide supporting medical documentation supporting such a request. The Court, however, finds that this argument is not applicable in this instance because Winston does not present a reasonable accommodation that would enable her to maintain regular attendance and perform the essential functions of her position. As such, the Court hereby GRANTS Defendant's motion for summary judgment as to the disability discrimination claim.

CONCLUSION
For the reasons discussed above, the Court concludes that Defendant has met its burden under Fed. R. Civ. P. 56 to establish that no genuine dispute of material fact exists for trial on Winston's claims of disability [*51]  discrimination and retaliation under the Rehabilitation Act. Accordingly, it is
ORDERED that Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment, ECF No. 29, shall be and hereby is, GRANTED with prejudice.
Judgment shall be entered accordingly.
Dated this 20th day of April, 2017.
/s/ Alan B. Johnson
Alan B. Johnson
United States District Judge

FINAL JUDGMENT
The Court has entered its separate Order on Defendant's Motion for Summary Judgment finding that summary judgment shall be entered in favor of Defendant on all claims. It is therefore
ORDERED, ADJUDGED AND DECREED that the plaintiff Deborah Winston recover nothing of the defendant and that the defendant recover its costs, pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 54, with all parties to bear their own attorneys' fees.
Dated this 20th day of April, 2017.
/s/ Alan B. Johnson
Alan B. Johnson
United States District Judge


End of Document

