Zinter v. Or. Univ. Sys.
United States District Court for the District of Oregon, Portland Division
February 21, 2014, Decided
3:12-cv-2272

Reporter
2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 187393 *
Zinter v. Oregon University System
Subsequent History: Dismissed by, Motion denied by, As moot Zinter v. Portland State Univ., 2014 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 187584 (D. Or., Feb. 26, 2014)
Affirmed by Zinter v. Portland State Univ., 2016 U.S. App. LEXIS 12955 (9th Cir. Or., July 14, 2016)
Counsel:  [*1] For Paul Zinter, Plaintiff: George P. Fisher, LEAD ATTORNEY, Portland, OR.
For Oregon University System, Portland State University, Defendant: Michelle B. Smigel, LEAD ATTORNEY, Kathryn L. Kammer, Miller Nash Graham & Dunn LLP, Portland, OR., 
Judges: MICHAEL W. ,MOSMAN, Chief United States District Judge.
Opinion by: MICHAEL W. MOSMAN
Opinion


MINUTES of Proceedings: Portland State University's Motion 23 for Summary Judgment is GRANTED. First, Mr. Zinter has failed to raise a genuine issue of material fact as to disparate treatment because he has introduced no comparator evidence. Second, Mr. Zinter has failed to raise a genuine issue of material fact as to PSU's engagement in the interactive process, because he offers no evidence to rebut the evidence in the record showing that PSU invited him to propose an accommodation. Third, Mr. Zinter has failed to raise a genuine issue of material fact as to PSU's failure to provide reasonable accommodation, because he offers no evidence to rebut PSU's contention that the adverse employment decision was motivated by Mr. Zinter's dishonesty, which requires no accommodation. Fourth, Mr. Zinter fails to raise a genuine issue of material fact demonstrating that PSU's decision was [*2]  motivated by his disability, because he offers no evidence showing that PSU terminated his employment because of his disease. Fifth, Mr. Zinter fails to raise a genuine issue of material fact as to invasion of privacy because he has introduced no evidence showing that any intrusion into his medical history was intentional, or that such an intrusion would be highly offensive to a reasonable person, in light of his invitation to PSU to contact his doctor. Finally, Mr. Zinter raises no genuine issue of material fact supporting the interstitial tort of wrongful discharge. George P. Fisher present as counsel for plaintiff(s). Michelle B. Smigel and Kathryn Kammer present as counsel for defendant(s).(Court Reporter Bonita Shumway.) (dls) (Entered: 02/21/2014)


End of Document

